7,  2^,  1*2^ 


3Fram  tljF  Ctbrarg  of 

Profefianr  Brn|amttt  Brwktttrtige  WarMl^ 

Spquratt^rd  b^  t|tm  tn 

tljf  Ctbrarn  nf 

Prtnrrt0n  SIliMlngtral  d^mtttarg 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOE. 

REVELATION. 


INVALUABLE   IN    THE   STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations, 

Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical, 

Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  of  Home  and  Foreign  Literature^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev*  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  IVLA* 


Royal  Octavo,  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00. 


"  No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his  pocket-book,  the  min- 
ister who  sees  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"  It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopaedia  for  ministers  issued  as  yet."— 
Christian. 

"  Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse,  with  apposite, 
varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number  of  ancient  and  modern  authors. 
The  meaning  of  words,  the  lessons  deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the 
duty  it  enjoins,  pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  anec- 
dotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  .  .  The  author  has  put 
the  condensed  subsUnce  of  many  commentaries  in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by 
many  learned  experts."— Methodist  Review. 

"  There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abundant  citation  of 
the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired  writers.  In  this  respect  the  book  is 
unique."— CArw/ra«  Intelligencer. 


Genesis,  Vol.  i.  Galatians. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  Ephesians. 

Exodus.  Philippians  and  Colossians. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Thessalonians. 

St.  Matthew.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Mark.  Second  Timothy,  Titus,   and 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  i.  Philemon. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  i. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  3.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,  Vol.  i.  James. 

St.  John,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  i. 

St.  John,  Vol.  3.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  i.  Second  Corinthians. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  First,     Second     and     Third 

Romans,  Vol.  i.  John,  and  Jude. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  Revelation. 


Send  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers. 


Fleming  H.  Rcvcll  Company, 

New  York:  Chicago:  Toronto: 

158  Fifth  Avenue.  63  Washington  Street.  154  Yonge  Street. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations ; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,  on    the  Verses  of   The    Bible 


V 

Rev.    JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,    M.A. 


REVELATION 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  BEVELATION. 

The  Author  of  the  Apocalypse. — There  is  very  strong  external  evidence  to  prove 
that  this  book  was  written  by  the  Apostle  John.  Passing  over  some  earlier  apparent 
witnesses,  we  find  unmistakable  mention  of  it  in  the  writings  of  Justin  Martyr.  He 
expressly  refers  to  it  as  the  work  of  the  apostle,  in  the  dialogue  which  he  held  with 
Trypho,  an  unbelieving  Jew,  in  the  very  city  of  Ephesus  where  John  lived,  and 
within  half  a  century  after  his  death.  Equally  clear  and  explicit  is  the  testimony 
of  Irenaeus,  a  disciple  of  Polycarp,  the  disciple  of  John.  Irenseus  even  gives  as  his 
authority  for  preferring  666  to  616  as  "  the  number  of  the  beast "  (chap.  xiii.  18),  the 
testimony  of  those  who  had  seen  John  face  to  face.  The  book  is  twice  mentioned 
in  the  Canon  of  the  Muratorian  Fragment,  once  in  such  a  way  as  to  imply  that  it 
was  publicly  read  in  church  ;  it  was  one  of  the  books  on  which  Melito,  Bishop  of 
Sardis,  wrote  a  commentary  (about  170  a.d.)  ;  and  it  is  expressly  quoted  as  "  the 
Scripture  "  in  the  letter  sent  by  the  persecuted  Christians  of  Vienne  and  Lyons  to 
their  brethren  in  Asia  Minor  (177  a.d.).  But  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  second 
century  the  book  began  to  be  regarded  with  suspicion,  owing  to  the  use  made  of  it 
by  the  Montanists,  who  indulged  in  extravagant  notions  regarding  the  "thousand 
years"  of  Christ's  reign  with  His  saints  (chap.  xx.).  The  feeling  of  distrust  was 
strengthened  by  observing  what  a  marked  difference  there  was  in  the  language  and 
style  of  the  Kevelation  and  of  the  other  works  ascribed  to  John  ;  and  a  considerable 
amount  of  controversy  took  place  on  the  subject.  Ultimately,  however,  the 
objections  were  overruled,  and  the  book  obtained  general  acceptance  in  the  Church. 
In  modern  times  the  controversy  has  been  renewed  ;  and  objectors  are  still  disposed 
to  insist,  as  of  old,  on  the  internal  marks  of  a  different  authorship  from  that  of  the 
fourth  Gospel.  In  particular  it  is  pointed  out  that  whereas  the  Gospel  is  written  in 
good  Greek,  the  Revelation  is  full  of  grammatical  mistakes  and  eccentricities.  To 
meet  this  objection  the  following  considerations  may  be  adduced : — (1)  The  differ- 
ence in  the  nature  and  contents  of  the  two  books ;  the  one  being  mainly  narrative 
or  colloquial,  the  other  being  formed  on  the  model  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets. 
(2)  The  possible  effect  on  the  Apostle  of  twenty  years'  residence  in  Ephesus,  in  the 
way  of  improving  his  knowledge  of  Greek.  (3)  The  unfavourable  circumstances 
under  which  he  appears  to  have  written  the  Revelation  ;  and  the  possible  employ- 
ment by  him  of  a  skilled  Greek  amanuensis  in  the  composition  of  the  Gospel.  On 
the  other  hand,  amid  all  the  diversity  between  the  two  books  both  in  ideas  and  in 
language,  there  are  not  wanting  some  important  features  of  resemblance,  betokening 
an  identity  of  authorship.  1.  The  name  "  Lamb  "  is  only  applied  to  the  Saviour  in 
the  fourth  Gospel  (John  i.  29,  36)  and  in  the  Revelation  (chap.  v.  6,  8,  12,  Ac), 
although  it  is  indirectly  referred  to  in  1  Peter  i.  19  and  Acts  viii.  32.  In  like 
manner  the  name  "  Word  "  is  only  applied  to  the  Saviour  in  the  Gospel  of  John 
(chap.  i.  1,  Ac),  in  First  Epistle  of  John  (chap.  i.  1,  "the  Word  of  life"),  and 
in  the  Revelation  (chap.  xix.  13,  "the  Word  of  God").  2.  Some  of  John's 
favourite  expressions,  such  as  "  he  that  overcometh,"  "  witness  "  (noun  or  verb), 
"  keep  (my)  word,"  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Revelation.  3.  In  Reve- 
lation i.  7  we  seem  to  have  an  echo  of  John  xix.  34-37,  where  alone  the  piercing 

T 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  REVELATION. 

of  our  Lord  with  the  spear  is  recorded,  and  where  there  is  the  same  quotation 
of  Zech.  xii.  10 — in  the  same  unusual  form.  4.  The  Greek  word  meaning 
"true"  or  "real,"  in  opposition  to  what  is  false  or  spurious,  occurs  nine  times 
in  St.  John's  Gospel,  four  times  in  1  John,  and  ten  times  in  the  Kevelation ;  but 
only  five  times  in  all  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament.  5.  The  Kevelation,  like 
the  fourth  Gospel,  recognises  our  Lord's  pre-eminence  and  His  title  to  Divine 
honours  (chaps,  i.  8,  17,  18;  iii.  14,  21;  v.  9,  13;  xjx.  16;  xxii.  13).  6.  A  still 
stronger  feature  of  resemblance  may  be  seen  in  the  similarity  of  the  representations 
which  the  two  books  give  of  the  Saviour's  triumph  as  resulting  from  successive 
conflicts  terminating  in  apparent  and  temporary  defeat.  La  these  conflicts  the 
Gentiles  take  the  place  held  by  the  unbelieving  Jews  in  the  Gospel ;  and  the  "  dis- 
ciples "  of  the  earlier  days  are  represented  by  the  Church,  or  "  the  bride  "  (of  Christ). 
It  has  been  objected  that  the  Eevelation,  unlike  the  other  writings  of  John,  gives 
the  name  of  its  avowed  author  (chaps,  i.  1,  4,  9  ;  xxii.  8).  But  this  is  sufficiently 
accounted  for  by  the  prophetical  character  of  the  book.  It  was  the  practice  of  the 
prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  although  not  of  the  historians,  to  mention  their 
names  in  their  writings.     {J.  A.  McClymont,  D.D.) 

Time  and  Place  of  Composition. — As  to  the  time  of  its  composition,  tradition  is 
far  from  consistent.  The  author  of  the  Muratorian  fragment,  e.g.,  incidentally 
places  it  earlier  than  the  Pauline  epistles ;  but  Irenaeus  expressly  states  that  it  "  was 
seen  towards  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Domitian,"  This  is  sometimes  interpreted  as 
implying  that  the  book  was  also  written  then  ;  but  more  probably  he  intended  his 
readers  to  understand  that  it  was  written  after  Domitian's  death — under  Nerva,  or 
perhaps  even  in  the  reign  of  Trajan.  But  Tertullian  seems  to  suggest  the  time  of 
Nero  as  the  date.  Jerome  dates  the  supposed  banishment  of  John  certainly,  and 
the  writing  probably,  in  the  14th  year  of  Domitian ;  but  in  this,  perhaps,  he  is  only 
repeating  Irenaeus.  There  is  some  reason  to  think  that  this  date  is  partly  derived 
from  an  interpretation  of  chap.  i.  9,  which  is  not  now  usually  accepted.  Epiphanius 
mentions  the  time  of  Claudius.  The  place  where  the  Eevelation  was  received  is 
professedly  Patmos,  and  ancient  writers  usually  assumed  that  it  was  also  com- 
mitted to  writing  there.  .  .  .  The  two-sided  character  of  the  evidence,  both  external 
and  internal,  as  to  date  led  Grotius  (1644)  to  suggest  that  the  problem  raised  by  it 
might  perhaps  be  solved  by  the  assumption  that  the  book  was  written  by  its  one 
author  at  different  times,  partly  in  Patmos  and  partly  at  Ephesus.  Vogel  (1811-1816) 
offered  a  different  solution — that  it  was  written  partly  by  the  Apostle  John  and 
partly  by  the  presbyter  John,  a  theory  which  seems  to  have  had  some  attraction  for 
Schleiermacher,  and,  temporarily  at  least,  for  Bleek.  Volter  (1882-1885)  thinks  that 
the  original  Apocalypse  as  written  by  the  Apostle  in  65-66  a.d.  consists  of  :  chaps,  i. 
4-6  ;  iv.  1-v.  10 ;  vi.  1-vii.  8 ;  viii. ;  ix. ;  xi.  14-19 ;  xiv.  1-7  ;  xviii.  1-xix.  14 ;  xiv. 
14-20  ;  xix.  5-10.  To  this  the  Apostle  himself  (68-69  a.d.)  added  chaps,  x.  1-xi.  13  ; 
xiv.  8  ;  xvii.  It  received  subsequent  additions  by  other  hands  in  the  time  of  Trajan 
(chaps,  xi.  15,  18;  xii.;  xix.  11-12;  xx. ;  xxi.  1-8),  of  Hadrian  (chaps,  v.  11-14;  vii. 
9-17 ;  xiii. ;  xiv.  4,  5,  9-12 ;  xv.  1-xvii.  1),  and  of  Antoninus  Pius  (prologue,  epistles 
to  churches,  &c.).  A  new  line  of  investigation  in  the  same  direction  was  opened  by 
Vischer,  who  (1886)  sought  to  show  that  the  groundwork  of  the  composite  book  was 
primarily  not  Christian  but  Jewish,  written  in  Hebrew,  but  translated  and  freely 
adapted  by  a  Christian  redactor.  This  view  was  accepted  by  Harnack  (1886),  and 
substantially,  though  with  large  modifications,  by  Pfleiderer  (1887),  and  Weyland 
(1888).  Schon  also  (1887)  and  Sabatier  (1888)  maintained  the  composite  character 
of  the  work,  holding  it,  however,  to  be  essentially  of  Christian  origin  (end  of  first 
century)  but  with  incorporation  of  Jewish  fragments.  The  most  powerful  and 
suggestive  of  recent  works  based  on  the  theory  of  composite  origin  is  that  of  Spitta 
(1889),  who  distinguishes  a  Christian  Apocalypse,  dating  from  about  60  a.d.,  which 
he  attributes  to  John  Mark,  and  two  Jewish  Apocalypses  dating  respectively  from 
Pompey's  capture  of  Jerusalem  in  63  B.C.,  and  from  Caligula's  time,  about  40  a.d. 
These  three  sections  of  the  work  correspond  roughly  to  the  visions  of  the  seals,  the 
trumpets,  an^  the  vials.  The  work  of  redaction,  Spitta  holds,  was  done  towards  the 
end  of  the  first  century.     (J.  Sutherland  Black.) 

The  Interpretation  of  the  Apocalypse. — According  to  St.  Augustine,  the  events 
which  come  to  pass  in  this  world  are  neither  fortuitous  nor  isolated.  JDivine  Pro- 
vidence directs,  co-ordinates,  and  controls  them  all,  causing  everything  to  concur 
towards,  the  triumph  of  purity,  holiness,  justice,  and  truth.    Whoever  hears  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  REVELATION.  vii 

voice  from  on  high  and  follows  it,  belongs  to  the  elect  people — to  "  the  City  of  God  " ; 
beside  which  lies  the  city  of  the  earth  occupied  with  the  interests  of  this  lower  sphere 
— a  city  proud,  tyrannical,  the  persecutor  of  the  saints,  but  which  does  not  the  less 
subserve,  albeit  by  means  of  which  it  is  unconscious,  the  establishment  of  the  Divine 
Kingdom.  Such  was  Babylon  in  the  East ;  such  was  Kome  in  the  West :  both 
imperial  cities,  and  both  ordained  to  diffuse  God's  revelation — the  one  the  Old 
Testament,  the  other  the  New.  The  empire  of  Kome  was  universal,  because  such 
must  be  the  Kingdom  of  Christ :  and  as  the  Old  Law  was  but  the  preparation  for 
the  New,  so  all  events  in  the  old  world  converged  towards  Eome  and  towards  the 
Coming  of  Christ ;  in  the  same  manner  as  all  events  after  that  Coming  have  con- 
curred to  the  final  triumph  and  to  the  universality  of  the  Christian  Faith.  If  this 
central  thought  be  kept  in  mind,  many  interpretations,  seemingly  opposed  to  each 
other  will  be  found  to  harmonize ;  it  being  assumed  that  the  successive  events  which 
are  taken  to  be  the  complete  accomplishment  of  an  Apocalyptic  prediction  are  but 
illustrations  merely — specimens,  so  to  speak — of  God's  dealings  with  the  Church  and 
with  the  world.  There  are  three  principal  systems  of  exposition,  as  they  are  com- 
monly classified,  according  to  which  the  Apocalypse  has,  for  the  most  part,  been 
interpreted : — the  Preterist,  the  Historical  or  Continuous,  the  Futurist.  To  these, 
however,  must  be  added  the  principle  of  interpretation  which  adopts  for  its  leading 
idea  the  great  conception  of  St.  Augustine  stated  above.  This  system  may  be 
styled  the  "  Spiritual."  As  Ebrard  says :  '•  The  Apocal3^se  does  not  contain 
presages  of  contingent,  isolated  events ;  but  it  contains  warning  and  consolatory 
prophecies  concerning  the  great  leading  forces  which  make  their  appearance  in  the 
conflict  between  Christ  and  the  enemy.  So  full  are  its  contents  that  every  age  may 
learn  therefrom,  more  and  more,  against  what  disguises  of  the  serpent  one  has  to 
guard  oneself  ;  and  also  how  the  afflicted  Church  at  all  times  receives  its  measure 
of  courage  and  of  consolation."    (Archdeacon  Lee.) 

Contents. — I.  The  prologue  (chaps,  i.-iii.),  setting  forth — 1.  The  vision  of 
Christ,  including  the  commission  given  to  the  Apostle  (chap.  i.  1,  11,  19) ;  an 
intimation  of  the  historical  personality  of  the  seer,  as  well  as  the  place  and  occasion 
of  his  receiving  the  Revelation  (vers.  9-11).  2.  The  enumeration  of  the  Seven 
Churches  (chaps,  i.  11 ;  ii.,  iii.)  which  symbolise  the  Church  universal  (chap, 
iii.  22)  for  whose  sake  the  prophetical  utterances  are  intended.  3.  The  Seven 
Epistles  (chaps,  ii.,  iii.).  II.  The  revelation  proper  (chaps,  iv.  1-xxii.  5). 
1.  The  prelude  (chaps,  iv.,  v.)  which  introduces  the  Divine  judgments.  These 
chapters  contain  two  scenes — the  appearance  in  heaven  of  the  throne  of  God  (chap, 
iv.),  and  the  appearance  of  the  Lamb  who  takes  the  sealed  book  "  out  of  the  right 
hand  of  Him  that  sat  on  the  throne  "  (chap.  v.).  2.  The  vision  of  the  seven  seals 
(chaps,  vl.  1-viii.  1),  including  an  interlude  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  seals 
which  consists  of  two  scenes — that  of  the  sealing  of  the  elect  (chap.  vii.  1-8),  and 
that  of  the  "  great  multitude  which  no  man  could  number  "  (chap.  vii.  9-17).  3. 
•  The  vision  of  the  seven  trumpets  (chaps,  viii.  2-xi.  19),  including  as  before  an  inter- 
lude between  the  sixth  and  seventh  trumpets,  which  again  consists  of  two  scenes — 
that  of  the  "  little  book"  (chap.  x.  1-11),  and  that  of  the  "  two  witnesses  "  (chap, 
xi.  1-14).  4.  The  vision  of  the  woman  and  her  three  enemies  (chaps,  xii.  1-xiii.  18) 
the  dragon  (chap.  xii.  3-17),  the  beast  from  the  sea  (chaps,  xii.  18-xiii.  10),  the 
beast  from  the  earth  or  "  false  prophet  "  (chap.  xiii.  11-18).  5.  The  group  of  visions 
in  chap.  xiv.  (1)  The  vision  of  the  Lamb  with  His  company  on  Mount  Sion  (vers. 
1-5).  (2)  The  vision  of  the  three  angels  proclaiming  judgments  (vers.  6-11).  (3) 
The  episode  (vers.  12,  13).  (4)  The  vision  of  the  harvest  and  the  vintage  (vers. 
14^20).  6.  The  vision  of  the  seven  vials  (chaps,  xv.  1-xvi.  21),  again  including  an 
interlude  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  vials  which  now  consists  of  one  scene — that 
of  the  three  unclean  spirits  gathering  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  into  the  place  which 
is  called  Har-Magedon  "  (chap.  xvi.  13-16).  7.  The  vision  of  the  final  triumph 
(chaps,  xvii.  1-xxii.  5),  presenting  four  scenes.  (1)  The  history  and  fall  of  Babylon 
(chaps,  xvii.  1-xix.  10) — the  hostile  world-power.  (2)  The  overthrow  of  Satan  (chaps, 
xix.  11-xx.  10) — the  hostile  spiritual  power.  (3)  The  universal  judgment  (chap. 
XX.  11-15).  (4)  The  glories  of  the  new  Jerusalem  (chaps,  xxi.  1-xxii.  5).  in.  The 
EPiLooxjE  (chap.  xxii.  6-21)  which  gradually  passes  from  visionary  representation, 
and  referring  back  in  ver.  8  to  the  prologue,  closes  with  a  Divine  attestation,  and 
with  threats  mingled  with  promises.     (Ibid.) 


THE   BIBLICxiL   ILLUSTEATOK. 

REVELATION. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vers.  1-3.  The  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.— T^  Revelation  of  Jesui  Christ  :— 
I.  The  Revelation,  or  Apocalypse.  1.  This  sacred  book  is  called  the  Revelation,  or 
Apocalypse,  to  express  its  origin.  It  is  the  Word  of  the  living  God,  given  by  Divine 
inspiration,  and  invested  with  Divine  authority.  2.  It  is  called  the  Apocalypse  to 
express  its  nature.  It  gives  a  blessed  manifestation  of  the  character,  counsels,  and 
deahngs  of  God.  3.  It  is  called  the  Apocalypse,  to  express  its  object.  There  is  an 
objective  revelation  of  the  character  and  will  of  God  which  is  given  in  His  Word ;  of 
the  great  plan  of  mercy  which  is  given  in  the  gospel ;  of  the  great  events  of  Provi- 
dence which  are  given  in  sacred  prophecy.  4.  It  is  called  the  Apocalypse,  to  express 
its  subject.  There  is  a  subjective  revelation  experienced  by  the  saint,  consisting  in 
the  saving  illumination  of  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xi.  25;  Psa.  cxix.  18).  5.  It  is  called 
the  Apocalypse,  to  express  its  great  design.  The  word  signifies  to  remove  the  veil 
that  conceals  an  object  from  view.  6.  There  is,  notwithstanding  this  glorious 
manifestation,  considerable  darkness  resting  on  this  book.  It  is  denominated  "  The 
mystery  of  God."  This  obscurity  arises  from  the  depth  of  the  counsels  of  heaven, 
from  the  symbolical  language  in  which  they  are  revealed,  from  the  prophetical 
nature  of  the  sacred  book.  But  amid  all  the  mystery  with  which  it  is  enveloped, 
there  is  a  light  within  the  cloud  to  illuminate  and  cheer.  II.  The  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ.  1.  It  is  a  revelation  from  Him  as  the  great  Author,  and  the  great 
Medium,  and  the  great  Depositary,  and  the  great  Dispenser  of  Divine  revelation,  and 
all  its  hopes,  promises,  and  blessings.  2.  It  is  a  revelation  concerning  Him  as  the 
great  subject,  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  glorious  gospel.  3.  It  is  a  revelation 
through  Him,  as  the  medium  of  Divine  communication,  as  the  great  Prophet  and 
Teacher  of  the  Church.  4.  It  is  a  revelation  to  Him  as  the  great  object,  the  end, 
the  proprietor  of  the  oracles  of  heaven.  It  is  His — His  own  pecuHar  charge,  and 
His  own  Divine  prerogative.  In  Him  all  the  lines  of  Divine  truth  centre ;  from 
Him  all  the  beams  of  its  glory  irradiate ;  to  Him  all  the  prophets  gave  witness. 
III.  The  great  design  of  this  sacred  charge.  1.  The  nature  of  this  design.  It 
is  "to  show."  This  partially  explains  the  word  "  revelation,"  which  is  to  make 
manifest  what  was  before  concealed.  It  also  explains  the  word  "  signified,"  which 
is  to  show  verbally,  in  plain  language ;  or  symbolically,  by  signs  or  symbols.  2. 
The  persons  to  whom  this  design  is  made  known.  They  are  "servants" — the 
servants  of  God,  by  a  devout  and  voluntary  surrender  of  themselves.  They  are  not 
only  servants,  but  they  are  kings  and  priests.  To  these  distinguished  servants 
God's  holy  will  is  given.  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him ;  and 
He  will  show  them  His  covenant.  3.  The  objects  revealed.  4.  The  time  of  fulfil- 
ment—" Things  that  must  shortly  come  to  pass."  (1)  This  may  be  viewed  person- 
ally, as  referring  to  ourselves  as  individuals.  The  time  of  our  departure  is  at  hand. 
"  Lord  teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  to  wisdom." 
(2)  It  may  be  viewed  generally.  The  time  is  at  hand  with  regard  to  the  Church, 
and  the  end  of  the  world,  and  the  day  of  judgment.  (3)  It  may  be  viewed  com- 
paratively. The  time  is  short  when  we  view  it  in  connection  with  eternity.  (4)  It 
may  be  viewed  progressively  with  respect  to  the  nature,  the  order,  and  arrangement 
of  Divine  operation — the  time  is  at  hand.  6.  As  the  message  was  important,  so  the 
messenger  was  honourable :  "  He  sent  and  signified  it  by  His  angel  unto  His  servant 

1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

John."  (1)  The  message,  and  how  it  was  delivered.  He  signified  and  testified,  or 
showed  it ;  He  made  it  manifest  by  plain  words,  direct  testimony,  and  by  signs  or 
symbols  (Hos.  xii,  10).  (2)  The  person  that  sent — "He  sent."  God  the  Father 
sent  His  angel  to  His  servant  John.  The  Lord  Jesus  sent  His  angel :  I,  Jesus,  sent 
Mine  angel  to  testify  to  you  these  things  in  the  Churches.  (3)  The  messenger  sent 
was  "  His  angel."  All  the  holy  angels  are  His  by  creation,  providence,  electing 
love,  confirming  grace,  and  sacred  ofi&ce.  But  some  He  selects  for  distinguished 
services.  {Jas.  You7ig.)  The  design  of  the  book  and  reward  for  its  study  : — There 
is  an  irresistible  charm  in  lofty  eminences.  There  is  exhilaration  in  ascending  them, 
though  attended,  often,  with  much  fatigue.  Similar  should  be  the  charm  of  this 
wondrous  book.  I.  The  title — "  The  Eevelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  H.  The 
DESIGN.  "  To  show  unto  His  servants,"  &c.  III.  The  special  peomise.  "Blessed 
is  he  that  readeth,''  &c.  (D.  G.  Hughes.)  The  preface : — I.  Its  original  source 
is  expressed  in  the  title  which  the  author  gives  to  his  book.  It  is  a  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  not  the  revelation;  as  though  it  were  the  only  one  which 
He  has  given,  or  the  only  one  which  He  gave  to  His  servant  John.  There 
may  be  a  reference  in  this  term  to  the  special  design  of  this  book  to  reveal 
the  time  and  manner  of  the  Saviour's  coming.  It  was  an  exciting  topic 
then,  as  it  is  now ;  and  many  were  the  conflicting  sentiments  that  were 
entertained  concerning  the  apocalypse,  or  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is 
styled  *'  a  Eevelation  of  Jesus  Christ,"  because  in  His  mediatorial  person,  as 
Iinmanuel,  or  God-man,  and  in  His  ofl&cial  capacity  as  the  great  Prophet  and  Teacher 
of  His  Church,  He  was  the  principal  party  in  making  it  known.  Yet  in  this,  as  in 
every  other  part  of  His  work.  He  acts  by  delegated  authority  from  the  Father,  and 
in  subserviency  to  His  will.  Not  less  in  heaven  than  on  earth,  in  His  glorification 
than  in  the  scenes  of  His  humiliation,  is  He  the  medium  of  communication  between 
God  and  His  redeemed.  This  revelation  was  given  to  Jesus  Christ  "  to  show  unto 
His  servants."  It  was  given  to  Christ  to  reveal  to  others.  He  knew  them  before. 
The  revelation  was  not  made  for  Him,  but  for  Him  to  make  known.  The  persons 
to  whom  He  is  empowered  to  reveal  them  are  "  His  servants."  The  servants  of 
Christ,  or  of  God,  are  the  redeemed.  This  He  is  ready  to  do  by  His  Word,  and  the 
teaching  of  His  Spirit.  H.  Of  the  general  character  of  these  contents  we  are 
thus  informed :  they  are  "  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass."  It  is  not  a 
history  of  the  past,  nor  a  record  of  the  present,  but  a  prophecy  of  the  future.  It  is 
not  a  mass  of  conjecture,  but  of  certainties.  Though  pending  upon  the  fickleness 
of  human  passions,  the  whole  future  course  of  events  is  as  unalterably  fixed  as  the 
past.  in.  We  are  informed  to  whom  this  revelation,  in  the  first  instance,  was  made 
known.  "  He  sent  and  signified  it  .  .  .  unto  His  servant  John."  He  teaches  one, 
that  this  one  may  teach  many.  Ministers  should  look  for  their  teaching  immedi- 
ately from  Christ.  John  had  borne  a  faithful  testimony  of  the  things  which  had 
been,  and  now  he  is  to  bear  record  of  the  things  that  should  be  hereafter.  Those 
who  have  evinced  a  sound  judgment,  and  given  a  faithful  record  of  things  which 
are,  and  have  been,  are  best  qualified  to  treat  of  things  to  come.  IV.  We  are 
informed  of  the  manner  in  which  this  revelation  was  communicated  by  Jesus  Christ 
to  His  servant  John :  "  He  sent  and  signified  it  by  His  angel."  God  gives  the 
revelation  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  to  an  angel,  and  the  angel  to  John.  The  word 
•'  angel,"  which  simply  signifies  a  messenger,  is  not  applied  in  Scripture  exclusively  to 
that  particular  order  of  beings  of  which  it  is  the  generic  term.  What  more  natural 
to  conclude  than  that  saints  carry  with  them  their  prevailing  disposition  to  heaven  ; 
and  that  the  saint  whose  heart  was  most  interested  in  the  events  here  recorded 
should  have  been  selected  by  Christ  as  His  messenger  to  John  ?  We  have  Moses 
and  Elias  appearing  in  angelic  forms  to  our  Lord  upon  the  mount.  Why  not  Isaiah 
or  Jeremiah,  or  Daniel,  to  John  in  the  isle  of  Patmos  ?  V.  We  are  informed  of  the 
PURPOSE  for  which  this  revelation  was  recorded.  It  was  for  our  study  and  observ- 
ance ;  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,"  &c.  Whoever  undertakes  to  read  the  Divine 
Word  to  others,  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed.  While  he  is  reading  new  hght  will 
burst  upon  the  sacred  page,  and  his  own  mind  will  be  instructed.  The  hearers  too 
will  be  blessed.  Few,  if  any  methods,  are  better  adapted  to  ascertain  the  meaning 
of  Scripture,  and  to  impress  it  upon  the  mind,  than  its  being  read  by  one  and  after- 
wards made  the  subject  of  mutual  inquiry  and  observation.  The  multiplication  of 
copies  ought  not  to  have  superseded  this  wholesome  practice.  Let  the  reading  and 
familiar  discussion  of  all  parts  of  the  sacred  volume  once  become  general,  and  a 
blessing,  as  the  dew  of  Harmon,  will  descend  upon  the  mountains  of  Zion.  A 
particular  reason  for  the  blessedness  which  would  accompany  the  study  of  this  book 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION. 


is  given  in  the  concluding  observation :  "  for  the  time  is  at  hand."  This  had  a 
special  application  to  the  Churches  to  which  it  is  first  addressed.  It  was  an  intima- 
tion to  them  that  the  first  events  of  the  series  in  which  they  were  principally  con- 
cerned would  speedily  occur.  It  was  needful,  therefore,  that  they  should  take  them 
at  once  into  serious  consideration.  To  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.  Let  them 
avail  themselves  of  these  preadmonitions,  and  they  would  experience  the  blessed- 
ness of  those  who  are  prepared  for  the  conflict  and  sure  of  final  victory.    Conclusion  : 

1.  The  Church  is  entrusted  with  the  observation  and  improvement  of  events  as  they 
rise.  2.  It  must  adapt  itself  to  external  changes  in  the  use  of  appointed  means. 
3.  Prophecy  is  intended  to  point  out  the  direction  in  which  its  energies  should  be 
employed.  {G.  Rogers.)  Divine  revelations: — Christians  are  not  confined  to 
this  world  in  their  enjoyments  of  life.  They  not  merely  behold  the  things 
of  men,  but  also  the  things  of  God;  not  merely  the  things  of  time,  but  also 
those  of  eternity.  I.  They  proceed  from  the  lnfinite  source  of  knowledge 
AND  LOVE.  1.  God  is  the  primal  author  of  spiritual  revelations.  He  is  the 
source  of  light,  and  alone  can  cause  it  to  shine  from  heaven  into  the  heart 
of  man.  2.  Christ  is  the  sympathetic  medium  of  spiritual  revelations.  St. 
John  is  here  writing  of  Him  as  having  ascended  to  heaven  with  a  Divine-human 
nature.  3.  Varied  messengers  are  the  communicating  agencies  of  revelation. 
Angelic  ministeries  are  interested  in  the  instruction  of  the  good.  Who  was  the 
messenger  here  employed  ?  It  would  seem  that  prophetic  fires  were  kindled  in  some 
ancient  seer  who  had  entered  upon  his  heavenly  rest,  and  that  he  was  employed  to 
uncover  to  the  imprisoned  apostle  the  sublime  visions  of  this  book.     U.  They  are 

GIVEN  TO  THOSE  ENGAGED  IN  THE  MORAL  SERVICE    OF   THE   UNIVERSE.       "  To   shoW  Unto 

His  servants."  1.  They  are  not  given  to  the  nationally  presumptuous.  These  have 
other  visions  more  welcome  to  their  ambitious  spirits — visions  of  fame.  They 
would  rather  dream  of  servile  crowds  paying  them  transient  homage,  than  be  per- 
mitted the  grandest  revelation  of  heaven  that  is  possible  to  human  soul.  2.  They 
are  not  given  to  the  socially  great.  They  are  not  given  to  kings  by  virtue  of  their 
kinghood.  They  are  not  given  to  the  warrior  in  acknowledgment  of  his  victory. 
They  are  not  given  to  the  wealthy  in  praise  of  their  industry  and  thrift.  They 
are  rather  given  to  the  humble,  to  the  poor  in  spirit,  to  the  pure  in  heart,  to  the 
loving  servants  of  the  Lord.  3.  They  are  not  given  to  the  intellectually  wise.  To 
untutored  minds,  but  of  heavenly  thought,  things  Divine  are  made  known,  far 
grander  than  are  suspected  by  the  students  of  earthly  things.  They  are  given  to 
the  good — (1)  Because  the  good  are  in  sympathy  with  God.  (2)  Because  the  good 
will  live  under  the  influence  of  the  revelation.  (3)  Because  the  good  wiU  be  faithful 
to  the  revelation.  III.  They  are  given  at  times  op  solitude  and  grief.  1. 
The  good  man's  solitude  is  never  lonely.  But  when  earth  is  far  removed,  when 
the  hurry  of  business  and  the  excitement  of  pleasure  are  behind,  then  come  those 
heavenly  visions  which  so  enrich  the  soul.  2.  God  does  not  forsake  His  faithful 
servants  in  their  time  of  need.  In  the  furnace  we  get  bright  visions  of  the  Son  of 
Man.  IV.  They  are  designed  to  interpret  the  eventful  ages  of  mankind.  1. 
Man  is  unable  to  interpret  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  ages.  2.  The  moral  signifi- 
cance of  the  ages  ought  to  engage  our  most  careful  study.  Lessons  :  1.  Adore  the 
condescension  of  God  in  revealing  Himself  to  man.  2.  Praise  the  glory  of  God 
which  He  has  manifested  to  your  soul  in  time  of  vision.  3.  Live  and  write  the 
spiritual  revelations  of  the  Eternal.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Aspects  of  human 
history  : — I.  As  a  revelation.  Christ  reveals  the  future  history  of  mankind — 1.  By 
disclosing  its  essential  principles.  2.  By  the  dispensations  of  Providence.  U.  As 
A  RECORD.  1.  Here  is  a  commission  from  heaven  to  record  certain  things.  2.  Here 
is  a  commission  from  heaven  to  reveal  certain  things,  addressed  to  a  man.  3.  Here 
is  a  commission  from  heaven  to  record  certain  things,  addressed  to  a  man  of  the 
highest  moral  class.    HI.  As  a  study.     1.  Historic  events  are  of  moral  significance. 

2.  The  moral  significance  involves  a  Divine  law.  3.  In  practical  obedience  to  this 
Divine  law  there  is  true  happiness.  (D.  Thomas,  B.B.)  To  show  unto  His 
servants  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass. — Christ's  cabinet  council: — For 
the  behoof  and  benefit  of  the  family  of  faith  who  are  all  of  Christ's  cabinet 
council.  {J.  Trapp.)  Timely  warning : — I.  Timely  revelation.  "  To  show 
unto  His  servants  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass."  There  was  a  time 
when  we  did  not  see  into  the  evil  of  sin  as  we  were  afterwards  led  to  do.  There 
was  a  time  when  we  did  not  see  into  the  infallible  certainty  of  the  judgment 
of  God  as  we  did  when  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  cause  the  weighty  matters  of 
judgment  to  sink  down  deep  into  our  souls.    Then  the  question  was,  How  are  wfl 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


to  escape  this  tremendous  evil  ?  What,  then,  is  to  be  done  ?  Some  of  us  ran  one 
way,  and  some  another ;  but  ere  long  the  Lord  showed  unto  us  that  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  II.  Confirmation.  Now  these  are  the  servants 
of  the  Lord  that  are  thus  brought  to  serve  Him  in  newness  of  spirit,  and  not  in  the 
oldness  of  the  letter ;  that  are  thus  brought  to  serve  Him,  not  at  Mount  Gerizim, 
nor  at  Jerusalem,  nor  any  other  earthly  locality,  but  brought  to  serve  Him  in  spirit 
and  in  truth,  and  consequently  to  worship  Him  everywhere.  And  we  need  confirm- 
ing in  these  things,  or  else  our  unbelief,  our  many  infirmities,  our  many  trials,  would 
put  an  end  to  His  religion.  And  so  we  need  confirming  from  time  to  time  in  God's 
truth  in  order  to  keep  us  pursuing.  How  does  the  Lord  confirm  us  now  ?  Is  it  not 
by  a  fresh  manifestation  of  the  redeeming  power  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ?  Is  it 
not  by  a  fresh  opening  up  unto  us  of  the  excellency  of  the  atoning  death  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ?  III.  Direction.  What  a  mercy  this  is !  It  is  a  great  thing  to  be 
guided  by  the  Lord ;  there  is  not  anything  too  hard  for  Him.  I  have  found  it 
good  in  my  time  to  watch  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  all  these  things.  So,  then,  "  to 
show  unto  His  servants,"  to  direct  them ;  and  He  does  in  many  of  His  dealings 
say,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  IV.  The 
THINGS  THAT  WERE  SHORTLY  TO  COME  TO  PASS.  Now  there  are  two  orders  of  things 
that  were  shortly  to  come  to  pass  ;  one  very  unpleasant,  and  the  other  exceedingly 
pleasant.  Well,  you  and  I  know  not  what  troubles  lie  in  our  path  yet,  but  there  is 
not  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord.  I  am  not  going  to  look  to  coming  troubles — 
that  is  not  my  business,  "  Sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  So,  then,  if 
tribulation  shall  abound,  consolation  shall  abound  also.  But  now  I  must  be 
careful  in  pointing  out  the  pleasant  circumstances — "  things  which  must  shortly 
come  to  pass."  To  speak  plainly,  it  means  that  these  people  should  soon 
be  in  heaven.  You  observe  that  every  one  of  the  promises  is  founded  upon 
victory.  "  To  him  that  overcometh."  It  is  a  legal  victory,  or  victory  of 
right.  In  righteousness  did  He  judge  and  make  war.  He  strove  for  the  victory 
lawfully.  Now  the  Lord  shows  unto  His  servants  the  way  of  victory,  and  that 
way  is  by  faith  in  what  the  Saviour  has  done.  {Jas.  Wells.)  Advantage  of 
revelation : — If  there  be  no  revelation,  we  have  no  hope,  and  can  have  no  com- 
fort in  our  death,  and  no  assurance  of  immortality  after  it.  If  there  be  no 
revelation,  we  are  in  a  perpetual  maze,  as  if  we  were  at  sea  without  star  or 
compass,  and  knew  not  what  course  to  take  to  gain  our  harbour.  (Bp. 
Williams.)  His  servant  John,  who  bare  record. — The  Christianity  of  St.  John : — 
Of  what  sort  was  the  Christianity  of  St.  John  between  thirty  and  forty  years 
after  Christ's  death,  as  we  find  it  in  the  Book  of  the  Eevelation  ?  (1)  In  chap. 
iv.  we  have  a  vision  reminding  us  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel.  There  is  a  Throne, 
and  One  who  sits  on  it.  He  is  Lord  and  God.  He  lives  for  ever  and  ever. 
He  created  all  things,  and  is  worthy  to  receive  glory  and  honour  and  power. 
In  the  second  chapter  we  read  of  One  who  is  the  Son  of  God.  He  in  whom 
St.  John  believes  is  therefore  God  the  Father,  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth.  (2)  This  Son  of  God  is  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  also  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords,  and  therefore  Lord  of  all  men,  our  Lord.  The  Lamb,  that  is 
Christ,  is  worshipped  by  every  created  thing,  in  one  breath  with  Him  that  sitteth 
upon  the  Throne.  (3)  The  Incarnation  of  Christ  is  implied  in  His  crucifixion, 
His  blood.  His  death,  and  the  title,  or  description.  Son  of  Man.  All  of  these 
are  expressly  mentioned  in  the  Eevelation.  Besides  we  find  Christ  described  by 
him  as  the  Lion  of  the  Tribe  of  Judah,  and  the  Boot  of  David.  (4)  That  Christ 
suffered  is  implied  in  His  overcoming,  and  in  His  being  a  Lamb,  as  it  had  been 
slain;  a  phrase  recalling  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah,  where  the  suffering 
is  described  at  length,  and  where  it  is  foretold  that  the  Sufferer  shall  triumph 
after  death.  (5)  The  Descent  into  Hades  must  be  understood  from  the  words, 
"I  was  dead,  and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore,"  &c.  The  Resurrection  is 
not  only  stated  in  these  and  other  like  words,  but  is  a  fundamental  conception 
of  the  whole  book.  (6]  We  do  not  read  of  the  Ascension ;  yet  as  the  death  took 
place  on  earth,  and  Christ  is  described  as  in  heaven  after  His  resurrection,  an 
ascension  is  implied.  (7)  The  sitting  on  the  Throne  of  God,  and  the  coming 
again  to  judgment  are  so  prominent  as  to  need  no  special  reference.  (8)  Then 
we  have  the  Spirit,  symbolised  in  His  abundant  powers  by  the  seven  lamps 
before  the  Throne,  and  again  by  the  seven  eyes  of  the  Lamb.  From  this  last 
may  we  not  infer  the  double  procession  ?  (9)  The  Communion  of  Saints  ia  indicated 
in  many  ways.  The  Angels  of  the  Seven  Churches  are  wreathed  into  a  garland 
of  stars  in  the  right  hand  of  the  Son  of  Man.    The  souls  of  the  martyrs,  under 


CHAP.  1.  ]  RE  VELA  TION. 


the  altar,  are  to  wait  for  their  brethren.    The  great  multitude  who  have  come  out 
of  the  great  tribulation   stand  before   the  Throne    and  before   the  Lamb.     (10) 
The  Remission  of  Sins  meets  us  in  the  very  first  chapter  ;  (11)  the  Resurrection  of 
the  Dead  comes  in  the  twentieth ;  and  (12)  the  Life  Everlasting  is  the  one  great 
gift  variously  shadowed  forth  by  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  Crown  of  Life,  the  Hidden 
Manna,  the   Morning  Star,  the   Book  of   Life,   the  Pillar  in  the   Temple,   the 
Sitting  Down  with  Christ  on  His  Throne ;  the  Seven  Gifts  to  the  Seven  Churches. 
Here  then,  in  this  venerable  monument  of  the  apostolic  age,  are  all  the  Articles  of 
the  Christian  faith,  as  we  now  have  them  in  our  creed.    2.  Until  a  man  has  made 
a  careful  study  of  the  Revelation,  he  might  very  possibly  set  it  down  as  a  tissue 
of  harsh  allegories,  thrown   together  without  skill   or  method,   and   betokening 
little  in  its  author  but  a  bewildered  enthusiasm.    But  indeed  there  is  in  it  a 
wonderful  order.    The  whole  book  seems  to  have  been  all  present  to  the  writer's 
mind  at  once,  like  the  universe  to  the  mind  of  the  Creator,  before  a  word  of  it  was 
written.    Vision  follows  vision,  each  complete  in  itself,  like  a  picture,  yet  all  adding 
something  new,  like  each  of  the  seven  parables  in  the  13th  of  St.  Matthew,  to  the 
manifold  lineaments  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     Then  there  is  this  peculiarity : 
Almost  every  phrase  of  the  Revelation  has  its  counterpart  in  the  old  Testament. 
The  Revelation  consists  of   Old  Testament  ideas  spiritually  combined  with  New 
Testament  narratives.     3.  St.  John,  after  all,  only  translates  the  Old  Testament 
prophecies  out  of  their  local  dialect  into  catholic  speech.    Malachi's  pure  offering 
in  every  place,  Zechariah's  feast  of  tabernacles,  Daniel's  kingdom  of  the  saints, 
Jeremiah's  Jerusalem  with  the  ark.     What  is  all  this  but  our  Lord's  teaching 
to  the  woman  of    Samaria,  and   the  absence   of    a    sanctuary   from  the   New 
Jerusalem — everywhere   Immanuel?     Then    we    have    Isaiah's    abounding    pro- 
phecies of  these  things,  the  Psalms  with  their  trumpet-call  to  all  lands,  the 
seed  of  Abraham  blessing  the  nations,  nay,  the  primal  promise  of  bruising  the 
serpent's   head — the   wonder   is   that  there   could   ever    have    been   a   mistake. 
These  old  prophets  saw  there  was  something  in  their  faith  and  worship,  different  in 
kind  from  the  local  idolatries  of  other  nations,  something  which  had  in  it  the 
germ  of  catholicity.     St.  John  had  touched  and  handled  the  stem  which  grew 
from  that  germ,  and  he  knew  that  it  must  grow  till  it  filled  the  earth.     4.  St.  John 
paints  an  ideal ;  and  ideals  are  never  realised  completely  in  this  world.    But  what 
would  the  world  have  been  without  them  ?    Here  in  England,  what  has  been,  deep 
down  beneath  the  vulgar  strife  of  parties,  the  ground  of  our  Constitution  in  Church 
and  State  ?     What  but  the  walking  of  our  nation  amidst  the  light  of  the  holy  city, 
and  our  kings  bringing  their   glory  into  it?     {J.  Foxley,  M.A.)        Of  the  "word 
of  Gk>d,  and  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  all  things  that  he  saw. — 
Three    aspects  of  revelation : — Some  apply  these  three  expressions  to  the  three 
portions  of  Holy  Writ,  of  which  John  was  the  inspired  penman.     The  word  of 
God,  they  refer  to  the  gospel;  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  to  the  epistles;  and  the 
things  which  he  saw,  to  the  Book  of  Revelation.    But  they  rather  seem  to  refer  to 
the  subject  of  all  these  sacred  writings.     I.  "  The  Word  of  God  "  is  His  personal, 
essential,  and  eternal  Word — His  only-begotten  Son.     John  bare  record  of  Him  in 
the  gospel,  in  the  epistles,  and  in  the  Book  of  Revelation.     Or  the  Word  of  God  is 
His  written  Word,  the  glorious  doctrines  of  Divine  revelation.     This  is  the  meaning 
of  the  Word  of  God  in  ver.  9  ;  chaps,  vi.  9,  xii.  11,  xx.  4,     H.  "  The  testimony  op 
Jesus  "  is  the  glorious  gospel   of   the  blessed   God.     1.  The  gospel  is  called  the 
testimony  of  Jesus,  because  He  is  the  author  of  it,  equally  with  the  Father.     He  is 
the  faithful  witness,  revealing  the  character,  the  counsels,  and  the  will  of  God. 
2.  Because  He  is  the  subject  of  it.     The  Spirit  of  Christ  testified  beforehand  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  followed.     3.  Because  He  is  the   object 
of  it.     To  Him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness.     The  holy  apostles  were  His  inspired 
witnesses.     4.  Because  He   was  the  recipient  of  this  testimony  (John  v.  19,  20, 
vii.  16,    viii.  28,   xii.    49,  xiv.  10,   xvii.   7;    Matt.  xi.    27).     HI.    Of  all  things 
THAT  HE  SAW.    {Jas.  YouTig.)        Blesscd  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear — 
The   seven  "  blesseds  "   in   the  Revelation : — There  are  seven  benedictions  in  the 
Book  of  Revelation.     Seven  is  said  to  be  the  number  of  completeness  or  perfection. 
The  first  of  these  benedictions  occurs  in  the  opening  lines  of  John's  Apocalypse : 
"Blessed  is  he  that  readeth  and  they  that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and 
keep,"  &c.     Just    at  the  close  of   the  Apocalypse   is  another  similar  passage: 
"  Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."     These  two 
verses  are  like  the  golden  clasps — one  on  either  lid — that  hold  together  a  dear  old 
family  Bible.     The  next    benediction    is    pronounced    upon    the    gospel-guests : 


.■6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

•'Blessed  are  they  who  are  called  unto  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb."  They 
who  are  drawn  by  the  attraction  of  the  Cros3,  and  yield  to  that  drawing,  are 
renewed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Theirs  is  a  place  at  the  celestial  banquet.  How  careful 
should  every  disciple  be  to  walk  unspotted  from  the  world,  for  every  stain  looks 
ugly  upon  a  white  ground.  There  is  a  hint  as  to  the  method  of  keeping  thus  clean, 
which  is  given  in  the  third  benediction  :  "  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth  and  keepeth 
his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked  and  they  see  his  shame."  No  believer  can  preserve 
the  purity  of  his  character  without  prayerful  vigilance.  "  Watch."  And  one  reason 
for  this  watchfulness  is  that  Christ's  coming  is  to  be  as  unannounced  as  the  midnight 
visit  of  a  burglar.  Old  Dr.  Alexander  used  to  say  with  solemn  tenderness,  "I 
won't  answer  for  any  Christian  who  dies  while  in  an  awful  state  of  backsliding." 
Upon  the  gospel-doers  rests  the  sweet  approval  of  the  fourth  benediction.  It  is  the 
blessing  upon  those  "  that  do  His  commandments."  The  evidence  and  the  joy 
of  discipleship  both  lie  in  obedience  to  Christ.  This  is  what  the  world  has  a  right 
to  demand  from  us — a  religion  of  fruits.  God  will  judge  every  one  of  us  according 
to  our  works.  The  next  blessing  is  that  angelic  voice  that  floats  over  the  resting- 
place  of  the  pious  dead.  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord."  To  them 
the  perils  of  the  voyage  are  over.  They  have  cast  anchor  in  the  haven.  They  are 
safe.  About  the  last  one  of  the  benedictions  in  this  sublime  book  there  has  been  no 
little  controversy :  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection." 
It  is  enough  for  me  that,  if  I  fall  to  sleep  in  Jesus  I  shall  awake  with  Him.  There  is 
not  an  unmarked  grave  in  all  Christ's  household  of  the  slumberers.  Them  which 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  together  with  Him.  {T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Reading 
the  Revelation: — A  scholar  of  singular  simplicity  and  holiness  of  life  was 
asked  by  a  friend  at  the  University,  why  he  so  often  read  the  Book  of  the 
Kevelation.  The  answer  savoured  of  great  humility  and  simple  faith.  He  turned 
to  this  verse,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,"  &c.  Bengel,  with  his  usual  sagacity,  in 
his  commentary  on  these  words  rebukes  men  for  their  neglect  of  this  great  book, 
reversing  the  promise,  as  if  it  were  written,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth  not ! "  The 
very  title  "Revelation"  should,  he  says,  quicken  our  interest,  and  provoke  our 
desire  to  look  in  and  see  those  things  which  are  revealed ;  whereas  too  many  pass 
by  the  uplifted  veil  with  eyes  averted,  and  lips  closed,  as  if  silence  were  wisdom,  and 
indifference  a  sign  of  reverential  fear.  But  let  them  take  heed,  he  says,  lest,  while 
they  devise  all  manner  of  excuse  for  refusing  the  heavenly  gift,  they  weary  God  as 
did  Ahaz,  when  in  pretended  modesty  he  would  ask  no  sign  of  Him  ;  lest  also  they 
be  found  ungrateful  to  Jesus  Christ.  {Canon  Furse.)  The  Apocalypse  to  be  read  : — 
What  if  there  be  a  veil  laid  over  this  Revelation,  will  it  not  be  rarified  by  read- 
ing, and  by  degrees  wholly  worn  away  ?  {J.  Trapp.)  The  words  of  this  prophecy. 
— Prophecy,  though  difficult  to  understand,  must  yet  be  studied : — When  Professor 
Stuart,  one  of  the  greatest  biblical  authorities,  was  asked  one  time  by  his  scholars  to 
explain  this  book  to  them,  he  told  them  he  wouldn't  till  he  understood  it.  Now,  if 
you  wait  tiU  you  understand  every  stone,  rivulet,  tree,  bush,  and  blade  of  grass  in 
a  picture  it  wiU  be  a  long  time  before  you  admire  it.  And  so  with  our  food. 
If  you  wait  to  analyse  every  kind  of  edible  on  the  table  it  wiU  be  a  long  while 
indeed  before  you  enjoy  it.  Because  we  can't  understand  every  thought,  word, 
and  picture  in  the  Book  of  Revelation  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  give  our 
attention  to  what  we  can  understand  in  it.  (H.  A.  Buttz.)  And  keep  those 
things  which  are  written  therein. — Keeping  the  Word  of  God : — 1.  To  keep  those 
things  is  to  believe  them.  Faith  must  be  mixed  with  the  hearing  of  the  gospel ;  we  can- 
not keep  those  things  unless  we  believe  them.  2.  To  keep  those  things  is  to  remember, 
ponder,  keep  them  in  mind  (Luke  ii.  19,  51).  We  are  saved  by  the  gospel,  if  we 
keep  it  in  memory.  We  must  remember  God's  name,  His  wonderful  works.  His 
holy  Word,  and  His  precious  promises.  3.  To  keep  those  things  is  to  observe  or 
obey  them ;  to  be  doers  of  the  Word  and  not  hearers  only ;  to  resemble,  embody, 
and  e^xhibit  the  holy  Word  of  God  in  living  characters  in  the  life  and  conversation. 
4.  To  keep  those  things  is  to  hold  them  fast ;  to  hold  fast  the  beginning  of  our 
confidence  steadfast  to  the  end ;  to  take  heed  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them 
slip ;  lest  there  be  in  us  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  in  departing  from  the  living  God ; 
lest  we  should  draw  back  unto  perdition.  5.  To  keep  those  things  is  to  make 
progress  in  holiness,  to  go  on  from  strength  to  strength,  from  grace  to  grace, 
from  glory  to  glory,  till  every  one  appears  in  Zion  before  God.    (Jos.  Young.) 

Vers.  4-9.  John  to  the  seven  Churches  ...  In  Asia. — The  dedication : — I.  The 
WBiTBB  of  this  book  is  again  named — "  John."    The  things  he  was  now  about  to  relate 


qpAP.  I.]  EEVELATION. 


depended  upon  his  own  testimony.  He  therefore  mentions  his  name  once,  and 
again,  and  yet  a  third  time.  He  refers  to  his  former  writings  for  his  credibility  as 
an  inspired  historian,  and  relates  circumstantially  the  occasion  upon  which  this 
revelation  was  given  him.  "  I,  John,"  he  says  in  ver.  9,  "I  am  the  person  to  whom 
these  disclosures  were  made,  by  whose  hand  they  were  written  down,  and  am  open 
to  the  examination  of  the  most  sceptical  inquirer."  U.  The  persons  to  whom  he 
dedicates  this  book  :  "  To  the  seven  Churches,"  &c.  It  is  dedicated  to  them  par- 
ticularly, partly  because  they  were  more  immediately  under  this  apostle's  care,  and 
partly  because  they  were  suffering  from  the  same  persecution  with  himself,  and 
most  needed  the  consolations  which  the  views  here  given  of  the  final  triumph  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  were  calculated  to  impart.  III.  The  salutation.  "  Grace  be 
unto  you  and  peace."  The  origin  of  our  salvation  is  grace,  the  effect  peace.  In 
proportion  as  we  perceive  the  grace,  we  have  peace.  First  grace,  then  peace.  Both 
are  from  God.  We  are  reminded  here  of  their  threefold  source.  The  Father  is 
first  mentioned  as  of  unchanging  form,  who  has  never  appeared  under  any  other 
aspect  than  that  of  the  Supreme  Being,  "  Him  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which 
is  to  come."  Next  we  have  the  Spirit  under  a  divided  form,  as  illustrative  of  the 
variety  and  diffusion,  and  also  of  the  limitation  of  His  influences ;  and  here  we 
have  the  Son  in  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  His  mission,  "  and  from  Jesus 
Christ  who  is  the  Faithful  Witness  and  the  First-begotten  of  the  dead,  and  the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth."  Thus  all  the  persons  of  the  Godhead  are 
mentioned  as  constituting  the  well-spring  of  grace  and  peace  to  the  Church.  Nor 
is  there  any  saving  grace,  nor  is  there  any  permanent  peace,  that  does  not  flow  from 
each  and  aU  of  these.  IV.  This  dedication  includes  an  ascription  of  praise  to  the 
Bedeemer  :  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us,"  &c.  V.  This  is  followed  by  a  reference  to 
THE  SECOND  COMING  OF  Christ.  "  Bchold  Hc  comcth  with  clouds,"  &c.  VI.  This  is 
further  confirmed,  by  an  annoiincement  from  Christ  Himself,  of  His  proper 
Divinity.  *'  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,"  &c.  To  the  foregoing  truths  Christ  aifixes 
this  as  His  signature.  VII.  This  dedication  closes  with  a  statement  of  the  time 
and  place  in  which  this  revelation  was  given,  "  I,  John,  who  also  am  your  brother," 
&c.  We  need  only  observe  here  the  humble  and  affectionate  manner  in  which, 
though  an  aged  apostle  and  favoured  with  these  revelations,  he  speaks  of  his  station 
amongst  other  Christians.  He  is  not  exalted  above  measure  through  the  abundance 
of  the  revelations.  He  speaks  not  of  anything  in  which  he  was  superior,  but  of 
that  only  in  which  he  was  upon  an  equality  with  them.  He  calls  not  himself  a 
companion  of  Christ  and  of  His  apostles,  but  their  '*  companion  in  tribulation." 
He  does  not  address  them  as  their  diocesan,  or  father  in  God,  but  as  their  "brother." 
The  humility  of  the  apostles,  it  is  to  be  feared,  as  well  as  their  dignity,  died  with 
them.  This  "  I,  John,"  which  is  repeated  in  the  last  chapter,  yet  stands  out  as  on 
the  borderland  of  that  primitive  simpUcity  which  the  Church  has  yet  many  steps  to 
retrace  before  she  regains.  {G.  Rogers.)  Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace. — The 
gifts  of  Christ  as  Witness,  risen  and  crowned  : — I.  Grace  and  peace  from  the  faith- 
ful Witness.  But  where  did  John  get  this  word  ?  From  the  lips  of  the  Master, 
who  began  His  career  with  these  words  (John  iii.  11) ;  and  who  all  but  ended  it  with 
these  royal  words  (John  xviii.  37).  Christ  Himself,  then,  claimed  to  be  in  an 
eminent  and  special  sense  the  witness  to  the  world.  What  was  the  substance  of 
His  testimony  ?  It  was  a  testimony  mainly  about  God.  It  is  one  thing  to  speak 
about  God  in  words,  maxims,  precepts ;  it  is  another  thing  to  show  us  God  in  act 
and  life.  The  one  is  theology,  the  other  is  gospel.  It  is  not  Christ's  words  only 
that  make  Him  the  "Amen,"  the  "faithful  and  true  Witness,"  but  it  is  all  His 
deeds  of  grace  and  truth  and  pity  ;  all  His  yearnings  over  wickedness  and  sorrow  ; 
all  His  drawings  of  the  profligate  and  the  outcast  to  Himself,  His  life  of  loneliness, 
His  death  of  shame.  The  substance  of  His  testimony  is  the  name,  the  revelation 
of  the  character  of  His  Father  and  our  Father.  This  name  of  "  witness  "  bears 
likewise  strongly  upon  the  remarkable  manner  of  our  Lord's  testimony.  The  task 
of  a  witness  is  to  tell  his  story,  not  to  argue  about  it.  And  there  is  nothing  more 
characteristic  of  our  Lord's  words  than  the  way  in  which,  without  attempt  of  proof. 
He  makes  them  stand  on  their  own  evidence,  or  rather  depend  upon  His  veracity. 
And  now,  ask  yourselves,  is  there  not  grace  and  peace  brought  to  us  all  from  that 
faithful  Witness,  and  from  His  credible  testimony  ?  Surely  the  one  thing  that  the 
world  wants  is  to  have  the  question  answered  whether  there  reaUy  is  a  God  in 
heaven  that  cares  anything  about  me,  and  to  whom  I  can  trust  myself  wholly ; 
believing  that  He  will  lift  me  out  of  all  my  meannesses  and  sins,  and  make  me  pure 
and  blessed  like  Himself.    Surely  that  is  the  deepest  of  all  human  needs,  howsoever 


8  THE  BIBLiCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.  1. 

little  men  may  know  it.  And  sure  I  am  that  none  of  lis  can  find  the  certitude  of 
such  a  Father  unless  we  give  credence  to  the  message  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
II.  Grace  and  peace  from  the  Conqueror  of  death.  "  The  First  begotten  from 
the  dead  "  does  not  precisely  convey  the  idea  of  the  original,  which  would  be  more 
accurately  represented  by  "  The  First  born  from  the  dead"— the  resurrection  being 
looked  upon  as  a  kind  of  birth  into  a  higher  order  of  life.  And  how  is  it  that  grace 
and  peace  come  to  us  from  the  risen  Witness  ?  Think  first  how  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  confirmation  of  His  testimony.  In  it  the  Father,  to  whom  He 
had  borne  witness  in  His  life  and  death,  bears  witness  to  Christ,  that  His  claims 
were  true  and  His  work  well-pleasing.  He  is  "declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  by 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  Strike  away  the  resurrection  and  you  fatally 
damage  the  witness  of  Jesus.  If  Christ  be  not  risen  our  preaching  and  your  faith 
are  alike  vain ;  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins.  Grace  and  peace  come  from  faith  in  the 
"  First  begotten  from  the  dead."  And  that  is  true  in  another  aspect.  Faith  in  the 
resurrection  gives  us  a  living  Lord  to  confide  in,  not  a  dead  one,  whose  work  we 
may  look  back  upon  with  thankfulness,  but  a  living  one,  whose  work  is  with  us, 
and  by  whose  true  companionship  and  real  affection,  strength  and  help  are  granted 
to  us  every  day.  In  still  another  way  do  grace  and  peace  flow  to  us,  from  the  "  First 
begotten  from  the  dead,"  inasmuch  as  in  His  resurrection  life  we  are  armed  for 
victory  over  that  foe  whom  He  has  conquered.  If  He  be  the  Firstborn,  He  will  have 
"  many  brethren."  III.  Grace  and  peace  from  the  King  op  kings.  The  series  of 
aspects  of  Christ's  work  here  is  ranged  in  order  of  time,  in  so  far  as  the  second 
follows  the  first,  and  the  third  flows  from  both,  though  we  are  not  to  suppose  that 
our  Lord  has  ceased  to  be  the  faithful  Witness  when  He  has  ascended  His  sovereign 
throne.  His  own  saying,  "  I  have  declared  Thy  name,  and  will  declare  it,"  shows 
us  that  His  witness  is  perpetual,  and  carried  on  from  His  seat  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.  He  is  the  "  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  just  because  He  is  "the faithful 
Witness."  A  kingdom  over  heart  and  conscience,  will  and  spirit,  is  the  kingdom 
which  Christ  has  founded,  and  His  rule  rests  upon  His  witness.  And  not  only  so. 
He  is  "  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  because  in  that  witness  He  became, 
asthe  word  etymologicaily  conveys  both  ideas,  a  martyr.  His  first  regal  title  was 
written  upon  His  Cross,  and  on  the  Cross  it  ever  stands.  He  is  the  King  because 
He  is  the  Sacrifice.  And  He  is  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  because, 
witnessing  and  slain,  He  has  risen  again ;  His  resurrection  has  been  the  step  mid- 
way, as  it  were,  between  the  humiliation  of  earth  and  death,  and  the  loftiness  of 
the  throne.  By  it  He  has  climbed  to  His  place  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  He  is 
King  and  Prince,  then,  by  right  of  truth,  love,  sacrifice,  death,  resurrection.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.I).)  A  ministerial  salutation  and  a  sublime  doxology  : — I.  A  minis- 
terial SALUTATION.  1.  It  was  givcu  by  an  old  minister  to  Churches  with  whom  he 
was  formerly  acquainted.  It  is  weU  for  ministers  to  communicate  the  experience  of 
their  higher  moments  of  spiritual  enjoyment  to  their  congregations.  Pastors  should 
never  forget  the  old  churches  from  which  they  have  removed.  They  should  always 
be  ready  to  write  to  them  a  holy  salutation.  2.  It  evokes  the  highest  moral  blessing 
to  rest  upon  the  Asiatic  Churches.  (1)  All  Christian  Churches  need  Divine  grace, 
to  inspire  with  humility,  to  strengthen  in  trial,  and  to  quicken  in  energy.  (2)  All 
Christian  Churches  need  peace,  that  sympathy  may  extend  from  member  to  member, 
that  moral  progress  may  be  constant,  and  that  the  world  may  have  a  pattern  of 
holy  unity.  God  only  can  impart  these  heavenly  blessings.  3.  It  mentions  the 
Divine  Being  under  the  grandest  appellations.  (1)  Indicative  of  eternity,  "  Which 
is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come."  (2)  Indicative  of  dignity.  "  And  from 
the  Seven  Spirits."  (3)  Indicative  of  fidelity.  "  And  from  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
the  faithful  Witness."  During  the  period  of  His  Incarnation  Christ  was  a  faithful 
witness.  He  was  a  faithful  witness  of  His  Father.  He  was  faithful  to  the  Jews ; 
before  Pilate ;  to  humanity.  He  sealed  His  testimony  with  His  death.  (4)  Indica- 
tive of  royalty.  "  The  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth."  Rendered  supreme,  not 
by  the  victory  of  an  earthly  conquest,  but  by  the  right  of  eternal  Godhead.  II.  A 
SUBLIME  DOXOLOGY.  1.  Inspired  by  a  glad  remembrance  of  the  Divine  love.  "Unto 
Him  that  loved  us."  Ministers  ought  to  delight  to  dwell  on  the  love  of  God.  If 
they  did,  it  would  frequently  awaken  a  loving  song  within  them.  It  would  also 
have  a  glad  effect  upon  their  congregations.  2.  Celebrating  the  Divine  and  sweet 
renewal  of  the  soul.  •'  And  washed  us  from  our  sins."  The  love  of  Christ,  and  the 
renewal  of  the  moral  nature,  should  go  together,  not  merely  in  the  pages  of  a  book, 
but  also  in  the  actual  experiences  of  the  soul.  He  can  wash  us  from  our  sins,  and 
give  purity,  freedom,  and  peace  in  their  stead.      What  process  of  cleansing  so 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION'.  9 

marvellous,  so  healthful,  and  heavenly  as  this !  3.  Mentionmg  the  exalted  position 
to  which  Christian  manhood  is  raised  in  Christ.  "  And  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God."  (1)  The  Christian  is  a  king.  He  rules  himself  ;  his  thoughts, 
affections,  and  passions.  He  rules  others  by  the  sublime  influence  of  patience  and 
faith.  (2)  The  Christian  is  a  priest.  He  offers  sacrifices  to  God,  the  sacrifice  of 
himself,  which  is  reasonable  and  acceptable ;  the  sacrifice  of  his  prayer,  praise, 
and  service.  He  also  makes  intercession  for  others.  4.  Concluding  with  a  devout 
ascription  of  praise  to  Christ.  "  To  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen."  Christ  has  "glory."  The  glory  of  Divinity;  of  heavenly  praise;  of 
terrestial  worship ;  of  moral  conquest ;  of  unbounded  moral  influence.  Christ  has 
*'  dominion  "  ;  dominion  over  the  material  universe ;  over  a  growing  empire  of 
souls ;  by  right  of  nature  rather  than  by  right  of  birth.  Both  His  glory  and 
dominion  are  eternal.  Both  should  be  celebrated  in  the  anthems  of  the  Church,  as 
they  are  glad  reasons  for  human,  as  well  as  angehc,  joy.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Grace : — 1.  A  world  of  grace  surrounds  ub.  2.  A  time  of  grace  lies  back  of 
us.     3.  A  hope  of  eternal  grace  opens  up  before  us.     {B.  Hoffmann.)  From 

Him  wMch  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come.  —  The  proper  object  of 
all  religious  worship  is  the  living  and  true  God.  1.  Divine  worship  must  be  pre- 
sented to  God,  essentially  considered,  as  possessing  all  those  Divine  perfections 
which  formi  a  proper  object  of  contemplation,  praise,  and  adoration  ;  and  a  proper 
ground  of  hope  and  holy  confidence.  2.  Worship  must  be  addressed  to  God,  per- 
sonally considered,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  possessing  all  those 
personal  characters  that  form  a  ground  of  confidence,  love,  and  adoration.  3. 
Worship  must  be  given  to  God,  graciously  considered,  as  possessing  all  those  cove- 
nant and  gracious  excellences  that  form  a  ground  of  hope  and  everlasting  consola- 
tion in  all  our  approaches  to  the  throne  of  grace.  Such  is  the  character  recognised 
by  the  apostle  in  the  prayer  before  us.  The  words  imply  the  existence  of  three 
Divine  persons  in  the  adorable  Trinity,  and  they  apply  equally  to  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Spirit.  They  are  also  expressive  of  His  adorable  sovereignty,  as 
the  Euler,  the  Lawgiver,  and  the  Judge  of  the  universe.  They  suppose  the  king- 
doms of  nature,  of  providence,  and  grace,  to  be  under  His  power ;  and  they  also 
teach  the  eternity  of  that  kingdom.  {Jas.  Young.)  Christ  for  ever : — We  speak 
of  time  as  past,  present,  and  future ;  but  what  a  mystery  it  is !  The  present 
moment  is  all  of  time  that  actually  exists.  All  past  time  ends  in  the  present 
moment.  All  future  time  begins  in  the  same  point.  To  use  the  experience  of  the 
past  so  as  to  shape  the  future  aright  is  to  redeem  the  time.  This  gives  to  every 
moment  of  time  a  tremendous  importance.  It  makes  the  thought  of  it  the  most 
practical  of  all  things.  It  is  from  this  extremely  practical  point  of  view  that  I  wish 
to  look  at  this  otherwise  most  abstruse  of  subjects.  I  wish  to  look  at  Christ's  re- 
lation to  time,  in  order  to  determine  our  own  relation  to  it.  He  is  here  spoken  of 
under  the  aspect  of  a  past,  a  present,  and  a  future  Christ.  The  relations  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  time  span  the  whole  of  time.  They  are  commensurate  with  the  whole 
purpose  of  God  in  time.  It  is  only  as  our  lives  run  into  the  line  of  Christ's  life,  as 
stretching  through  all  time,  that  we  can  be  saved.  The  life  that  flies  off  at  a 
tangent  from  that  line,  or  that  crosses,  contradicts,  or  reverses  it,  is  a  lost  life.  I. 
The  Christ  of  the  past.  It  is  very  evident  to  a  spiritual  reader  of  the  Bible  that 
Christ  runs  through  the  whole  of  it,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  But  what  I 
want  specially  to  notice  here  is  that  the  Christ  of  the  past  represents  three  great 
facts  that  are  for  ever  settled  and  done.  First,  that  one,  and  only  one,  perfect 
human  life  has  been  lived  in  the  world ;  second,  that  one,  and  only  one,  atoning 
death  has  been  died  in  the  world ;  and  third,  that  one,  and  only  one  Person,  in  virtue 
of  the  life  He  lived  and  the  death  He  died,  is  the  conqueror  of  sin  and  death.  Those 
are  facts  that  belong  to  the  past  history  of  this  world.  They  are  eternally  consum- 
mated and  complete.  Moreover,  they  are  thoroughly  well  authenticated  facts ;  and 
it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  there  can  be  any  real  justification  of  doubt  concerning 
them.  You  cannot  separate  the  one  from  the  other.  You  must  believe  in  a  whole 
Christ  or  not  at  aU.  What  the  age  wants  is  not  a  diluted  Christ — not  a  mere 
spectre  of  Christianity,  or  ghost  of  morality,  but  a  whole  Christ.  11.  The  Christ 
OF  the  present.  Christianity  is  much  impeded  by  the  want  of  progress  in  the  Church. 
There  is  not  that  growth  and  robustness  in  our  modern  Christianity  which  there 
ought  to  be.  Why  has  Christ  not  remained  the  Christ  of  the  past  alone  ?  Why 
has  He  not  remained  in  the  grave?  Why  is  He  at  the  right  hand  of  God  in  heaven 
— at  the  very  goal  of  the  ages  ?  Because  He  would  not  have  His  people  live  in  the 
past.    He  is  the  Christ  of  the  present,  to  be  with  His  people  to-day,  to  lead  them  on 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

to  far  higher  things  than  they  have  yet  realised.  The  present  ought  to  be  full 
of  Christ.  For  what  does  this  belief  in  a  living  Redeemer  imply  ?  It  implies  three 
things :  First,  that  in  Christ,  as  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  God  in  heaven,  we 
have  an  actual  Person  in  whom  might  and  right  are  absolutely  one.  Further,  this 
Christ  who  exists  to-day  in  the  face  of  all  the  tyrannies  and  inequalities  of  the 
world,  as  the  absolute  embodiment  of  might  and  right,  is  not  sitting  aloft  in  heaven 
in  passive  contemplation  of  the  conflict  here.  He  is  actually  ruling  over  all  worlds 
for  the  accomplishment  of  a  Divine  purpose.  There  is  a  third  idea  here  belonging 
to  the  Christ  of  the  present.  Believing  in  Him  as  the  actual  embodiment  of  might 
and  right,  and  as  that  One  who  is  ruling  over  all  things  for  the  accomplishment 
of  a  Divine  purpose,  we  are  called  upon  to  co-operate  with  Him  in  the  present,  and 
we  have  the  promise  that  just  as  we  intelligently  do  so  will  we  receive  of  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  to  enable  us  to  do  the  work  to  which  we  are  called.  He  rules  in 
heaven  to  shed  down  power  upon  His  people.  He  walks  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks,  and  holds  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand.  HI.  The  Christ 
OF  THE  FUTURE.  What,  then,  are  the  certainties  in  connection  with  the  Christ  of 
the  future  in  which  we  are  called  to  believe  ?  There  is,  first  of  all,  the  certainty 
that  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  Christ  will  prevail  throughout  the  whole  earth.  There 
are  tremendous  obstacles  to  be  overcome.  There  are  false  principles  at  work  every- 
where in  human  society.  There  is  scepticism  of  first  principles  altogether.  There 
are  the  disintegrating  forces  of  a  shallow  and  self-elated  criticism.  And  beyond 
all  these  there  are  the  dense  masses  of  pure  heathenism.  But  in  view  of  what  we 
have  already  considered,  we  cannot  possibly  have  one  atom  of  doubt  as  to  the 
result.  Who  can  doubt  what  the  future  will  be  ?  It  must  be  the  legitimate  sequel 
of  the  things  which,  in  the  name  of  God,  have  been  accomplished  in  the  past,  and 
are  being  wrought  out  and  applied  in  the  present.  Having  once  got  an  intelligent 
hold  of  these  things,  we  can  no  more  doubt  them  than  we  can  doubt  our  own 
existence.  But  it  follows  also  that  the  Christ  of  the  future  is  that  One  whom  we 
have  individually  and  personally  to  meet.  There  is  just  one  other  thought  lying  in 
the  Christ  of  the  future,  and  that  is  the  relation  that  is  destined  to  exist  for  ever 
between  Christ  and  His  own  people — the  relation  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  to 
His  bride,  the  Church.  In  that  sublime  relationship  we  have  the  consummation  of 
felicity.  {F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  The  seven  spirits. — Omnipotence,  omniscience, 
omnipresence,  are  here  ascribed  to  the  seven  spirits  which  are  before  the  throne. 
1.  They  are  called  seven  spirits  symbolically.  The  number  seven  is  the  symbol  of 
blessedness.  He  sanctified  the  seventh  day ;  He  made  it  a  holy  day.  The  number 
seven  is  the  symbol  of  holiness.  He  rested  on  the  seventh  day  ;  He  made  it  a  day 
of  sacred  repose.  The  number  seven  is  the  symbol  of  rest.  He  rested  and 
was  refreshed  on  the  seventh  day,  because  His  work  was  finished.  The  number 
seven  is  the  symbol  of  perfection.  2.  They  are  called  seven  spirits  typically,  in 
allusion  to  the  typical  use  of  the  number  seven  in  the  law  of  Moses  and  in  the  Old 
Testament.  3.  They  are  called  seven  spirits  prophetically.  We  find  the  sevenfold 
spirit  described  in  prophecy  as  resting  upon  Christ  (Isa.  xi.  2).  And  we  find 
a  sevenfold  effect  of  the  manifold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  described  by  the 
prophet  Isaiah  (Isa.  Ixi.  1-3).  4.  They  are  called  the  seven  spirits  emblemati- 
cally. The  seven  lamps  and  the  seven  eyes  (Zech.  iv.  2,  10),  are  explained  to 
be  the  spirit  (vers.  6,  7).  The  seven  lamps  are  applied  in  the  same  sense  in  Rev. 
iv.  and  v. ;  and  the  seven  eyes  are  explained  in  this  sense  in  chaps,  v.  and  vi., 
all  of  which  refer  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  5.  They  are  called  the  seven  spirits 
officially  (1  Cor.  xii.  4-11;  Zech.  xii.  10).  6.  They  are  called  the  seven  spirits 
relatively,  in  reference  to  the  symbolical  number  seven  applied  to  the  Churches. 
As  there  are  seven  Churches,  so  there  are  seven  spirits.  The  number  of  the  one 
corresponds  with  the  number  of  the  other.  The  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is  com- 
mensurate with  the  necessities  of  the  Church.  But  amid  this  variety  there  is 
still  a  blessed  unity.  As  the  seven  Churches  are  the  symbol  of  the  one  Church 
of  Christ,  so  the  seven  spirits  are  the  symbol  of  the  one  Divine  Spirit.  (Jas.  Young.) 
Jesus  Christ  .  .  .  the  faithful  witness. — The  trustworthiness  of  Jesus  Christ : — 
Those  who  do  not  regard  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the  Son  of  God,  find  themselves  at 
once  placed  in  a  difficulty,  by  the  very  attitude  which  He  assumes  toward  mankind 
in  this  respect.  The  Bible  abounds  with  the  very  strongest  denunciations  against 
the  sin  of  trusting  anybody  else  but  God.  The  ancient  law  pronounced  a  distinct 
curse  upon  any  man  who  fell  into  this  sin.  The  Psalmist  exhorts  us  not  to  allow 
ourselves  to  be  drawn  into  it  (see  Jer.  xvii.  5,  6).  Now,  if  our  blessed  Lord 
laid  Himself  out  to  induce,  on  the  part  of  His  contemporaries,  a  moral  attitude 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  11 

towards  Himself,  which  was  incompatible  with  the  direct  law  of  God,  He  was 
not  a  good  man,  but  an  impostor.  Christ  was  either  the  Son  of  God,  or  else,  from 
first  to  last,  throughout  the  whole  course  of  His  ministry.  He  allowed  persons  to  fix 
upon  Him  a  confidence  which  they  ought  not  to  have  reposed  upon  any  person — 
whatever  his  pretensions — unless  that  person  were  God  Himself.  Nay,  it  is  not 
merely  that  He  permitted  His  people  to  trust  Him ;  but  He  actually  held  Him- 
self forward  as  an  object  of  faith.  He  positively  demanded  faith  in  Himself 
before  He  would  comply  with  the  entreaties  of  those  that  approached  Him.  Still 
more  emphatic  is  the  position  which  He  occupies  in  the  moral  world.  He  repre- 
sents Himself  as  the  object  of  the  sinner's  confidence.  "As  Moses  lifted  up 
the  serpent,"  &c.  What  blasphemy  if  He  be  not  the  Son  of  God !  I  venture 
to  say  that  the  man  who  fixes  the  eye  of  intelligent  faith  upon  the  dying  Son  of 
Man,  if  Christ  be  not  the  Son  of  God,  is  guilty  of  idolatry,  and  the  blighting  curse 
of  the  prophet  will  rest  upon  him :  "  That  man  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the 
desert,  he  shall  not  see  when  good  cometh."  I  marvel  greatly,  then,  if  Chi'ist  be 
not  the  Son  of  God,  why  these  results  do  not  follow.  How  comes  it  to  pass  that 
those  who  trust  Him  most  fervently,  are  not  the  most  shrivelled  beings  on  the  face 
of  God's  earth?  I  said  I  was  to  speak  to  you  about  Christ's  trustworthiness. 
There  is  this  great  truth  that  underlies  it  all ;  but  I  want  to  point  out  other  con- 
siderations that  lead  us  in  the  same  direction,  in  order  that  our  faith  may  be 
strengthened.  First,  He  gathered  around  Him  a  little  band  of  followers,  and  asked 
them  to  do  a  good  deal.  Their  fishing  boats  and  nets,  to  be  sure,  were  not  very 
valuable  property ;  but  then,  remember,  these  were  all  they  had.  What  authority 
had  they  to  make  such  a  tremendous  sacrifice?  Simply  the  bare  word  of  a 
Stranger,  who  says,  "  Follow  Me."  Very  well,  did  He  prove  Himself  trustworthy? 
They  wandered  about  with  Him  many  a  weary  night ;  sometimes  their  commis- 
sariat was  very  slender  indeed ;  yet,  somehow,  they  never  wanted  ;  "  the  five  barley 
loaves  "  managed  to  supply  the  wants  of  all  who  put  their  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 
"  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  to-day."  In  our  outward  circumstances,  how  many  are 
there  of  us  that  make  proof  of  it  ?  How  many  are  there  of  us  who  pass  through 
difficulty  and  trial,  and  sometimes  have  been  sore  straitened,  and  yet  the  Lord  has 
met  our  wants  I  He  has  fulfilled  His  promise.  Is  that  all  ?  No ;  by  no  means. 
From  beginning  to  end  of  our  Lord's  blessed  ministry.  He  was  continually  being 
approached  by  the  children  of  want  and  misery.  Now  observe — from  the  nobleman 
at  Capernaum  to  the  dying  thief  on  the  cross  of  Calvary,  the>ery  first  thing  He 
demanded  of  them  was  confidence  ;  and  we  do  not  read  of  one  single  case  where 
that  confidence  was  ill  reposed.  There  were  plenty  of  enemies  who  would  have 
been  glad  to  point  to  such  cases.  Contemporary  history  says  nothing  about  them. 
The  Jews  have  left  no  contradiction  of  the  glorious  facts  which  our  blessed  Lord 
actually  achieved:  the  cases  where  He  failed  remain  unknown,  and  will  for  ever 
remain  unknown,  because  they  never  existed.  AU  this  leads  up  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  pre-eminently  a  trustworthy  Person.  But  now,  one 
step  further.  If  He  was  trustworthy  in  these  minor  details  of  His  daily  life,  does 
it  not  seem  reasonable  to  conclude  that  He  would  also  be  trustworthy  in  the  great 
work  which  He  came  into  the  world  specially  to  perform  ?  "  Well,"  you  say,  "  it 
was  a  greater  work  than  any  of  the  rest."  So  it  was.  "  It  entailed  a  great  deal 
more  moral  power."  Yes,  a  great  deal  more.  "It  involved  vaster  mysteries."  Yes ; 
aU  true.  Set  against  that,  however,  another  consideration.  We  shall  readily 
admit  that  God  must  have  known  the  nature  of  the  work ;  He  must  have  foreseen  its 
difficulties,  understood  its  condition.  Now,  there  was  only  one  Person  God  could 
have  trusted  with  the  work — His  own  eternal  Word,  co-eternal  with  Himself — One 
with  Himself  for  ever — He  could  afford  to  trust  Him.  Now  then,  if  God  could 
trust  Him  with  this  work,  I  think  we  may  trust  Him  with  it.  The  passage  of 
Scripture  which  I  have  brought  before  you,  represents  Him  as  "  the  faithful  Wit- 
ness, the  First  begotten  of  the  dead."  He  stands  before  us  as  the  risen  Christ,  and 
the  question  naturally  arises,  Is  His  character  different  now  from  what  it  was  when 
He  lived  here  on  earth,  1800  years  ago?  Well,  it  seems  only  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  words  of  the  risen  Saviour  will  be  even  more  trustworthy,  if  possible,  than 
the  words  of  a  Uving  Saviour.  As  the  Son  of  God,  He  knew  all  about  eternity  from 
all  eternity ;  but,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  He  had  to  make  that  long,  long  voyage  into 
that  unknown  region  which  lies  beyond  the  stream  of  death.  He  has  returned 
from  His  journey,  and  He  stands  before  His  disciples  in  the  fulness  of  resurrection- 
life  as  "  The  Trustworthy."  If  He  was  trustworthy  when  He  lived,  surely  He  is  no 
less  trustworthy  now.     Lo  1  the  risen  Jesus  stands  before  you.     His  very  life 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

witnesses  to  something.  The  fact  that  He  is  "  raised  from  the  dead  to  die  no 
more  "  witnesses  to  something.  What  does  it  witness  to  ?  The  very  first  words  He 
utters,  set  my  doubt  at  rest.  He  speaks  of  "  My  Father  and  your  Father,  My  God 
and  your  God."  What?  Has  a  risen  Christ  borne  faithful' witness  to  me,  that 
there  is  now  established  between  fellen  man  and  a  holy  God  this  blessed  relation- 
ship, so  that  I  may  look  up  and  say,  "  Father!  "  and  that  I  may  know  that  He 
looks  down  and  says  "  Son  !  "  What  were  His  first  words  to  the  disciples,  as  they 
gathered  together  in  fear  and  trembling?  He  stands  in  their  midst,  and  says, 
"Peace  be  unto  you."  Is  it  true?  The  risen  Christ  says  so:  "the  faithful 
Witness  "  says  so.  It  is  true ;  because  it  is  witnessed  to  by  a  risen  Saviour.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  stands  before  us  as  "the  First  begotten  of  the  dead,"  and  as  "the 
faithful  Witness."  (IF.  Hay  Aitken,  3I.A.)  Jesus  His  own  witness  : — The  two- 
fold proposition  we  offer  for  your  acceptance  is  this :  Jesus  Christ  was  not  a 
product  of  the  age  in  which  He  lived,  but  a  native  of  another  world  who  came  to  this 
world  for  a  purpose ;  that  He  was  God  and  man  in  one  person.  The  geologist, 
finding  a  stone  where  there  was  no  other  stone  like  it,  reasonably  concluded  that  it 
was  imported.  A  Chinaman  walking  down  the  streets  of  Shanghai  meets  an 
American  missionary.  The  missionary  is  a  man  like  himself,  but  in  dress,  language, 
and  religion  is  totally  different  A  foolish  man,  that  Chinaman,  if  he  does  not 
conclude  that  he  has  met  a  foreigner.  Now  Jesus  Christ  was  a  man  like  other  men, 
and  yet  so  different  from  all  other  men  that  we  are  justified  in  believing  that  He  is 
more  than  man  and  not  a  native  of  this  world  at  all.  Our  first  proof  of  this 
proposition  is  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  in  His  claims.  His  character,  and  His  works. 
He  claimed  that  He  was  the  Son  of  Man.  His  claim  was  not  that  He  was  a  son  of 
man,  nor  the  son  of  a  man,  but  the  Son  of  Man,  of  aU  men,  of  the  human  race,  of 
humanity.  His  was  a  life  world-wide.  His  was  a  heart  pulsating  with  the  blood 
of  the  human  race.  He  reckoned  for  His  ancestry  the  collective  myriads  of  man- 
kind. Now,  was  there  anything  in  the  environments  of  Christ  to  make  out  of  Him 
such  a  world-wide  Son  of  Man?  Just  the  contrary.  He  lived  in  a  mountain 
village,  and  village  life  tends  to  make  men  narrow.  Travel  may  correct  this  ten- 
dency, but  He  did  not  travel  out  of  Palestine.  Born  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and 
having  a  legal  right  to  the  throne  of  David,  we  would  naturally  expect  Him  to 
share  the  narrow,  bitter  feeling  of  His  Jewish  kindred,  and,  like  them,  chafe  under 
the  loss  of  national  glory.  On  the  other  hand,  He  shares  none  of  their  narrow 
feelings.  He  teaches  them  a  lesson  of  brotherly  love  by  condemning  their  priest 
and  Levite  for  passing  by  on  the  other  side,  while  He  praises  the  hated  Samaritan 
who  stops  and  helps  the  wounded  man.  All  through  His  life  there  was  a  conflict 
between  His  universal  sympathy  and  the  narrow  bigotry  of  His  people.  The  forces 
at  work  at  that  time  did  not  produce  such  a  man.  He  evidently  brought  into  the 
world  this  new  idea,  which  we  find  through  Revelation  to  be  native  of  the  world 
from  which  He  came.  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  not  a  Son  of 
God,  but  the  Son  of  God.  It  was  evident  that  His  friends  and  enemies  understood 
Him  as  claiming  that  in  being  the  Son  of  God  He  was  God.  In  many  places 
He  claims  attributes  which  none  but  God  can  possess.  There  are  some, 
however,  who  demand  more  evidence  than  a  mere  claim.  They  wish  to  know 
the  basis  on  which  the  claim  rests.  Let  me  say  to  such  there  are  but  three 
positions  we  can  hold  with  reference  to  Christ.  None  but  a  God,  a  madman, 
or  a  deceiver  could  have  made  the  claims  that  He  did.  The  charge  that  He  was 
a  madman  no  one  is  foolish  enough  to  defend.  Then  He  was  either  God  or 
the  worst  of  men.  A  good  man  cannot  claim  to  be  what  he  is  not.  Nor  does 
any  one  at  this  day  claim  that  Jesus  was  a  deceiver.  There  is  no  middle 
ground.  The  very  thought  shocks  the  conscience  of  one  who  is  at  all  familiar 
with  His  character.  If,  then,  there  be  none  foolish  enough  to  claim  that  He  was 
a  madman,  or  bad  enough  to  assert  that  He  was  a  bad  man,  surely  the  verdict 
that  He  was  good  is  universal;  and  if  good  He  was  God.  {A.  G.  Dixon.)  The 
resources  of  Christianity  : — It  is  no  little  war  which  Christianity  is  waging. 
1.  Christianity  possesses  the  resource  of  the  truth.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  "  faithful 
Witness."  A  faithful  witness  is  one  who  utters  the  truth.  And  truth  is  something 
conquering  and  eternal.  2.  Christianity  possesses  the  resource  of  the  truth  sub- 
stantiated. Christ  staked  everything  upon  the  Resurrection.  But  the  fact  of  the 
resurrection  stands.  So  Christianity  stands  with  it.  3.  Christianity  possesses  the 
resource  of  a  present  Divine  power.  The  pierced  hand  is  on  the  helm  of  all 
things.  4.  Christianity  possesses  the  resource  of  a  sacrificial  Divine  love.  It  ig 
from  the  Cross  that  Clurist  appeals  to  men.    Such  appeal  must  be  irresistible. 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  13 

Lessons — 1.  Of  courage.  The  Christian  is  on  the  winning  side  of  things.  2.  Of 
wise  prudence.  He  who  opposes  Christ  must  go  down  before  Him.  Is  it  not  best 
to  make  alliance  with  the  Conquering  One?  (Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Views  of 
Christ : — We  have  Christ  here  in  three  aspects — I.  In  relation  to  truth.  "  He  is 
a  witness."  What  is  truth?  Reality.  Christ  came  to  bear  witness  of  the  reahty 
of  realities.  As  a  witness  of  God.  Christ  was  a  competent  witness — 1.  In- 
tellectually competent.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  the  only-begotten  of 
the  Father."  He  alone  knew  the  Absolute.  2.  Morally  competent.  He  had  no 
motive  to  misrepresent  Him.  You  must  be  pure  to  represent  purity,  just  to  repre- 
sent justice,  loving  to  represent  love.  II.  In  relation  to  immortality.  "First 
begotten  of  the  dead."  How  was  He  first  begotten  of  the  dead?  Did  not  Lazarus 
rise  from  the  grave  ?  Not  in  time,  but  in  importance.  1.  He  rose  by  His  own 
power.  No  one  else  ever  did.  2.  He  rose  as  the  representative  of  risen  saints. 
ni.  In  relation  to  empire.  "The  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth."  "All 
power  is  given  unto  Him."  {David  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ  as  Mediator: — I. 
Christ's  mediatorial  titles.  1.  Christ  is  invested  with  prophetic  order.  As  a 
prophet  He  is  "  faithful."  He  shed  the  true  hghton  the  momentous  questions.  2. 
Christ  is  invested  with  priestly  order.  He  was  the  first  who  rose  from  death  to 
immortaUty.  He  entered  heaven  with  His  own  blood,  to  appear  before  His  Father 
to  intercede  for  the  salvation  of  all  who  would  believe  on  His  name.  3.  Christ  is 
invested  with  kingly  order.  II.  Christ's  mediatorial  work.  1.  The  original  cause 
of  the  work.  "He  loved  us."  2.  The  efficacy  of  the  work.  "Washed  us."  3. 
The  end  attained  by  the  work.  "  Hath  made  us  kings  and  priests."  III.  Christ's 
mediatorial  glory.  To  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 
"Glory  and  might."  1.  It  is  personally  addressed — "unto  Him."  2.  It  is  con- 
stantly felt — "  unto  Him  that  loved  us."  3.  It  is  everlastingly  due — "  for  ever  and 
ever."  4.  It  is  universally  approved — "  Amen."  [Homilist.)  A  threefold 
description  of  Christ : — First,  from  His  prophetical ;  secondly,  from  His  priestly ; 
thirdly,  from  His  regal.  We  begin  with  the  prophetical  office  of  Christ,  expressed 
in  these  words,  wherein  Jesus  Christ  is  said  to  be  the  faithful  witness.  First,  it  is 
the  witness.  Christ  is  a  witness,  and  He  is  a  special  and  singular  witness,  so  as 
there  is  none  else  besides  that  in  this  particular  is  like  unto  Him  (Isa.  Iv.  4). 
First,  by  way  of  discovery  and  revelation,  as  making  known  to  us  the  will  of  His 
Father  (Matt.  xi.  27  ;  John  i.  18).  There  were  two  ways  wherein  Christ  did  make 
known  unto  us  the  gospel,  and  the  will  of  His  Father.  First,  in  His  own  person 
(Isa.  Ixi.  1,  &c.)  Second,  He  did  it  also,  and  still  does  in  His  servants,  who  were 
sent  and  appointed  by  Him  (1  Pet.  i.  10,  11).  Third,  by  way  of  assurance  and 
confirmation,  not  only  so  far  forth  as  He  reveals  to  us  those  things  which  we  knew 
not ;  but  also  as  He  does  further  settle  us  in  these  things  which  we  know ;  He  is  a 
witness  in  this  respect  likewise.  And  that  by  virtue  of  His  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in 
us  (2  Cor.  ii.  10).  Now  there  are  two  things  which  Christ  by  His  Spirit  doth  thus 
witness  to  all  those  that  are  members  of  Him.  First,  the  truths  and  doctrines  of 
Christianity;  and  second,  their  own  spiritual  condition  and  state  in  grace,  as 
having  such  truths  belonging  to  them.  The  second  is,  the  faithful.  Christ  is  not 
only  a  witness  but  a  faithful  witness,  which  is  the  chief  commendation  of  a  witness. 
This  faithfulness  of  Christ  in  point  of  testimony  may  be  explained  in  three  particu- 
lars. First,  in  the  veracity  of  it.  Christ  is  a  faithful  witness,  because  He  witnesses 
nothing  but  that  which  is  indeed  truth.  Second,  from  the  universality  of  it. 
Christ's  faithfulness  is  seen,  not  only  in  deUvering  the  truth,  but  the  whole  truth. 
And  as  without  reservation,  so  without  addition  likewise ;  that  which  the  Fathei 
commits  unto  Him  to  be  declared,  that  alone  does  Christ  declare.  Third,  His 
faithfulness  is  seen  in  His  sincerity  in  all  this,  in  that  herein  He  seeks  not  His  own 
glory,  but  the  glory  of  Him  that  sent  Him  (John  vii.  18).  The  consideration  of  this 
point  thus  explained  may  have  a  suitable  influence  upon  ourselves  in  a  way  of  appU- 
cation.  First,  as  a  special  argument  to  us  to  believe  what  is  propounded  by  Christ. 
Faithfulness  on  Christ's  part  calls  for  faith  on  ours  ;  and  His  witnessing,  it  calls  for 
our  assent.  Let  us  hold  upon  Christ's  faithfulness  by  trusting  perfectly  to  the  grace 
which  is  revealed.  Second,  as  for  promises,  so  for  threatenings ;  He  is  the  faithful 
witness  here  likewise.  A  second  use  of  this  point  may  be  to  acquaint  us  with  the 
blessed  estate  of  the  servants  of  God.  Those  that  are  true  members  of  Christ  are 
happy  persons,  because  He  is  a  faithful  witness.  Whatever  they  have  at  present  here 
below  they  have  much  in  reversion  and  expectation ;  and  that  because  they  have  an 
interest  in  Christ,  who  will  be  sure  not  to  fail  them.  Third,  seeing  Christ  is  a  fahtt" 
f ul  witness  it  should  teach  us  also  conformity  to  Christ  in  this  particular,  whether 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ministers  or  other  Christians.  The  second  is  taken  from  His  priestly,  in  these,  "  And 
the  first  begotten  of  the  dead,"  The  principal  actions  of  Christ's  priesthood  consist  in 
two  particulars — the  one  is  in  dying  for  us,  and  the  other  in  rising  again  from  the 
dead,  and  making  intercession  for  us.  First,  Christ  was  once  dead.  This  is  one  thing 
which  is  here  implied  (1  Cor.  xv.  3).  The  death  of  Christ  is  a  special  article  of  our 
Christian  faith.  Second,  He  rose  again  from  the  dead ;  He  was  begotten  among 
the  dead,  that  is.  He  was  raised  from  death  to  life.  And  this  the  Scripture  also 
mentions  to  be  profitable  to  us,  both  in  point  of  justification,  and  in  point  of 
sanctification  likewise  (Rom.  iv.  25  ;  the  latter  in  Eom.  vi.  4).  Third,  Christ  was 
the  first  begotten  of  the  dead  (Col.  i.  18).  Christ  was  said  to  be  the  first  begotten  of 
the  dead,  in  point  of  order,  as  being  first  in  the  glorious  Resurrection.  Therefore 
He  is  called  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  sleep  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  Christ  is  before  any 
other  in  this  particular.  And  this  again  in  a  twofold  respect.  First,  as  to  the 
principle  of  His  resurrection  ;  and  secondly,  as  to  the  terms  of  it.  Though  Lazarus 
and  some  others  rose  from  the  dead  before  Christ,  yet  they  rose  from  natural  death 
to  natural  life,  and  so  as  to  die  again ;  but  Christ  so  rose  as  never  more  to  die 
(Rom.  vi.  9).  Thus  now  Christ  is  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead,  in  point  of  order. 
The  second  is  in  point  of  influence ;  so  far  forth  as  Christ's  resurrection  was 
operative  and  efificacious  to  ours  ;  by  way  of  merit,  by  way  of  efiiciency,  and  by  way 
of  pattern  or  example.  Again,  He  is  said  to  be  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead,  in 
regard  of  that  authority  which  He  has  over  the  dead,  obtained  by  His  rising  again 
(Rom.  xiv.  9).  Christ  was  Lord  of  us  before  He  rose  again;  but  His  resurrection 
put  Him  into  the  actual  possession  of  this  lordship,  and  was  a  clearer  manifestation 
of  it.  This  is  a  point  of  singular  encouragement  to  God's  children;  and  that 
especially  against  the  fear  of  death,  and  the  horror  of  the  grave.  There  is  an 
inseparable  union  betwixt  Christ  and  every  believer  ;  and  that  not  only  in  regard  of 
their  souls,  but  also  of  their  bodies  (1  Cor.  vi.  15).  And  God  has  made  a  gracious 
covenant  with  them  likewise  in  Christ,  to  be  their  God,  even  for  ever  and  ever, 
and  in  death  itself,  which  they  shall  at  last  be  also  raised  up  from,  upon  the 
account  of  Christ's  resurrection  (1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  His  regal,  or  kingly  office. 
♦'  And  the  Prince  of  kings  of  the  earth."  Christ  is  not  only  a  prophet  and  a 
priest,  but  likewise  a  king  (Acts  v.  31).  This  Christ  is  said  to  be  upon  a  twofold 
consideration.  First,  in  reference  to  His  nature.  Second,  in  reference  to  His 
office.  Thus  He  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  committed  unto  Him  (Matt, 
xxviii.  18).  Now  here  He  is  said  not  only  to  be  a  prince  absolutely,  but  relatively, 
the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  as  showing  both  His  influence  upon  them,  and 
Hkewise  their  dependence  upon  Him.  The  consideration  of  this  point  is  useful 
both  to  princes  and  people.  First,  it  is  useful  to  princes  to  teach  them  to  look  up  to 
this  great  and  mighty  Prince  of  all,  whom  they  thus  stand  in  subjection  unto.  And 
second,  it  is  useful  to  people  in  sundry  regards  likewise.  First,  to  infer  their 
obedience ;  and  second,  to  regulate  it.  (T.  Horton,  D.D.)  The  first  begotten 
of  the  dead. — The  risen  Christ  the  only  revealer  of  immortality  : — Simple  as  these 
words  are,  it  is  perhaps  impossible  for  us  to  understand  how  deep  and  blessed  their 
meaning  was  to  him  who  wrote  them.  Their  brief  sentence,  beautiful  in  its  brevity, 
must  have  formed  his  only  strength  against  the  powerful  influences  that  tended  to 
depress  his  faith.  To  that  old  man,  gazing  on  the  desolate  sea,  and  thinking  of 
that  unseen  and  boundless  ocean  in  which  all  things  seemed  to  perish,  every  wave 
which  broke  on  the  shores  of  Patmos  would  seem  to  speak  of  the  omnipotence  of 
death,  if  there  were  no  human  Christ  exalted  above  its  power.  But  such  a  One 
there  was.  John  saw  Him,  and  His  name  was  this — "  the  First  Begotten  of  the 
dead."  The  name,  "  first  begotten,"  implies  that  He,  the  first  who  rose,  should  lead 
the  great  armies  of  the  sons  of  God  to  a  conquest  over  death,  thereby  implying  that 
He  ^^9-8  the  first  who  revealed  to  them  the  certain  truth  of  their  deathless  destiny. 
John  says,  "  He  is  the  faithful  witness,  and  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead,  and  the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth."  Between  these  three  facts  there  is  a  fundamental 
connection.  They  teach  us,  then,  that  unless  Christ  had  risen.  His  witness  to  God 
and  His  truth  would  have  been  imperfect  and  vain,  and  that  on  His  rising  stands 
His  kingship  over  men.  And  if  that  be  true,  it  is  evident  that  unless  we  realise  in 
our  individual  experience  the  meaning  of  "  Christ,  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead," 
we  can  neither  understand  nor  feel  the  power  of  the  testimony  which  He  bore  to 
God.  I.  Let  us  inquire  on  what  grounds,  apart  from  those  given  by  the  risen 
Redeemer,  man  could  build  any  belief  in  a  deathless  life.  Let  us  imagine 
that  there  is  no  Christ,  and  we  shall  find  that  every  ground  of  belief  will  fail  us. 
1.  We  may  grant  at  once  that  in  hours  of  glad  and  hopeful  feeling  nature  might 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  15 

seem  to  suggest  to  man  a  life  beyond  the  sleep  of  the  grave,  and  that,  for  a  time,  he 
might  think  he  believed  it.  But  that  is  not  a  true  test.  To  judge  of  the  real  per- 
sonal value  of  such  natural  suggestions,  we  must  test  them  in  times  of  darkness, 
doubt,  and  sorrow.  Do  you  think  that  then  men  can  rise  to  faith  on  the  strength 
of  some  dim  and  mystic  hint  which  nature  appears  to  convey — that,  because  she 
renews  her  life,  man's  life  will  rise  from  the  tomb?  No!  The  human  spirit, 
startled  at  its  own  doubts,  and  anxiously  panting  for  belief,  can  never  build  its  faith 
in  a  thing  so  awfully  glorious  upon  any  emblems  such  as  those.  2.  Again,  men 
have  tried  to  find  a  proof  of  immortality  by  reasoning  from  the  great  law  that  God 
leaves  none  of  His  works  unfinished.  We  admit  that  this  argument  is  very  strong. 
When  taken  in  union  with  the  truth  of  Christ,  it  seems  to  prove  unanswerably  the 
immortality  of  man.  But  we  can,  perhaps,  show  that,  if  there  were  no  Christ,  it 
would  furnish  no  certain  proof,  but  only  indicate  a  probability.  For,  mark,  it 
assumes  that  we  can  tell  whether  man's  life  is  completed  or  not.  I  know  God's 
works  are  never  unfinished,  but  may  not  man's  life  have  answered  all  its  ends, 
though  we  see  not  how  ?  The  insect  sports  its  life  away  during  a  summer  morning ; 
the  "bird  pipes  his  lone  desire,  and  dies  unheard  amid  his  tree."  And  man,  before 
God,  is  but  an  insect  of  a  day  ;  even  compared  with  God's  angels,  he  is  an  insignifi- 
cant creature ;  and  may  not  this  strange  life  of  ours  have  answered  the  purposes 
God  designed  ?  3.  Once  more,  men  have  appealed  to  the  instincts  of  the  human 
heart  as  pledges  of  immortality.  These  beliefs  might  afford  convincing  proofs  but 
for  two  facts.  The  first  is,  that  sin  deadens  aspiration,  denies  the  Divine,  and  blots 
out  the  heavenly.  Sin  stifles  those  yearnings  after  the  spiritual  and  eternal,  which 
nothing  finite  can  satisfy.  The  sinner's  eye  glances  not  beyond  the  visible.  The 
second  fact  is,  that  by  clothing  all  faith  in  a  future  with  terror,  sin  tends  to 
produce  disbelief  in  it.  II.  We  proceed  to  note  how  Christ's  rising  is  the 
GREAT  revelation  OF  IMMORTALITY.  1.  On  the  One  hand,  the  fact  of  His 
rising  reveals  it  to  every  man.  No  mere  voice  from  the  unseen  world  would 
satisfy  man's  heart.  A  real  Son  of  God  and  of  man  must  descend  into  the 
dark  unknown,  and  come  forth  a  conqueror.  Man  stood  before  the  grave  in 
doubt ;  the  Christ  rose,  the  doubt  was  gone.  2.  The  risen  Christ  reveals  immor- 
tality in  a  still  deeper  sense  to  the  Christian.  Christ  rose,  and  the  man  who 
is  in  Christ  realises  the  resurrection  now.  With  Christ  he  is  dead  to  the 
old  life,  and  is  risen  with  Him  into  a  new  spiritual  world.  {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.) 
Unto  Him  that  loved  us. — John's  song  of  praise  to  Christ : — It  is  not  a  song  which 
John  heard,  but  a  song  which  welled  up  in  John's  heart.  It  is  not  a  song  which 
came  down  from  heaven,  but  a  song  which  ascended  to  heaven  from  earth.  The 
very  mention  of  the  Saviour's  name  awakened  in  his  heart  the  memory  of  His  love. 
Here  is  the  song  of  an  exile.  Here  is  the  song  of  one  who  was  soUtary,  without  a 
heart  to  sympathise  with  him,  or  a  voice  to  unite  with  him  in  his  praises.  It  was 
in  a  loathsome  dungeon  that  Bunyan  followed  the  Pilgrim  from  the  City  of  Destruc- 
tion to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  so  mapped  it  out  that  it  has  imparted  gladness 
to  millions  from  that  day  to  this.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  sickness  and  when  the 
victim  of  persecution,  of  which  Judge  Jeffreys  was  the  appropriate  instrument, 
that  Baxter  wrote  his  "  Saint's  Everlasting  Best,"  picturing  by  faith  and  hope,  even 
from  this  world  of  sorrow,  the  depth  of  joy  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. 
And  so  here,  this  apostle  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  banished  to  Patmos,  "  for  the 
Word  of  God  and  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus,"  found  Patmos  a  second  Paradise. 
I.  The  theme  which  awakened  his  praises  was  the  love  of  Jesus.  It  was  this 
that  even  in  Patmos  made  John  sing  this  doxology  of  praise,  and  it  is  the  great 
theme  which  pervades  the  whole  of  this  book.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  had  an 
irrepressible  eagerness  to  speak  of  His  love  to  His  disciples.  "  Having  loved  His 
own  who  were  in  the  world,  He  loved  them  unto  the  end."  *'  As  My  Father  loved 
Me,  even  so  have  I  loved  you."  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man 
lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  2.  The  revelation  of  the  love  of  Christ  was  ever 
on  the  lips  and  ever  on  the  pens  of  those  sacred  writers.  '•  We  Jove  Him,  because 
He  first  loved  us."  The  apostle  Paul  said,  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us." 
The  greatest  prayer  he  offered  for  man  was  this,  that  they  might  be  "  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,"  and  that  they  might  "  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  saints 
what  is  the  breadth  and  length  and  depth  and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of 
Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  and  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God." 
3.  The  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  which  the  apostle  here  speaks,  was  a  love  that 
was  undeserved.  This  very  apostle  had  seen  what  the  love  of  Christ  had  cost 
Christ.    This  very  apostle  had  heard  such  language  as  this  from  the  lips  of  Jesus : 


16  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

'*  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with ;  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be 
accomplished."  He  had  heard  Him  say,  "Father,  the  hour  is  come,  glorify  Thy 
Son,  that  Thy  Son  may  also  glorify  Thee."  He  had  heard  Him  say,  "  Now  is  My 
soul  troubled.  What  shall  I  say  ?  Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour ;  but  for  this 
cause  came  I  unto  this  hour."  He  had  stood  by  the  very  Cross,  and  had  watched 
the  long  hours  of  agony  and  of  death,  4.  It  was  love  which  John  realised  for 
himself.  It  was  not  a  sentimental  thing  with  him.  He  could  say,  **  I  speak  of  that 
which  I  know,  and  testify  of  that  which  I  have  tasted."  II.  The  blessings  which 
THE  APOSTLE  CELEBRATES  IN  HIS  SONG.  1.  "  Uuto  Him  that  lovcd  US,  and  washed  us 
from  OUT  sins  in  His  own  blood."  The  apostle  thought  of  his  past  state  and  his 
present  state.  He  was  a  sinner,  and  he  had  been  cleansed  from  sin.  This  separated 
his  song  from  the  songs  of  the  angels  in  glory.  Their  song  is  a  song  of  sympathy 
with  the  redeemed  ;  but  here  is  a  song  for  sinners.  It  is  this  that  makes  it  suitable 
for  our  lips.  2.  "  He  has  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father." 
{J.  J.  Brown.)  John's  first  doxology  : — John  had  hardly  begun  to  deliver  his 
message  to  the  seven  Churches,  he  had  hardly  given  in  his  name  and  stated  from 
whom  the  message  came,  when  he  felt  that  he  must  lift  up  his  heart  in  a  joyful 
doxology.  The  very  mention  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  "  faithful  wit- 
ness," &c.,  fired  his  heart.  This  text  is  just  the  upward  burst  of  a  great  geyser 
of  devotion.  I.  The  condition  of  heabt  out  op  which  outbursts  op  adoration 
ARISE.  1.  This  man  of  doxologies,  from  whom  praise  flashes  forth  like  light  from 
the  rising  sun,  is  first  of  all  a  man  who  has  realised  the  person  of  his  Lord.  The 
first  word  is,  "  Unto  Him  "  ;  and  then  he  must  a  second  time  before  he  has  finished 
say,  "  To  Him  be  glory  and  dominion."  His  Lord's  person  is  evidently  before  his 
eye.  He  sees  the  actual  Christ  upon  the  throne.  The  great  fault  of  many  pro- 
fessors is  that  Christ  is  to  them  a  character  upon  paper ;  certainly  more  than  a 
myth,  but  yet  a  person  of  the  dim  past,  an  historical  personage,  but  who  is  far 
from  being  a  living,  present  reality.  Jesus  was  no  abstraction  to  John  ;  he  loved 
Him  too  much  for  that.  Love  has  a  great  vivifying  power  :  it  makes  our  impres- 
sions of  those  who  are  far  away  from  us  very  lifelike,  and  brings  them  very  near. 
John's  great  tender  heart  could  not  think  of  Christ  as  a  cloudy  conception  ;  but  he 
remembered  Him  as  that  blessed  One  with  whom  He  had  spoken,  and  on  whose 
breast  he  had  leaned.  2.  John,  in  whom  we  notice  the  outburst  of  devotion,  was  a 
man  firmly  assured  of  his  possession  of  the  blessings  for  which  he  praised  the 
Lord.  Doubt  has  no  outbursts ;  its  chill  breath  freezes  all  things.  Oh  for  more 
assurance  !  I  would  have  you  know  beyond  all  doubt  that  Jesus  is  yours,  so  that 
you  can  say  without  hesitation,  "  He  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  John 
was  certain  that  he  was  loved,  and  he  was  furthermore  most  clear  that  he  was 
washed,  and  therefore  he  poured  forth  his  soul  in  praise.  3.  John  had  also  felt, 
and  was  feeling  very  strongly,  his  communion  with  all  the  saints.  Notice  his  use 
of  the  plural  pronoun.  It  is  well  for  you  and  me  to  use  this  "us"  very  often. 
There  are  times  when  it  is  better  to  say  "  me,"  but  in  general  let  us  get  away  to 
the  "  us  " ;  for  has  not  our  Lord  taught  us  when  we  pray  to  say,  "  Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread ;  forgive  us  our  trespasses," 
and  so  on  ?  Our  usual  praises  must  be,  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins."  II.  The  outburst  itself.  1.  It  is  a  doxology,  and  as  such  does 
not  stand  alone  :  it  is  one  of  many.  In  the  Book  of  the  Revelation  doxologies  are 
frequent.  If  you  begin  praising  God  you  are  bound  to  go  on.  Praise  is  somewhat 
like  an  avalanche,  which  may  begin  with  a  snowflake  on  the  mountain  moved  by 
the  wing  of  a  bird,  but  that  flake  binds  others  to  itseK  and  becomes  a  rolling  ball : 
this  rolling  ball  gathers  more  snow  about  it  till  it  is  huge,  immense ;  it  crashes 
through  a  forest.  Thus  praise  may  begin  with  the  tear  of  gratitude ;  anon  the 
bosom  swells  with  love ;  thankfulness  rises  to  a  song ;  it  breaks  forth  into  a  shout ; 
it  mounts  up  to  join  the  everlasting  hallelujahs  which  surround  the  throne  of  the 
Eternal.  2.  This  outburst  carried  within  itself  its  own  justification.  Look  at  it 
closely,  and  you  perceive  the  reasons  why,  in  this  enthusiastic  manner,  John  adores 
his  Saviour.  The  first  is,  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us."  This  love  is  in  the  present 
tense,  for  the  passage  may  be  read,  ♦'  Unto  Him  that  loveth  us."  Dwell  on  the 
present  character  of  it,  and  be  at  this  moment  moved  to  holy  praise.  He  loved  us 
first  before  He  washed  us.  Yes,  He  loved  us  so  much  that  He  washed  us  from 
our  sins,  black  as  they  were.  He  did  it  effectually  too  :  He  did  not  try  to  wash  us, 
but  He  actually  and  completely  "  washed  us  from  our  sins."  The  stains  were  deep ; 
they  seemed  indehble,  but  He  has  "  washed  us  from  our  sins."  "  Wash  me,  and  I 
shall  be  whiter  than  snow,"  has  been  realised  by  every  believer.    But  think  of  how 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  17 

He  washed  us — "  in  His  own  blood."  Men  are  chary  of  their  own  blood,  for  it 
is  their  life  ;  yet  will  brave  ones  pour  it  out  for  their  country  or  for  some  worthy 
object ;  but  Jesus  shed  His  blood  for  such  unworthy  ones  as  we  are,  that  He 
might  by  His  atonement  for  ever  put  away  the  iniquity  of  His  people.  At  what  a 
cost  was  this  cleansing  provided  !  Nor  is  this  all.  The  Lord  that  loved  us  would 
do  nothing  by  halves,  and  therefore,  when  He  washed  us  in  His  own  blood,  He 
"  made  us  kings."  We  walk  like  kings  among  the  sons  of  men,  honoured  before 
the  Lord  and  His  holy  angels — the  peerage  of  eternity.  Our  thoughts,  our  aims, 
our  hopes,  and  our  longings  are  all  of  a  nobler  kind  than  those  of  the  mere  carnal 
man.  We  read  of  the  peculiar  treasures  of  kings,  and  we  have  a  choice  wealth  of 
grace.  He  has  made  us  even  now  among  the  sons  of  men  to  possess  the  earth  and 
to  delight  ourselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace.  Furthermore,  our  Lord  has  made 
us  priests.  The  world  is  dumb,  and  we  must  speak  for  it.  We  are  to  be  priests 
for  all  mankind.  Oh,  what  dignity  is  this  !  Peter  Martyr  told  Queen  Elizabeth, 
*'  Kings  and  queens  are  more  bound  to  obey  God  than  any  other  persons :  first,  as 
God's  creatures,  and  secondly,  as  His  servants  in  office."  This  applies  to  us  also. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ's  love  to  us  in  xoashing  us  from  our  sins  : — To  Him 
that  loved  us :  it  is  spoken  in  a  manner  exclusively,  as  if  none  did  so  much  love  us 
as  Christ,  as  indeed  there  does  not.  The  use  of  this  point  is  to  believe  it,  and  to 
teach  us  to  labour  more  and  more  to  assure  our  hearts  of  it.  We  should  endeavour 
to  have  the  sense  of  this  love  of  Christ  more  upon  our  souls,  and  to  be  well  settled 
in  it.  Which  was  that  which  the  apostle  Paul  did  so  much  pray  for  (Eph.  iii.  16, 
17).  This  is  discerned  by  such  notes  as  are  most  proper  to  it.  We  may  know  that 
Christ  hath  loved  us,  according  to  that  which  He  has  done  for  us,  and  especially 
done  in  us,  by  changing  our  natures  and  by  infusing  of  His  graces  into  us.  The 
second  is  from  the  manifestation  of  this  affection  in  particular,  in  these  words, 
"And  hath  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood."  First,  take  it  absolutely 
and  in  itself,  as  it  is  an  expression  of  the  privilege  of  believers,  and  that  is  to  be 
washed  from  their  sins  by  Christ's  blood.  The  blood  of  Christ  hath  that  efficacy 
with  it  as  to  cleanse  from  all  sins  (1  John  i.  7).  There  is  a  double  benefit  from  the 
blood  of  Christ — the  one  is  the  benefit  of  justification,  as  to  the  taking  away  of 
the  guilt  of  sin ;  and  the  other  is  the  benefit  of  sanctification,  as  to  the  taking 
away  of  the  power  and  dominion.  And  each  of  these  are  here  included  in  this 
expression.  The  improvement  of  this  point  to  ourselves  may  be  drawn  forth  into 
a  various  application.  First,  it  may  serve  as  a  discovery  to  us  of  the  grievous 
nature  of  sin,  which  had  need  of  such  a  remedy  as  this  to  be  used  for  the  removal 
of  it.  Secondly,  here  is  matter  of  encouragement  also  to  the  servants  of  God  in  all 
the  upbraidings  of  conscience  and  of  Satan  setting  in  with  it,  that  here  is  a  remedy 
and  help  for  them.  Hence  also  we  have  ground  of  encouragement  in  our  access 
to  the  throne  of  grace  and  hope  of  our  entrance  into  heaven  at  last.  Lastly, 
seeing  we  have  so  much  benefit  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  we  should  in  a  special 
manner  take  heed  of  sinning  against  it.  And  so  much  may  be  spoken  of  this 
passage  in  its  absolute  consideration,  as  it  is  the  expression  of  a  Christian's  privilege, 
which  is  to  be  washed  from  his  sins  in  Christ's  blood.  Now,  further,  we  may  also 
look  upon  it  relatively,  and  in  connection  with  the  words  before,  where  it  is  said 
that  He  hath  '*  loved  us."  And  so  it  is  an  expression  to  us  of  Christ's  affection. 
First,  in  His  death  itself  He  showed  His  love  to  us  in  that,  and  that  is  implied  in 
His  blood.  It  was  not  only  the  blood  of  His  finger,  but  the  blood  of  His  heart,  His 
very  life  went  with  it.  Secondly,  in  the  manner  of  His  death  there  was  His  love 
also  in  that.  And  this  likewise  implied  in  the  Word  "  blood,"  which  does  denote  some 
violence  in  it,  a  cruel  and  painful  death  (Col.  i.  20;  Phil.  ii.  8).  Thirdly,  in  the  full 
and  perfect  application  of  this  His  death  unto  us.  It  is  said  "that  He  washed  us 
in  His  own  blood."  He  did  not  sprinkle  us  only,  but  bath  us.  He  did  give  us  a 
plentiful  share  and  interest  in  it.  And  lastly,  there  is  an  emphasis  also  in  the  word 
of  propriety,  in  that  it  is  said  "  His  own  blood."  The  priests  under  the  old  Law, 
in  the  execution  of  their  ofl&ce,  sprinkled  the  people  with  blood,  and  did  in  a  sense 
and  after  a  sort  wash  them  from  their  sins  in  it.  But  that  blood  was  not  their 
own,  but  the  blood  of  beasts.  And  this  is  a  further  enlargement  of  His  love 
towards  us.  The  use  of  all  to  ourselves  is  to  enlarge  our  hearts  in  all  thankfulness 
and  acknowledgment  to  Christ  for  His  goodness,  which  we  should  be  very  much 
quickened  unto.  And  we  should  make  it  a  ground  of  encouragement  in  the  expec- 
tation of  all  things  else  from  Christ  which  are  necessary  for  us.  He  that  has  not 
stuck  at  this  great  expression  of  love  will  be  sure  not  to  stick  to  anything  which  is 
inferior  to  it ;  and  He  that  has  given  us  the  greater  will  not  stick  to  give  us  the 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

less.  And  so  I  have  done  also  with  the  second  general  part  of  the  text,  which  is 
the  description  of  Christ  from  the  particular  discovery  of  His  affection,  "  who  hath 
washed  us,"  &c.  The  third  and  last  is  from  the  effect  and  result  of  it  m  these 
words,  "And  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father."  Wherein 
there  is  a  twofold  dignity  which  believers  do  partake  of  from  and  with  Christ. 
I.  His  kingly  office ;  all  true  believers  are  kings.  This  is  to  be  taken  not  in 
a  temporal  sense,  but  in  a  spiritual ;  and  so  the  Scripture  still  expresses  it 
(Luke  xii.  32,  xxii.  29).  1.  For  the  state  of  grace.  All  true  Christians,  they 
are  kings  in  this  particular,  namely,  so  far  forth  as  they  have  power  over  their 
spiritual  enemies,  and  all  those  things  which  might  hinder  their  salvation.  Thus 
is  he  a  king  in  reference  to  the  state  of  grace.  2.  In  reference  to  the  state 
of  glory  also,  so  far  forth  as  he  is  an  heir  of  heaven,  and  shall  reign  with  Christ 
for  ever  and  ever.  Thus  he  is  a  king  in  regard  of  right  and  title,  even  here  in 
this  life,  though  he  be  not  in  actual  possession.  II.  His  priesthood,  "And  hath 
made  us  priests,"  &c.  1.  In  regard  of  the  prayers  which  are  continually  put 
up  by  them  both  for  ourselves  and  others  (1  Peter  ii.  5).  2.  As  to  the  keeping 
of  themselves  from  the  pollutions  and  defilements  of  the  world.  The  priests 
they  were  prohibited  the  touching  of  those  things  which  were  unclean.  3.  As 
to  the  teaching  and  instructing  of  others  in  the  communion  of  saints  (Mai.  ii.  7). 
And  so  should  every  Christian  also  in  his  way  and  within  his  compass  (Gen. 
xviii.  19).  4.  As  to  the  offering  up  of  themselves  to  God.  And  then  the  high 
priest  especially,  he  entered  into  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  so  should  every  Christian 
have  his  heart  always  towards  the  Holy  of  Holies,  &c.  5.  The  priests  they  still 
blessed  the  people ;  so  would  the  mouths  of  Christians  do  others  with  whom 
they  converse  (1  Peter  iii.  9).      {T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Christ  and   the  soul: — I. 

Christ  is  the  lover  of  the  soul.  He  loved  it  with — 1.  An  absolutely  disinterested 
love.  2.  A  practically  self-sacrificing  love.  3.  An  earnestly  forgiving  love.  II.  Christ 
is  the  CLEANSER  of  the  soul.  The  grand  mission  and  work  of  Christ  are  to  put 
away  sin  from  the  soul.  Sin  is  not  so  ingrained  into  the  texture  of  the  human 
soul  that  it  cannot  be  removed  ;  it  can  be  washed  out.  III.  Christ  is  the  ennobler 
of  the  soul.  1.  Christ  makes  souls  "  kings."  He  enthrones  the  soul,  gives  it  the  sceptre 
of  self-control,  and  enables  it  to  make  all  things  subservient  to  its  own  moral 
advancement.  2.  Christ  makes  souls  "  priests."  IV.  Christ  is  the  hero  of  the  soul. 
"  To  Him  be  glory,"  &o.  "Worship  is  not  a  service,  but  a  spirit ;  is  not  obedience  to 
a  law,  but  the  irrepressible  instinct  of  a  life.  V.  Christ  is  the  hope  of  the  soul. 
"Behold,  He  Cometh,"  &c.  {David  Thomas,  D.D.)  Loved  and  laved: — 1.  The 
LOVE  OF  Christ.  1.  He  loved  us  freely.  He  did  not  love  us  because  we  were 
righteous,  because  we  had  neither  omitted  any  duty  nor  committed  any  offence. 
We  are  described  in  Scripture  sometimes  as  crimson,  and  again  as  scarlet  with  sin. 
These  are  glaring  colours,  and  sin  is  a  glaring  thing  that  must  be  seen.  God  has 
seen  it ;  God  abhors  it.  But  though  He  saw  it  He  loved  us.  2.  He  loved  us 
condescendingly.  He  loved  us  "  and  washed  us."  That  God  should  create,  I  under- 
stand ;  that  He  should  destroy,  I  also  understand ;  but  that  He  should  wash  and 
cleanse  those  who  have  made  themselves  foul  with  sin  is  marvellous.  God  is  so 
full  of  power  that,  if  a  thing  is  broken,  it  is  never  worth  His  while  to  mend  it.  It  is 
the  poverty  of  our  resources  that  compels  us  to  put  up  with  defiled  and  broken 
things  and  make  them  better.  Yet  He  loved  us,  so  that  He  stooped  to  wash  us 
from  our  defilement.  3.  He  loved  us  in  a  holy  manner.  Even  the  Almighty  could 
not  make  us  happy  and  let  us  remain  in  sin.  4.  He  loved  us  at  a  costly  rate ; 
He  hath  washed  us  from  our  sins  "  in  His  own  blood."  5.  He  loved  us  effectually. 
The  text  says  that  Christ  "  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins,"  or  "  loosed  us 
from  our  sins."  6.  Once  more,  this  love  of  Christ  is  perpetual ;  He  loves  us  still. 
Turning  to  the  Kevised  Version  we  read,  "'Unto  Him  that  loveth  us."  He  did  not 
finish  His  love  by  His  death.  He  loves  you  still,  and  He  will  always  love  you. 
II.  Glorify  this  loving,  nvmo  Saviour.  1.  Gladly  confess  His  name.  "  Then,  I 
should  have  to  bear  a  lot  of  ridicule,"  says  one.  And  are  you  afraid  to  follow  your 
Master  for  fear  of  ridicule  ?  Remember  what,  for  love  of  you.  He  bore.  2.  Next, 
if  we  really  do  wish  to  glorify  Him,  we  must  shun  all  sin.  A  man  cannot  say, 
"  Unto  Him  that  loved  me  and  washed  me  from  my  sins  be  glory,"  and  then  go 
and  drink  with  the  drunkard.  You  dare  not  say  "  Unto  Him  be  glory,"  and  then, 
as  a  professed  Christian,  go  and  do  a  dishonest  deed,  or  speak  a  lie,  or  do  that 
which  would  be  discreditable  to  yourself  and  would  bring  dishonour  on  His  name. 
3,  Again,  if  we  truly  say,  "  To  Him  be  glory  and  dominion,"  then  we  must  give 
Him  dominion  over  ourselves.    Each  man  is  a  little  empire  of  three  kingdoms — 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  19 

body,  soul,  and  spirit — and  it  should  be  a  united  kingdom.  Make  Christ  King  of 
it  all.  4.  And  then,  next,  if  we  say,  "  To  Him  be  glory  and  dominion,"  we  must 
seek  to  bring  others  under  His  sway.  There  is  some  way  in  which  every  one  of  us 
can  do  it.  Begin  at  home  ;  do  not  be  content  till  the  boys  and  girls  all  belong  to 
Christ.  Then  look  after  your  neighbours.  You  that  are  large  employers,  care  for 
the  men  who  work  for  you.  5.  If  we  really  wish  that  Christ  should  have  glory 
and  dominion  because  He  has  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  blood,  we  must  do 
nothing  to  dishonour  Him  ourselves,  and  we  shall  do  anything  sooner  than  see 
His  blessed  gospel  and  His  holy  name  dishonoured  by  others.  6.  Unto  Him  that 
loved  and  laved  us  let  us  give  all  glory  and  dominion ;  but  if  we  would  do 
that  we  must  not  be  cold  and  indifferent  about  holy  things.  You  know  what 
kind  of  hearers  some  people  are.  You  may  say  what  you  will  to  them, 
but  they  are  never  moved.  They  are  so  sohd,  so  cold.  Can  I  hear  of  that 
dear  name  and  never  catch  the  sacred  fire  ?  Can  I  think  of  Calvary  and 
still  my  heart  remain  cold  and  chill?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Praise  to 
Christ : — I.  What  Christ  has  done  for  His  people.  1.  He  hath  loved  us. 
Can  anything  be  more  evident?  He  loved  us  from  eternity.  He  foresaw  our 
misery,  and,  moved  with  pity,  provided  for  our  relief.  He  loved  us  when  we 
existed  only  in  His  eternal  idea.  What  a  love,  reaching  through  eternal  ages  and 
undiminished  !  "  He  hath  chosen  us  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
that  we  should  be  holy,  and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love."  "  He  hath  predes- 
tinated us  unto  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  Himself."  All  this  from 
the  infinite  love  of  His  nature ;  because  He  loved  us.  All  that  He  hath  done  for 
His  Church  through  ages  are  proofs  of  His  love  to  you.  By  this  merciful  preserva- 
tion of  the  Church  the  news  of  salvation  has  reached  us.  2.  He  hath  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood.  3.  He  honours  us.  '*  And  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father."  JI,  The  retuens  of  gratitude  and 
PRAISE  WHICH  His  PEOPLE  RENDER  TO  HiM.  1.  To  Him  be  glory.  He  has  an 
essential  glory  as  God.  He  is  possessed  of  glory  arising  from  His  undertaking  in 
behalf  of  sinful  men — from  His  unparalleled  condescension — glorious  example — 
unreserved  benevolence — patient  submission — from  His  Cross — spoiling  principali- 
ties and  powers — making  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it — 
conquest  over  death — glorious  ascension.  AJl  this  glory  the  believers  see,  with 
gladness,  beaming  on  the  crown  of  the  Kedeemer.  The  glory  of  the  Saviour  receives 
additional  lustre  from  those  offices  which  He  so  successfully  fills  for  His  people  at 
the  right  hand  of  God.  Is  He  an  Advocate  ?  How  many  causes  has  He  gained ! 
Is  He  a  Priest  ?  All  the  services  of  His  people  are  rendered  acceptable  to  God 
through  Him.  Is  He  an  Intercessor  ?  What  innumerable  benefits  hath  He  obtained 
for  them  !  Is  He  a  Mediator  ?  What  hosts  of  enemies  hath  He  reconciled  to  God, 
making  them  one  in  Him.  Is  He  a  Saviour?  How  complete  and  perfect  His 
work,  saving  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  unto  God  through  Him.  Is  He  a 
Leader  and  Commander  of  the  people  ?  What  glorious  achievements  and  conquests 
have  His  people  made  through  Him.  But  His  people  look  forward  with  pleasing 
expectation  to  a  period  when  the  glories  of  their  Saviour  shall  be  abundantly 
increased,  and  shine  forth  in  their  greatest  splendour.  In  the  day  of  judgment  He 
■will  gather  His  people  before  Him,  and  glorify  His  grace  in  their  eternal  salvation. 
"  He  will  come  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints  and  admired  by  all  them  that  believe." 
He  will  be  glorified  by  their  variety  ;  out  of  all  nations  and  kindreds  and  tongues. 
He  will  be  glorified  by  the  circumstances  attending  their  salvation.  These  are  they 
which  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation — through  reproaches  and  persecutions. 
He  wiU  be  glorified  by  the  infinite  rewards  which  He  will  then  bestow  upon  them. 
2.  "  To  Him  be  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  Christ  hath  a  natural 
dominion  as  God,  and  in  this  His  people  acquiesce  and  rejoice.  '•  The  Lord 
reigneth,  let  the  earth  rejoice,  let  the  multitude  of  the  isles  be  glad  thereof."  But 
He  hath  acquired  dominion  as  Mediator  by  grant  from  His  Father.  "  Ask  of  Me 
and  I  shall  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Thine  inheritance,"  &c.  As  the  reward  of  His 
obedience.  '*  He  humbled  Himself  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death 
of  the  Cross,  wherefore  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,"  &c.  This  is  but  partly 
established.  So  He  hath  taught  us  to  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  &c.  {R.  Watson.) 
The  measureless  love  of  Christ: — I.  The  duration  of  the  love  of  Christ.  He 
had  us  in  His  heart  ages  before  any  sign  appeared  of  our  existence  upon  this  earth 
— in  spirit  He  was  slain  for  us— before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  The  most 
ancient  of  all  love  is  that  of  Jesus.  But  turn  now  from  the  past  to  the  future. 
Even  as  to  this  present  life,  what  a  distinction  does  it  confer  on  any  attachment 


20  .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

cherished  towards  us,  the  absolute  certainty  of  its  continuance,  of  its  surviving  all 
the  trials  of  time,  or  separation,  or  misunderstandings,  or  collisions  of  interest,  or 
variations  of  taste  and  of  pursuit.  We  rejoice  in  the  knowledge  that  there  are 
earthly  friendship,  which  are  wholly  delivered  from  all  such  fear  ;  that  there  are 
those  of  whom  we  are  assured  that,  come  what  will  with  them  or  us,  they  will  love 
us  still,  will  love  us  to  the  end.  But  then,  there  is  that  close  of  all  things  here 
below  ;  and  what  of  the  existence  afterwards  ?  Who  shall  love  us  throughout  that 
unknown,  unending  life  which  awaits  us  beyond  the  grave?  Shall  those  who 
loved  us  so  long  and  so  tenderly  here  be  there  beside  us  to  bless  us  with  an  ever- 
lasting affection  ?  We  hope  so ;  in  our  best  moments  we  believe  that  it  shall  be  so. 
Still,  there  is  a  shade  of  dimness  over  the  prospect.  There  is,  however,  one  love 
upon  whose  continuance  through  time  and  throughout  eternity  we  can  most  securely 
count.    He  whose  heart  it  fills,  is  the  same  yesterday,  to  day,  for  ever.     II.  Let  us 

CONTEMPLATE   THE   LOVE    OF   ChRIST  IN   THE   WIDTH   OF   ITS   EMBRACE,    ITS    AMPLITUDE, 

ITS  INFINITY.  It  surrounds  us  with  its  vast,  its  measureless  expanse.  Its  mighty 
volume  is  around  each  separate  spirit,  as  if  the  enfolding  of  that  spirit, 
the  guiding,  guarding,  purifying  of  that  spirit  were  its  sole  and  separate  care. 
Yet  what  untold  multitudes  of  such  spirits  does  it  embrace.  III.  The  inten- 
sity OF  THE  LOVE  OF  Christ  AS  SHOWN  IN  ACTUAL  OPERATION.  We  mcasurc  the 
intensity  of  any  affection  by  the  difficulties  it  overcomes,  the  burdens  it  bears,  the 
services  it  renders,  the  sacrifices  it  makes.  Now,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  there  was  a 
great  initial  difficulty  in  the  love  of  Christ  turning  upon  such  sinners  as  we  are. 
For  what  is  it  that  begets  love  but  the  sight  in  the  object  of  that  which  is  lovable  ? 
Was  there  not  much  fitted  rather  to  alienate  than  to  attract  ?  This  very  feature, 
however,  of  the  love  of  Christ — that  it  was  love  to  those  not  worthy  of  it,  is  one  that 
goes  far  to  enhance  it  in  our  esteem.  He  saw  in  us  the  guilty  that  might  be  par- 
doned, the  defiled  that  might  be  purified,  the  lost  that  might  be  saved.  Nay,  the 
very  things  in  us  that  might  have  turned  away  another  benefactor,  and  led  him  to 
seek  a  more  congenial  field  of  labour,  gave  but  the  quicker  wing,  and  the  firmer 
footstep  to  that  great  love.  The  life  of  Christ  on  earth  was  throughout  a  manifes- 
tation and  expression  of  this  love.  For  let  us  remember  that  it  is  not  merely  a 
human  heart  that  beats  in  Jesus  Christ — a  human  sensibility  with  which  that  heart 
is  gifted.  The  Divine  capacity  to  love  is  present  here,  and  the  Divine  sensibility 
attaching  to  that  capacity.  {W.  Hannay,  D.D.)  Christ's  jyresent  love,  and  its 
great  outcome: — [Eead  "  loveth  us,  and  loosed  us  from  our  sins."]  I.  The  ever- 
present,  timeless  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  John  is  writing  these  words  of  our 
text  nearly  half  a  century  after  Jesus  Christ  was  buried.  He  is  speaking  to  Asiatic 
Christians,  Greeks  and  foreigners,  most  of  whom  were  not  born  when  Jesus  Christ 
died,  none  of  whom  probably  had  ever  seen  Him  in  this  world.  To  these  people 
he  proclaims,  not  a  past  love,  not  a  Christ  that  loved  long  ago,  but  a  Christ  that 
loves  now  when  John  was  writing,  a  Christ  that  loves  us  nineteenth-century  Eng- 
lishmen at  the  moment  when  we  read.  Another  thing  must  be  remembered.  He 
who  speaks  is  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  Is  it  not  beautiful  that  he  thus 
takes  all  his  brethren  up  to  the  same  level  as  himself,  and  delights  to  sink  all  that 
was  special  and  personal  into  that  which  was  common  to  all.  The  foundation  of 
all  our  hopes  and  all  our  joys,  and  all  our  strength  in  the  work  of  the  world  should 
be  this  firm  conviction,  that  we  are  wrapped  about  by,  and  evermore  in,  an  endless 
ocean,  so  to  speak,  of  a  present  Divine  love,  of  a  present  loving  Christ.  Then, 
further,  that  love  is  not  disturbed  or  absorbed  by  multitudes.  He  loveth  us,  says 
John  to  these  Asiatic  Christians  ;  and  he  speaks  to  all  ages  and  people.  Again,  it 
is  a  love  unchilled  by  the  sovereignty  and  glory  of  His  exaltation.  The  Christ  of 
the  gospels  is  the  Christ  in  His  lowliness,  bearing  the  weight  of  man's  sins ;  the 
Christ  of  the  Apocalypse  is  the  Christ  in  His  loftiness,  ruling  over  the  world  and 
time.  But  it  is  the  same  Christ.  From  the  midst  of  the  glory  and  the  sevenfold 
brilliancy  of  the  light  which  is  inaccessible,  the  same  tender  heart  bends  down  over 
us  that  bent  down  over  all  the  weary  and  the  distressed  when  He  Himself  was 
weary ;  and  we  can  lift  up  our  eyes  above  stars,  and  systems,  and  material  splen- 
dours, right  up  to  the  central  point  of  the  universe,  where  the  throned  Christ  is, 
and  see  "Him  that  loveth  us" — even  us!  II.  The  great  act  in  time  weqch  is  the 
OUTCOME  AND  THE  PROOF  OF  THIS  ENDLESS  LOVE  **  He  looscd  US  from  our  sius  by  His 
own  blood."  The  metaphor  is  that  of  bondage.  •'  He  that  committeth  sin  is  the 
slave  of  sin."  Every  wrong  thing  that  we  do  tends  to  become  our  master  and  our 
tyrant.  The  awful  influence  of  habit,  the  dreadful  effect  upon  a  nature  of  a  cor- 
rupted conscience,  the  power  of  regretful  memories,  the  pollution  arising  from  the 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  21 

very  knowledge  of  what  is  wrong — these  are  some  of  the  strands  out  of  which  the 
ropes  that  bind  us  are  twisted.  We  know  how  tight  they  grip.  But  the  chains  can 
be  got  off.  Christ  looses  them  by  "  His  blood."  Like  a  drop  of  corrosive  acid, 
that  blood,  falling  upon  the  fetters,  dissolves  them,  and  the  prisoner  goes  free, 
emancipated  by  the  Son.  His  blood  looses  the  fetters  of  our  sins,  inasmuch  as  His 
death,  touching  our  hearts,  and  also  bringing  to  us  new  powers  through  His  Spirit, 
which  is  shed  forth  in  consequence  of  His  finished  work,  frees  us  from  the  power  of 
sin,  and  brings  into  operation  new  powers  and  motives  which  free  us  from  our 
ancient  slavery.  The  chains  which  bound  us  shrivel  and  melt  as  the  ropes  that 
bound  the  Hebrew  youths  in  the  fire,  before  the  warmth  of  His  manifested  love  and 
the  glow  of  His  Spirit's  power.  HI.  The  praise  which  should  be  our  answer 
TO  THIS  GREAT  LOVE.  Our  praisc  of  Christ  is  but  the  expression  of  our  recognition 
of  Him  for  what  He  is,  and  our  delight  in  love  towards  Him.  Such  love  and 
praise,  which  is  but  love  speaking,  is  all  which  He  asks.  Love  can  only  be  paid  by 
love.  Any  other  recompense  offered  to  it  is  coinage  of  another  currency,  that  is 
not  current  in  its  kingdom.  The  only  recompense  that  satisfies  love  is  its  own 
image  reflected  in  another  heart.  That  is  what  Jesus  Christ  wants  of  you.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christ's  measureless  love: — I.  The  love  is  absolutely  sove- 
reign. It  was  not  called  forth  by  any  sort  of  worthiness  in  the  objects 
of  it,  but  was  entirely  spontaneous,  self -moved.  No  doubt  these  objects  come  to 
have  most  attractive  features.  In  course  of  time  they  are  washed,  cleansed  from 
the  filthiness  in  which  they  lay  by  nature,  or  loosed  from  the  degrading  bondage  in 
which  they  were  held.  They  have  moral  and  spiritual  excellences  of  the  highest 
order,  though  not  unmixed  with  imperfections  and  impurities.  But  to  whom  are 
they  indebted  for  all  this  distinction  ?  To  Christ  alone.  And  what  moved  Him  to 
beautify  them  with  salvation,  to  take  them,  as  it  were,  from  the  dunghill  and  set 
them  among  the  princes  ?  His  love.  When  the  love  first  rested  on  its  objects, 
when  it  contemplated  and  planned  their  redemption  in  the  counsels  of  eternity,  it 
had  respect  to  them  simply  as  fallen,  ruined  creatures.  It  was  while  provoking 
the  vengeance  of  high  heaven  that  the  arresting  hand  was  laid  on  them.  Nothing 
like  personal  doing  or  desert  had  any  place  whatever  in  effecting  the  blessed 
change.  And  this  feature  is  made  still  more  abundantly  manifest  by  a  considera- 
tion of  the  persons  often  thus  raised  to  a  participation  in  the  high  calling  of  the 
saints.  They  are  not  seldom  those  that  would  have  been  deemed  by  us  the  most 
unfit  and  unlikely.  They  are  not  the  best,  but  the  worst  characters ;  not  those 
standing  out  from  their  fellows  for  good,  but  for  bad  quaUties.  H.  The  love  is 
immeasurably  great.  How  shall  we  estimate  its  magnitude  ?  In  no  better  way 
than  by  considering  what  it  freely  bestows  on  its  objects,  and  the  sacrifices  it  makes 
for  what  it  thus  bestows.  Try  this  love  by  both  these  measures.  What,  then,  does 
it  give  those  upon  whom  it  rests?  All  the  benefits  of  redemption.  Take  these 
benefits  as  summarised  here,  in  connection  with  and  as  the  ripened  fruit  of  the  love 
in  question.  The  washing  spoken  of  very  specially  points  to  forgiveness,  the 
blotting  out  of  sin  in  the  blood  of  atonement.  The  graces  of  the  Spirit  spring  up 
where  before  there  were  only  the  works  of  the  flesh,  and  these  graces  both  beautify 
the  character  and  satisfy  the  soul.  Thus  believers  are  fitted  for  being  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  and  the  Father.  And  has  all  this  cost  Him  nothing,  or  cost  Him 
but  little?  Has  no  sacrifice,  or  only  a  small  one,  been  required?  He  has  washed 
them  in  His  own  blood,  and  to  it  is  to  be  traced  not  less  their  royal  priesthood. 
His  blood  wasiihat  of  sacrifice,  of  atonement,  the  price  of  our  redemption.  Here 
was  the  great  ransom,  and  it  is  only  in  consequence  of  it  that  any  sinner  is  washed 
and  invested  with  a  royal  priesthood.  Truly,  when  tried  thus,  the  love  passes 
knowledge.  HI.  The  love  is  unchangeably  constant.  He  loved  and  He  loveth 
us.  Who  can  tell  how  much  He  suffers  at  the  hands  of  His  people?  How 
unthankful  and  rebellious  are  they!  But  still  He  forgives,  restores,  and 
keeps  them.  No  doubt  there  are  sometimes  appearances  to  the  contrary. 
He  withdraws  from  His  people,  hides  His  face  from  them,  so  that  they 
walk  in  darkness,  and  feel  as  if  they  were  utterly  forsaken.  But  there  is  no 
proof  here  that  His  love  is  either  gone  or  weakened.  Behind  the  frowning  Provi- 
dence there  is  still  a  smiling  face.  The  clouds  temporarily  obscure,  but  they  do 
not  extinguish,  or  even  really  diminish,  the  light  of  heaven.  And  so  it  will  ever 
be.  The  love  has  stood  true  during  all  the  past,  and  it  will  not  fail  in  all  the 
future.  {John  Adam,  D.D.)  The  love  of  Christ: — I.  With  respect  to  the  mani- 
festation OF  the  love  of  Christ,  we  may  remark,  in  general,  that  love  was  the 
spring  of  aJl  His  mediatory  acts.    No  doubt,  He  chiefly  sought  the  glory  of  His 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Father,  and  testified  His  love  to  Him  by  fulfilling  His  will.  But  in  prosecuting 
these  objects  He  was  gratifying  His  own  love.  1.  It  was  love  that  induced  the  Son 
of  God  to  undertake  our  cause  in  the  counsels  of  eternity.  2.  The  love  of  Christ 
appears  in  the  delight  He  took  in  the  prospect  of  the  work,  arduous  and 
grievous  as  it  was,  which  He  had  engaged  to  perform.  3.  His  love  appears 
in  the  assumption  of  our  nature.  Oh,  what  a  stoop  was  there  !  4.  The 
love  of  the  Eedeemer  appears  in  the  whole  of  His  obedience  unto  death. 
II.  The  nature  and  properties  of  Christ's  love.  1.  It  is  the  love  of 
a  Divine  Person.  2.  It  is  the  love  of  a  Divine  Person  in  human  nature. 
3.  The  love  of  Christ  is  transcendently  great.  It  is  incredible  to  all  but 
those  who  have  been  taught  from  above.  III.  Let  us  attend  to  the  practical 
IMPROVEMENT  of  this  subjcct.  1.  We  may  see  one  proof  of  the  deep  depravity  of 
mankind.  2.  Here  is  food  for  faith,  3.  The  reasonableness  and  the  duty  of  love 
to  Christ.     (T.  McCrie,  D.D.)         The  love  of  Christ  in  Redemption  : — I.  Some  of 

the   GREAT   GENERAL   CHARACTERS   OF   THE   LOVE   OF    ChRIST.       1.   An   CVerlastiug   loVB 

(Jer.  xxxi.  3  ;  Psa.  ciii.  17 ;  Isa.  liv.  7,  8 ;  Eph.  i.  4,  5,  iii.  11 ;  Eev.  xiii.  8).     Does 
not  this  lead  us  to  contemplate  the  glory  of  an  infinite  God,  as  it  shines  in  this 
everlasting  love  ?    2.  Free  and  unmerited  love  (Psa.  viii.  4,  cxliv.  3 ;  Job  vii.  17). 
3.  Unsolicited  love  (1  John  iv.  10 ;  Eom.  v.  10).     There  is  something  infinitely 
more  noble  and  generous  in  extending  mercy  to  the  miserable  without  waiting  .for 
their  request,  than  when  it  is  hardly  procured,  or  as  it  were  extorted  by  importu- 
nity or  solicitation.     4.  A  distinguishing  love,  which  must  greatly  enhance  the 
obligation  of  those  who  are  the  objects  of  it.     5.  An  expensive  love.     6.  A  most 
generous  and  disinterested  love.     It  was  giving  to  those  from  whom  He  could 
receive  nothing.     7.  A  most  fruitful,  active,  and  beneficent  love.    II.  Practical 
IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SUBJECT.     1.  If   SO  great  are  the  obligations  of   believers 
to    the    love    of  Christ,   how    drea^lful  must  be    the    condition    of    those  who 
die  in  their   sins.      2.  Learn  that  the  great  and  leading  motive  to  obedience 
under  the  gospel,  is  a  deep   and    grateful  sense   of  redeeming  love.     3.    The 
necessity  of    a  particular  application  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel  to  ourselves, 
and  the  reliance  of    every  believer  upon  them  as  the  foundation  of  his  own 
hope.    4.  This  leads  me  to  invite  every  sinner  to  accept  of  Christ  as  his  Saviour 
and  to  rely  upon  Him  as  He  is  offered  in  the  gospel.     {J.  Witherspoon,  D.D.) 
The  work  of  works : — The  word  translated  "washed"  should  be  "loosened."     I. 
This  is  the  most  important  of  all  works.     Sin  is  a  chain  that  enslaves  not  the  mere 
body,  but  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul.    What  a  chain  is  this !     1.  It  is  heavy. 
2.  Galling.     3.  Strong,  and — 4.  Becomes  stronger  with  the  commission  of  every 
sin.    n.  This,  the  most  important  of  all  works,  is  effected  by  Christ  and  by  Him 
ONLY.    He  came  into  the  world  to  set  the  captives  free.     "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."    III.  That  for  this,  the  most  important  of  all 
works,  Christ  receives  the  praises  of  eternity.     True  gratitude  implies  a  belief 
in  three  things.     1.  A  belief  in  the  value  of  the  service^rendered.   ^2.  A  beUef  in  the 
kindness  of  the  motive  which  inspired  the  service.     3.  A  belief  in  the  undeserved- 
ness  of  the  service  on  our  part.     {David  Thomas,  D.D.)        Living  love  : — It  is  the 
echo  of  the  heavenly  harping  that  John  hears.     This  is  what  they  are  singing  on 
high,  and  what  we  are  training  for  here .    I.  The  source  of  salvation  in  eternity. 
"  Unto  Him  that  loved  us."      When  God  set  out  for  His  journey  of  redemption 
He  must  have  looked  round  the  shelves  of  glory  for  what  to  take,  as  some  of  you 
starting  on  a  journey,  pack  your  bag  or  portmanteau.     Certain  things  you  take  with 
you  for  the  journey.     So  with  God.     There  are  the  thunders  of  almighty  power.    Is 
He  to  take  these  ?    No.    He  became  man — poor,  feeble  man,  and  the  thunders  slept 
till  He  came  back.    Is  He  to  take  the  glory  above  the  sun's  strength?    Is  He  to  take 
the  robe  of  uncreated  light  ?    No.    He  strips  Him  of  the  visible  Godhead.     He  lays 
aside  the  uncreated  Shekinah  manifestation,  but  He  takes  something — something 
that  heaven  can  give  and  that  earth  needs.    He  dips  His  almighty  heart  in  love. 
He  cannot  do  without  that.    He  will  not  get  love  enough  here,  and  if  He  is  to  bring 
love  He  must  get  it  before  He  starts.    He  comes  with  the  only  qualification  for  His 
great  work  that  He  sees  needful — love  in  His  heart.    And  it  is  that  love  that  you 
and  I  need,  the  love  that  death  hath  no  power  over,  a  love  that  is  to  exist  and  be 
strong  when  yonder  sun  flickers  out  into  eternal  midnight.     It  is  that  love  that  my 
longing  soul  craves  for,  and  it  is  that  love  that  is  in  Christ's  heart.     Human  love ! 
— why,  we  dare  only  creep  from  headland  to  headland ;  we  cannot  launch  out  into 
the  deep,  for  death  is  nigh.    But  in  Christ's  love  you  can  let  your  soul  go.    You  can 
sail  into  the  mighty  ocean  assured  that  there  is  no  limit,  that  there  is  no  further 


CHAP.  1.]  REVELATION.  23 

shore  to  it,  that  there  are  no  shoals  to  tear  the  ribs  of  the  vessel  of  your  heart 
asunder.  The  love  of  Christ  will  outlive  the  sun ;  the  love  of  Christ  will  be  strong 
in  mighty  current  when  the  stars,  the  last  of  them,  pull  a  veil  over  their  faces  and 
die.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  one  eternal,  abiding,  almighty  force  in  the  universe. 
Can  you  sing  it  ?  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us  "  with  a  deathless,  undying,  unchang- 
ing, abiding,  eternal  love,  to  Him  "  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever."  II. 
The  effect  of  salvation  in  time.  The  stream  runs  from  the  hillside  to  the  valley, 
and  it  gets  deep  and  wide  and  broad,  and  the  masts  of  the  navy  of  a  commercial 
city  are  reflected  in  its  fair  bosom.  So  with  the  love  of  God.  It  came  rushing  out 
of  the  pearly  gates  a  mighty  torrent,  and  it  came  down  to  the  valley  and  expanded 
there  into  a  broad  lake,  and  the  love  has  become  a  fact  in  time.  And  the  way  it  has 
become  a  fact  is  this :  The  love  has  washed  us  in  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  Oh, 
how  foul  we  were,  how  the  streets  of  time  had  left  their  defilement  on  our  spirit. 
A  thousand  rivers — have  they  water  enough  to  cleanse  a  sinful  heart  ?  What  did 
God  find  and  feel  to  be  necessary?  What  is  that  awful  tinge  that  reddens  the  waves 
of  the  laver  of  regeneration?  What  is  this  mysterious  chemical.  Thou,  God,  art 
putting  there  ?  Why  this  agony  of  Thy  beloved  Son  ?  Why  the  open  side,  why  the 
pierced  hands  and  feet,  why  the  blood  ?  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission,"  says  God.  If  you  turn  to  the  Eevised  Version  you  will  see  the  word 
♦•  loosed  "  for  "  washing."  It  is  the  same  idea,  but  more  vigorously  expressed. 
Sometimes  when  the  dirt  sticks  you  take  pumice  stone,  or  something  that  will  rub  or 
scrape.  And  so  the  Greek  word  shows  that  God's  washing  is  so  eiJectual,  the  blood 
of  Jesus  is  so  powerful  in  its  cleansing,  that  it  is  more  like  cutting  off,  it  is  more  like 
excising  and  putting  aside.  The  word  is  a  strong  word — loosing,  cutting  us  out  from 
our  sins  by  His  precious  blood.  III.  The  effect  of  salvation  on  man.  "And 
hath  made  us  kings."  We  crouch,  a  slave,  to  the  Cross,  but  we  give  three  leaps 
from  it,  and  tread  to  heaven  with  the  tramp  of  a  king.  The  Cross  gives  dignity, 
the  Cross  gives  royalty,  to  the  saved  heart.  Christ  crowns  us  when  the  heart 
accepts  Him.  We  are  kings,  and  we  have  a  country.  We  are  not  like  John  Lack- 
land, for  a  king  must  have  a  kingdom.  We  are  kings  from  the  Cross,  and  what  is 
our  kingdom?  It  is  our  heart,  our  own  soul,  that  is  our  kingdom.  Your  great 
country  of  promise  has  to  be  conquered  by  your  own  little  fist  of  fulfilling.  So  with 
your  heart.  It  is  the  promised  land,  but  you  have  to  fight  for  it.  You  have,  as  a 
conqueror,  to  make  the  plains  of  your  own  soul  reverberate  with  your  own  tread. 
Old  habits  come  out!  old  sins,  passions,  lusts,  come  out !  "  Put  your  feet  on  the 
necks  of  them,"  says  Christ,  and  I,  by  the  grace  of  God,  put  my  feet  on  old  habits, 
old  sins,  old  passions,  and  am  king  over  my  own  heart.  "  And  hath  made  us 
kings."  And  it  is  the  priest's  service  that  God  accepts  and  needs  to-day.  It  is  the 
profession  of  adoration,  it  is  the  song  of  praise  from  my  heart  that  He  carmot  get 
from  the  harps  of  heaven.  It  is  this,  that  you  and  I  should  just  tell  Him  more  that 
we  love  Him.  You  know  they  say  a  Scotchman  never  tells  his  wife  he  loves  her  tUl 
he  is  just  dying.  Well,  it  is  a  great  pity.  In  this  world  he  would  be  happier  and 
she  would  be  happier,  if  he  would  tell  his  love  into  the  ear  while  it  can  hear.  So 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  longing  for  you  and  me,  in  time,  while  we  have  the  opportunity, 
just  to  tell  Him.  Go  home,  then,  to  your  own  room,  and  kneel  down  and 
say  in  this  holy  priesthood  of  thine,  "Lord  Jesus,  I  adore  Thee,  I  love  Thee ;  to 
Thee  be  the  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  {John  Robertson). 
The  believer^s  acknowledgment  of  Christ's  love  : — I.  What  Chkist  has  done  for  us. 

1.  Christ  loved  us.  You  all  know,  from  the  feelings  of  your  own  hearts,  something  of 
what  it  is  to  love,  and  likewise  what  it  is  to  be  the  object  of  affection.  Christ's  love 
to  His  people  surpasses  in  intensity  and  purity  and  disinterestedness  anything  that 
was  ever  felt  by  a  human  heart.  There  was  no  worth  or  excellence,  no  good  thing 
about  us.  In  His  eyes  we  were  unseemly  and  loathsome  objects.  We  were  alto- 
gether unable  to  render  Him  any  service,  or  to  make  Him  any  compensation  for 
the  benefits  He  might  bestow.  His  essential  happiness  and  glory  could  neither  be 
diminished  by  our  ruin,  nor  increased  by  our  salvation.  And  consider  who  it  was 
that  loved  us  in  this  manner  ;  for  we  are  in  the  habit  of  estimating  the  value  of  any 
expression  of  love  by  the  character  and  condition  of  the  individual  from  whom  we 
receive  it.  Now  He  who  thus  loved  us  was  not  a  mere  man  like  ourselves,  but  He 
was  the  Eternal  God,  the  Author  and  the  Head  of  the  whole  creation  ;  He  was  not 
an  angel  or  an  archangel,  but  One  whom  all  the  angels  of  God  are  commanded  to 
worship  ;  He  was  not  Uable  to  errors  of  judgment,  or  to  mistakes  of  feeling,  but  He 
was  possessed  of  the  Divine  perfections,  as  weU  as  the  Divine  nature  and  prerogatives. 

2.  "He  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood."    This  was  the  first  great  step  that 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

was  necessary  in  order  to  our  deliverance  and  salvation,  and  this  accordingly  is 
mentioned  as  the  first  great  manifestation  of  Christ's  love  that  was  poured  out  upon 
believers.  3.  "He  has  likewise  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father." 
Here  the  priestly  character,  as  well  as  the  "  kingly "  one,  is  but  imperfectly 
developed,  and  its  privileges  but  partially  enjoyed.  Here  we  see  through  a  glass, 
darkly.  But  a  time  will  come  when  aU  believers  shall  see  face  to  face — when  their 
intercourse  with  God  shall  be  much  more  close  and  uninterrupted  and  delightful 
than  it  has  ever  been  upon  earth — when  anything  that  can  defile  or  annoy  shall  be 
taken  away.  II.  The  feelings  and  desiees  which  the  contemplation  op  what 
Christ  has  done  for  us  ought  to  produce.  (IF.  Cunningham,  D.D.)  The 
love  of  Christ : — I.  In  this  song  the  redeemed  make  grateful  mention  of  the 
LOVE  OF  Christ  ;  that  being  the  spring  of  aU  their  present  privileges  and  all  their 
future  hopes.  This  is  well  put  first  in  order,  not  only  because  it  is  the  source  of 
every  spiritual  blessing,  but  also  because  it  is  in  itself  their  chief  happiness — they  being 
the  objects  of  his  love;  and  every  ingenuous  mind  will  more  esteem  the  kindly  heart, 
than  the  costly  gifts  of  a  benefactor.  How,  in  ordinary  cases,  do  we  estimate  the 
strength  of  a  friend's  affection  for  us  ?  Is  it  in  the  first  instance  by  the  ardour  with 
which  it  is  expressed  in  words  ?  Then  what  are  the  terms  in  which  the  Kedeemer 
speaks  of  His  people?  " I  have  loved  them  with  an  everlasting  love;  therefore  with 
loving-kindness  have  I  drawn  thee."  Does  it  enhance  our  esteem  of  the  benignant 
heart  of  a  friend,  when  hi?  kindness  is  continued,  notwithstanding  we  have  given 
him  cause  of  offence ;  and  is  that  friendship  sufficient  to  melt  the  hardest  heart 
which  requites  every  offence  with  forgiveness,  and  suffers  us  not  to  sink  under  an 
imworthy  return  ?  Then  is  Christ  such  a  friend.  Is  the  love  of  a  friend  the  more 
valued  because  it  comes  to  us  in  circumstances  of  great  destitution  or  distress  ? 
Now,  it  was  when  we  were  miserable  and  poor  that  the  Kedeemer  loved  us.  His 
office  was  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  and  to  make  the  mourner  glad.  Do  we 
appreciate  the  friendship  which  we  have  reason  to  believe  has  no  connection  with 
selfish  motives  or  personal  ends  ?  The  friendship  of  the  Kedeemer  was  purely  dis- 
interested. The  only  reward  which  He  sought  was  the  salvation  of  His  people. 
The  only  joy  that  was  set  before  Him  was,  that  He  should  see  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul  and  be  satisfied.  Do  we  estimate  the  strength  of  a  friend's  affection  for  us  by 
his  fondness  for  our  society,  by  his  affording  us  free  access  at  aU  times,  and  by  the 
frequency  and  kindness  of  his  invitations  to  meet  us  ?  Then  with  what  con- 
descension has  the  Kedeemer  invited,  nay,  urged  His  people  to  repair  to  Him  as  their 
friend,  as  "  a  very  present  help  to  them,  in  every  time  of  need !  "  Do  we  estimate 
the  strength  of  a  friend's  affection  by  the  sacrifices  he  makes,  or  by  the  personal 
sufferings  He  endures  for  our  sakes  ?  Then  what  sacrifice  is  so  great,  what  suffer- 
ings so  severe  as  those  of  the  Son  of  God  ?  Do  we  estimate  the  kindness  of  an 
earthly  friend  by  his  long-suffering  patience  in  bearing  with  our  infirmities,  and  in 
dealing  tenderly  with  us,  even  when  we  most  try  his  patience  by  our  provocations  ? 
And  what  beUever  can  fail  to  acknowledge  that  he  is  a  living  monument  of  the 
Kedeemer's  mercy,  an  unprofitable  servant  whom  none  but  Divine  patience  could 
have  spared.  Finally,  do  we  rest  with  confidence  on  the  friendship  of  one  who 
identifies  himself  with  us,  and  acts  as  if  our  interests  and  his  own  were  the  same  ? 
Then  is  Christ  the  friend  of  His  people.  Whoso,  saith  He,  receiveth  you  receiveth 
Me :  Whoso  shall  give  but  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  one  of  these  Uttle  ones,  in  the  name 
of  a  disciple,  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward.  II.  But  that  love  was  not  without 
EFFECT,  and  the  beloved  disciple  adverts  to  some  of  the  benefits  which  have 
FLOWED  from  IT  TO  His  PEOPLE.  He  has  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own 
blood.  The  words  imply  that  the  Saviour's  blood  was  shed,  and  shed  for  the 
remission  of  sins ;  and  it  was  a  noble  proof  of  His  love.  They  also  intimate 
that,  besides  being  shed,  that  blood  had  been  savingly  applied,  and  had  sufficient 
efficacy  to  wash  them  from  their  sins.  And  believers  will  ever  regard  the  saving 
application  of  that  blood  to  their  consciences  as  no  less  proof  of  the  Kedeemer's 
kindness  than  the  fact  of  His  having  shed  it.  His  love  in  leading  them  to  that 
fountain  is  not  less  to  be  celebrated  than  His  love  in  having  opened  it,  especially 
when  it  is  considered  that,  without  such  a  personal  application  of  His  blood  to  them 
mdividually,  His  death  would  have  been  of  no  avail.  By  that  blood  they  were 
delivered  from  the  burden  of  an  accusing  conscience,  and  admitted  into  peace 
and  friendship  with  God.  By  that  blood  they  were  delivered  for  ever  from 
judgment  to  come.  IH.  The  design  of  the  Saviour  was  not  accomplished,  nob 
His  love  exhausted,  by  pardoning  the  sins  of  His  people.  It  was  His  design 
to  advance  them  as  monuments  of  His  grace  to  a  state  of  great  dignity,  and  to 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  25 

employ  them  in  a  very  exalted  station.    lY.  It  is  the  natural  fruit,  and  a  strong 

EVIDENCE  OF  FAITH,  AND  AT  THE  SAME  TIME  A  SOURCE  OF  GREAT  SPIRITUAL  COMFORT, 
TO  BE  MUCH  ENGAGED  IN  REFLECTING  ON  THE  LOVE  OF  THE  REDEEMER,  AND  REGARDING 
WITH   HOLY   GRATITUDE    THE    BENEFITS    WHICH   YOU   HAVE   RECEIVED   OR   "ZET   EXPECT   AT 

His  hands  ;  for  while  we  thus  meditate  on  His  love,  and  on  our  own  honour  and 
privileges,  as  His  people,  our  hearts  will  burn  within  us,  and  our  lips  break  forth  in 
His  praise.  To  many  among  us,  indeed,  who  are  downcast  and  sorrowful,  it  may 
seem  as  if  this  strain  were  more  fitted  for  those  who  have  already  fought  the  good 
fight,  and  finished  their  course,  than  for  us  who  are  still  in  the  body,  burthened 
with  the  remains  of  a  corrupt  nature ;  weak,  yet  beset  with  strong  temptation ; 
prone  to  backsliding.  But  may  not  the  most  desponding  believer  take  courage  aft 
least  from  their  success  ?  May  not  their  triumphant  song  inspire  us  with  new  hopes, 
since  it  tells  us  that  men  like  ourselves  have  obtained  the  victory.  {Jas.  Buchanan.) 
The  redeemed  ascribing  glory  to  Christ : — I.  What  Christ's  saints  owe  to  Him. 
1.  A  debt  of  everlasting  love.  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us."  2.  The  debt 
of  their  redemption.  3.  The  debt  of  glory.  He  "hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God,  even  His  Father."  "  A  kingdom  of  priests,"  some  will  read 
it.  Be  it  BO.  Then  they  are,  in  reality,  what  the  Israelites  were  typically,  "  a 
kingdom  of  priests,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people."  In  the  light  of  this  inter- 
pretation we  see  the  significance  of  the  washing  previously  mentioned ;  for  when 
any  one  of  that  royal  and  priestly  nation  had  contracted  any  ceremonial  unclean- 
ness,  before  he  was  restored  to  his  national  privileges  —  or  when  any  one  was 
called  to  minister  to  God  in  the  priestly  office,  before  he  was  consecrated  to  the 
service — and  every  time  before  he  went  into  the  temple  to  minister — it  was  ordained 
that  he  should  be  washed.  Or,  let  us  interpret,  as  promising  separate  offices  in 
glory,  that  expression  "kings  and  priests."  We  have  here  evidently  a  complete 
reversal  of  their  condition  before  regeneration.  Once  they  were  slaves,  now  they 
are  not  only  set  free,  they  are  made  kings  to  God.  Once  they  were  afar  off,  now 
they  are  not  only  brought  nigh,  they  are  engaged  as  priests  in  His  own  immediate 
service ;  kings  and  priests  to  One  to  whom  to  serve  in  the  most  menial  capacity, 
in  the  outermost  courts  of  His  earthly  temple,  were  a  dignity  of  surpassing 
honour.    11.  We  wUI  now  advert  to  the  ascription  by  the  saints  to  Christ,  in 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  THEIR  OBLIGATIONS  TO  HiM,  OF  GLORY  AND  DOMINION  FOR  EVER 

AND  EVER — which  glory  and  'dominion,  you  will  observe,  are  the  very  things  of 
which  Christ  disrobed  Himself  in  order  to  accomplish  their  salvation ;  and  common 
justice  demands  that  they  should  be  restored  to  Him  when  the  work  is  done ;  nay, 
more,  that  they  should  not  only  be  restored,  but  restored  with  increase.  [G.  Camp- 
hell.)  How  wonderful  that  Christ  should  love  us  : — We  know  how  to  love  our  chil- 
dren, because  they  are  better  than  we ;  we  know  how  to  love  our  friends,  because 
they  are  no  worse  than  we ;  but  how  Christ  can  stoop  from  out  the  circle  of 
blessed  spirits  to  love  us,  who  are  begrimed  with  sin,  and  bestormed  with  tempta- 
tion, and  wrestling  with  the  lowest  parts  of  humanity — that  is  past  our  finding  out. 
He  has  loved  us  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  ;  and  because  heaven  was  too  far 
away  for  us  to  see.  He  came  down  to  earth  to  do  the  things  which  He  has  always 
been  doing  profusely  above.  Christ's  life  on  earth  was  not  an  official  mission  ;  it 
was  a  development  of  His  everlasting  state ;  a  dip  to  bring  within  our  horizon  those 
characteristics  and  attributes  which  otherwise  we  could  not  comprehend ; — God's 
pilgrimage  on  earth  as  a  shepherd,  in  search  of  His  wolf -imperilled  fold.  And  when 
I  look  into  His  life,  I  say  to  myself — "  As  tender  as  this,  and  yet  on  earth  1  What  is 
He  now,  then  ?  If  He  was  such  when  imprisoned  in  the  flesh,  what  is  He  now  in  the 
full  liberty  and  largeness  of  His  heavenly  state  ?  "  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  And  waslied 
us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood. — Christ's  eternal  sacrifice : — There  is  no  such 
thing  as  age  in  His  sacrifice ;  centuries  cannot  give  antiquity  to  His  atonement, 
time  cannot  wear  out  its  virtues.  His  blood  is  as  precious  now  as  when  it  was  first 
shed,  and  the  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness  flows  with  a  stream  as  full  and 
purifying  as  when  first  it  was  opened.  And  how  ?  Simply  because  by  His  inter- 
cession He  perpetuates  His  sacrifice ;  and  His  offering,  though  not  repeated  on  earth,  is 
incessantly  presented  in  heaven.  It  was  enough  that  He  should  once  die  to  make 
atonement,  seeing  He  ever  lives  to  make  intercession.  He  is  now  carrying  on  in 
heaven  the  very  office  and  work  which  He  commenced  when  upon  earth ;  and, 
though  there  is  no  visible  altar  and  no  literal  sacrifice,  no  enaurance  of  anguish  and 
no  shedding  of  blood,  yet  still  He  presents  vividly  and  energetically  the  works  of  His 
Passion,  and  the  effect  is  the  same  as  though  He  died  daily,  and  acted  over  again  and 
again  the  scene  of  His  tremendous  conflict  with  •'  the   powers  of    darkness." 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

{E.  Mason,  D.D.)        The  filthy  can  be  made  clean : — In  some  of  our  factories  the 
filthiest  of  rags  are  put  through  a  purifying  process  and  made  clean.     They  enter 
the  machine  soiled  and  dirty,  they  come  out  beautifully  white  and  clean  sheets  of 
paper.     Thus  wiU  even  a  poor  illustration  show  us  that  our  righteousness  is  as 
filthy  rags,  but  that  through  the  blood  of  Christ  we  are  washed  and  made  white  as 
snow.    (Silas  Jones.)       And  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God. — Kings  and 
priests  : — Now,  observe  that  this  dignity  of  "kings  and  priests"  is  conferred  as  by 
a  definite  act,  contemporaneous  with,  or,  at  the  most,  immediately  consequent  on, 
the  •'  loosing  from  our  sins."    It  is  then  a  present  dignity.    I.  Jesus  Christ,  the 
GREAT  King,  wmL  crown  us  kings,  too,  if  we  wiiiL.     Every  man  who  has  be- 
come the  servant  of  Christ  is  the  king  and  lord  of  everything  else ;  to  submit  to 
Him  is  to  rule  all  besides.    Keign  over  what  ?     1.  First,  over  the  only  kingdom 
that  any  man  reaUy  has,  and  that  is  himself.      We  are  meant  to  be  monarchs  of 
this  tumultuous  and  rebellious  kingdom  within.     We  are  like  some  of  those  Uttle 
Bajahs  whose  states  adjoin  our  British  possessions,  who  have  trouble  and  difficulty 
with  revolted  subjects,  and  fall  back  upon  the  great  neighbouring  power,  saying : 
*'  Come  and  help  me :    subdue  my  people  for  me,  and  I  will  put  the  territory  into 
your  hands."    Go  to  Christ  and  say:  "Lordl  they  have  rebelled  against  me! 
These  passions,  these  lusts,  these  follies,  these  weaknesses,  these  sinful  habits  of 
mine,  they  have  rebelled  against  me!  What  am  I  to  do  with  them?  Do  Thou  come 
and  bring  peace  into  the  land,  and  Thine  shall  be  the  authority."    And  He  will 
come  and  loose  you  from  your  sins,  and  make  you  kings.     2.  And  there  is  another 
realm  over  which  we  may  rule ;  and  that  is,  this  bewitching  and  bewildering  world 
of  time  and  sense,  with  its  phantasmagoria  and  its  illusions  and  its  lies,  that  draw 
us  away  from  the  real  life  and  truth  and  blessedness.     Do  not  let  the  world  master 
you  !     It  will,  unless  you  have  put  yourself  under  Christ's  control.    He  will  make 
you  king  over  all  outward  things,  by  enabling  you  to  despise  them  in  comparison 
with  the  sweetness  which  you  find  in  Him,  and  so  to  get  the  highest  good  out 
of  them.    He  will  make  you  their  lord  by  helping  you  to  use  all  the  things  seen 
and  temporal  as  means  to  reach  a  fuUer  possession  of   the  things  unseen  and 
eternal.    Their  noblest  use  is  to  be  the  ladder  by  which  we  climb  to  reach  the 
treasures  which  are  above.    They  are  meant  to  be  symbols  of  the  eternal,  like 
painted  windows  through  which  our  eye  may  travel  to  the  light  beyond,  which  gives 
them  all  their  briUiancy.    If  you  want  to  be  set  free  from  all  these  things,  to  be 
lifted  above  them,  to  have  a  joy  that  they  cannot  touch,  and  an  inward  life  which 
they  will  feed,  and  not  thwart,  such  emancipation  from  their  control,  such  power  of 
using  them  for  your  highest  purposes,  can  only  be  secured  by  taking  Christ  for  your 
King  and  resting  your  souls  upon  Him.     3.  And  then,  all  things  serve  the  soul 
that  serves  Christ.      H.  The  King,  who  is  the  Priest,  makes  us  priests  as  well 
AS  kings.    In  what  is  the  force  of  this  grand  conception  of  the  Christian  man's 
dignity?    Four  things  make  the  priest — two  of  them  express  his  standing,  one 
of  them  his  office,  one  of  them  his  character.     The  priestly  standing  is  marked  by 
consecration  and  free  access  to  God,  the  priestly  office  is  sacrifice,  the  priestly 
character  is  purity.    And  these  four  things — consecration,  direct  access  to  God, 
the  power  of  offering  sacrifice  which  is  acceptable  to  Him,  and  purity  of  life  and 
heart — are  the  gifts  of    Christ's  hands  to  each  of   you,  if  you  will  have  them. 
Every  one  that  is  perfect  shall  be  as  his  Master,  and  even  here  on  earth,  the 
Christian  life  is  the  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul,  and  consists  in  growing  likeness  to 
Him.    Is  He  a  King  ?    So  are  we.    Is  He  a  Priest  ?    So,  therefore,  are  we.    Is  He 
a  Son?     So  are  we.    Is  He  the  Heir?      So  are  we.      Is  He  the  "Anointed"? 
"  He  that    in    Christ  hath  anointed  us  is  God."    His  offices.  His  dignity.  His 
character.  His  very  life  becomes  ours,  if  we  are  His.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The 
humility  and  dignity  of  the  Christian  life  (with  ver.  1)  : — I.     The  humility  op  the 
Christian  life.     1.  The  Christian  life  is  a  service:    rendered  to — (1)  God.     (2) 
Christianity.     (3)   The  Christian  himself.      (4)  Humanity.     It  is — (a)  Great  in 
requirement.    (6)  Solemn  in  obligation,    (c)  Eternal  in  reward.     2.  The  Christian 
life  as  a  service  is  esteemed  lowly.     11.  The  dignity  of  the  Christian  life. 

1.  It  is  a  life  of  moral  rulership.  He  is  a  moral  king.  He  rules  by  prayer. 
Many  conspiracies  are  formed  against  Him,  but  He  outlives  and  controls  them  all. 

2.  It  is  a  life  of  moral  sacrifice.  He  is  a  priest,  not  domineering  and  exclusive,  but 
loving  and  expansive  in  His  sympathies.  HI.  The  harmony  between  the  BIing- 
HOOD  AND  THE  SERVANTHOOD.  1.  The  Christian  is  a  king  because  he  is  a  servant. 
2.  The  Christian  is  a  priest  because  he  has  a  trust.  Lessons  :  1.  As  servants  of 
God  let  us  do  His  work.     2.  As  kings  of  God,  let  us  extend  His  kingdom.    3.  As 


CHAP.i.]  REVELATION.  27 

priests  of  God,  let  us  offer  His  sacrifices.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Christians  are 
kings  : — I.  In  bespect  of  their  birth  and  extraction.  Their  lineage  is  direct  and 
undisputed  from  Him  who  is  the  fountain-head  of  all  honour  and  authority.  They 
hold  in  their  veins  the  blood  royal  of  heaven.  Though  not  by  natural,  yet  by 
spiritual  birth,  which  is  better,  they  are  the  "  sons  of  God  "  ;  though  not  by 
succession  or  inheritance,  yet  by  adoption  which  is  equally  valid,  and  yet  more 
distinguishing.  11.  In  respect  of  their  relations  and  allies.  1.  They  are  mem- 
bers of  a  family,  partly  on  earth  and  partly  in  heaven,  which  is  all  legitimate  and 
royal;  which  is  unstained  by  any  inferior,  impure  admixture.  2.  Their  allies, 
too,  are  royal  like  themselves.  "  Ye  are  come  to  Mount  Sion,  the  city  of  the 
living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  to 
Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant."  "  Truly,  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father,  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ."  III.  In  respect  of  the  dominion 
which  they  have  been  called  to  exercise.  The  empire  of  a  Christian  is  his 
own  heart — '*  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  him."  And  "  wisdom,"  says  Solomon^ 
the  wisdom  of  self-government,  "  is  better  than  weapons  of  war  " — better,  inasmuch 
as  it  supersedes  the  use  of  them ;  "  and  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is  better,"  bolder, 
more  truly  courageous  and  noble,  "  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  Until  ye  thus 
become  "  kings,"  you  must  needs  remain,  not  only  subjects,  but  slaves.  You  are 
not  your  own  masters  ;    your  *'  unruly  lusts  and  passions  "  have  the  command  of 

you.       IV.   To     THE    EXERCISE     OF    THIS     KINGLY    DOMINION,     THERE     ARE     PRINCELY, 

KINGLY  REVENUES  ATTACHED.  Bclievers  are  not  left  to  their  own  resources  in 
maintaining  their  high  dignity.  In  themselves,  and  in  their  own  right,  they  are  as 
poor  and  dependent  after  their  elevation  as  they  were  before  it ;  their  ability  to  rule 
is  derived  exclusively  from  Him  who  gave  them  the  authority  to  do  so,  who  "  made 
them  kings  unto  God !  "  They  are  not  only  the  allies,  but  the  stipendiaries,  so  to 
speak,  of  Christ ;  they  have  all  their  riches  from  Him,  and  in  Him.  He  is  not 
only  the  "  Lord  of  their  treasury,"  He  is  their  treasury — their  storehouse  itself. 
In  regard  to  temporal  provision,  they  may  indeed  be  poor — they  often  are  so.  But 
poor  though  they  be,  they  always  have  enough — enough  for  their  real,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  their  imaginary  wants.  Besides,  whatever  they  have,  they  have  not 
by  permission,  or  toleration  merely,  but  by  inheritance  and  of  right.  Then,  as  to 
their  spiritual  provision,  if  that  is  not — not  only  ample  but  abundant,  they  have 
themselves  alone  to  blame  for  the  deficiency.  And  voluntary  poverty  of  this  kind  is  not 
only  unnecessary,  it  is  injurious,  it  is  sinful ;  it  is  dishonouring  to  Him  who  has 
made  them  what  they  are.  The  whole  domain  of  Scripture  is  theirs — ever  fresh 
and  verdant — in  which  to  expatiate  and  delight  themselves :  the  "  wells  of  salva- 
tion" are  theirs — "the  upper  springs,  and  the  nether  springs,"  "from  which  to 
draw  water  with  joy."  Theirs  are  the  treasures  of  grace — theirs  is  the 
hope  of  glory !    V.  Yet,  after  aU,  it  remains  to  be  added,  the  chief  part  of 

THE   DIGNITY  TO  WHICH  BELIEVERS   ARE   ADMITTED  IS   YET   TO   COME;     OT    at    Icast  yet 

to  be  known  and  seen.  In  the  present  state,  it  is  the  least  part  of  it  which 
is  visible.  God's  people  below  are  kings  in  disguise.  They  are  travelling, 
in  the  dress  of  pilgrims,  to  their  dominions  above.  In  conclusion,  let  me 
remark — 1.  If  the  statements  now  given  be  true,  there  are  few  Christians  who  know 
what  their  privileges  are ;  and  fewer  stiU,  it  is  to  be  feared,  who  are  careful  to  realise 
and  enjoy  them.  2.  Let  me  say  to  those  of  you  who  are,  or  who  believe  yourselves  to , 
be,  "  kings  unto  God,"  "  Be  holy."  To  "  keep  one's  own  heart  with  all  dili- 
gence "  —  to  rule  one's  own  unruly  spirit,  the  temper,  the  appetites,  the  passions 
— to  have  that  "little  member"  in  subjection,  which  "worketh  mightily, 
and  which  no  man  can  tame,"  that  is  to  be  a  king.  (J".  Burns,  D.D.) 
Christians  a  royal  priesthood  : — I.  The  functions  or  offices  here  assigned  to 
BELIEVERS.  1.  They  are  made  kings.  Temporal  power  and  dignity  belong  to  earthly 
kings.  To  Christ,  the  great  King,  belong  aU  Divine  power  and  glory.  And  aU  His 
redeemed  followers  partake  of  His  power  and  dignity.  (1)  Christians  are  kings  in 
respect  of  their  power.  They  have  wonderful  power  over  all  their  enemies,  if  they 
are  but  careful  how  to  use  it  and  to  put  it  forth.  Thus  they  can  resist  the  devil,  imtil 
he  flees  from  them.  They  can  also  resist  their  own  evil  tendencies,  mortify  the 
deeds  of  their  bodies,  crucify  their  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts.  And  they 
can  withstand  the  world,  despising  its  allurements,  and  patiently  enduring  its 
frowns.  (2)  Christians  are  also  kings  in  dignity,  as  regards  both  their  personal 
dignity  and  their  borrowed  glory,  (a)  They  partake  of  the  personal  dignity  of 
kings.  They  have  in  them  a  kingly  nature.  There  is  a  moral  majesty  in  the 
character  of  all  God's  children.    (6)  Christians  also  partake  of  a  borrowed  dignity 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

that  is  Divine.     They  partake  of  the  glory  that  belongs  to  the  Divine  Kedeemer. 
They  are  arrayed  in  the  robes  of  His  righteousness.     Go  to  the  dying-bed  of  a 
mighty,  graceless  monarch,  and  you  find  him,  in  the  midst  of  weakness  and  of 
misery,  hastening  down  to  the  sides  of  the  pit.     Go  to  the  dying-bed  of  an  humble 
child  of  God,  and,  though  you  find  him  on  his  pallet  of  straw,  yielding  to  the  power 
of  dissolution,  his  face  is  radiant  with  the  light  of  the  Divine  countenance,  and 
with  the  hopes  of  glory  that  fill  and  cheer  his  heart ;  and  already  you  see  Satan, 
death,  and  hell  dragged,  as  powerless,  prostrate  foes,  at  the  chariot-wheels  of  his 
triumphing  faith,  and  find  him  raising  the  song  of  victory  over  all  his  enemies,  as 
I  one  who  already  feels  that  in  Christ  he  is  more  than  conqueror.     2.  Christians  are 
I  made  priests.      (1)  The  foundation  of  the  priesthood  of  Christians  is  their  oneness 
with  Christ.    As  bone  of  their  bone,  and  flesh  of  their  flesh,  their  surety  and  repre- 
isentative,  their  sin-bearer,  their  righteousness,  and  their  life,  all  that  He  did  and 
■  suffered  for  them,  and  is  doing  for  them,  they  are  dealt  with  as  having  done  and 
suffered  themselves,  as  now  doing  in  and  with  Him.      (2)  The  introduction  of 
Christians  into  their  priesthood,     (a)  They  are  called  to  it  by  God.     (&)  They  are 
Divinely  quaUfied  and  prepared  for  their  priestly  work.     They  have  been  duly 
purified,  being  washed  by  Christ  from  their  sins  in  His  own  blood.      They  are 
clothed  in  the  necessary  priestly  vestments  ;  for  Christ  has  put  upon  them  the 
garments  of  salvation ;  He  has  covered  them  with  the  robe  of  His  righteousness 
(Isa.  Ixi.) ;  He  has  arrayed  them  in  that  fine  linen,  white  and  clean,  which  is  the 
righteousness  of  saints  (chap,  xix.) ;  and  they  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  one,  a 
Divine  anointing,  an  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  by  which  they  are  made  to  know  and 
love  their  priestly  work  (1  John  ii.).     They  are  thus  prepared  to  yield  themselves 
unto  God,  as  alive  from  the  dead,  through  Jesus  Christ.     (3)  Thus  called  to  their 
work,  and  qualified  for  it,  they  perform  the  duties  of  their  priesthood,  as  the  proper 
business  of  their  hfe.      They  present  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  (Kom.   xii.). 
They  present  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  a  broken  and  contrite  heart  (Psa.  li.).     They 
offer  the  sacrifice  of  a  living  faith  (Phil.  ii.).     They  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving,  or  what  are  termed  "  the  calves  of  their  lips  "  (Hos.  xii.,  Heb.  xiii.). 
They  lay  on  Christ,  as  their  altar,  the  deeds  of  love  done  by  them  to  others ; 
remembering  that  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased  (Heb.  xiii.,  Phil,  iv.),  and 
that  they  are  the  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable  to  God  (Phil.  iv.). 
II.  The  inseparable  connection   between  the  eotalty  and  the  pbiesthood  op 
Christians,  between  their  work  as  kings  and  their  work  as  priests.    They  have 
the  honour,  and  exercise  the  power,  of  kings,  because  thus  only  can  they  be  prepared 
to  perform  their  duty  as  priests.    For,  as  kings,  they  are  laden  with  honours,  make 
conquests,  and  in  various  ways  put  forth  their  power,  and  accumulate  the  fruits  of 
its  exercise,  in  order  that,  as  priests,  they  may  take  their  honours,  resources,  and 
conquests,  and  the  varied  fruits  of  their  power,  and  consecrate  them  all  to  the  service 
and  glory  of  God.  III.  The  subordination  op  their  kingly  to  their  priestly  office 
AND  work.     The  office  of  Christians,  as  priests,  is  higher  than  their  office  as  kings. 
And  the  reason  is  found  in  the  very  nature  of  the  offices  of  believers,  as  kings  and 
as  priests  to  God.    For,  as  kings,  they  but  rule  over  themselves,  and  over  creation 
around,  conquering  and  keeping  under  the  spiritual  enemies  that  fill  and  surround 
them,  and  causing  the  creatures  around  them  to  pay  them  tribute.    But  as  priests, 
they  turn  their  back  upon  creation,  and  their  faces  toward  God,  and  stand  in  His 
immediate  presence,  and  minister  before  His  eternal  throne.    As  kings,  they  but 
exhibit  the  honour  with  which  they  themselves  are  invested.    But  as  priests,  they 
are  employed  in  giving  all  glory  to  God.      They  are  thus  not  priestly  kings,  but 
kingly  priests.      They  are  a  "  royal  priesthood."    This  view  of  the  subordination 
of  their  kingly  to  their  priestly  office  and  work,  becomes  more  evident  and  impressive 
\?hen  we  consider  how  their  office,  as  kings,  shall  at  length  be  in  a  great  measure 
absorbed  in  their  office  as  priests.    For  when,  as  kings,  they  have  conquered  sin 
and  Sata,n,  and  death  and  hell,  they  shall  come  out  of  all  their  tribulation,  and 
wash  their  robes,  and  make  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  be  before  the 
throne  of  God,  and,  as  priests,  for  ever  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple.  And 
though,  as  kings,  they  shall  at  last  appear  with  crowns  of  glory,  yet,  as  priests,  they 
shall  take  their  crowns,  and  cast  them  at  the  feet  of  Him  who  bought  them  with 
His  blood ;  and  they  shall  then,  and  for  ever,  have  it  for  their  chief  employnaent,  to 
give,  as  priests,  all  glory  to  the  Eternal.     {W.  Nixon.)        The  responsibility  of 
exaltation : — Frederick  the  Great,  before  he  became  "  the  Great,"  was  seated  with 
his  roystering  companions,  and  they  were  drinking  and  hallooing,  and  almost  imbecile, 
when  word  came  to  him  that  his  father  was  dead,  and  consequently  the  crown  was  to 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  29 

pass  to  him.  He  rose  up  from  among  the  boisterous  crew,  and  stepped  and  cried, 
"  Stop  your  fooHng ;  I  am  Emperor !  "  {T.  de  Witt  Talmage).  To  Him  be  glory 
and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. — A  glorified  Christ  : — I  desire  to  speak  of 
Christ  glorified.  But  how  shall  we  learn  what  He  is  like  on  His  throne  ?  These 
dim  eyes  cannot  pierce  the  skies  and  the  clouds  to  see  Him.  Men  look  through  their 
telescopes  at  the  stars,  and  mere  sparkling  points  of  light  prove  to  be  burning  suns. 
But  no  telescopes  can  reveal  to  us  Christ  on  His  throne.  Some  day  we  shall  see  Him 
as  He  is,  but  now  no  eye  can  behold  Him.  Yet  human  eyes  have  seen  Him  in  vision 
since  He  went  back  to  His  glory,  and  those  who  saw  Him  have  told  us  what  they 
saw.  The  beloved  disciple  had  a  vision  of  His  glory.  1.  He  appears  as  a  glorified 
Lord.  Very  wonderful  is  the  contrast  between  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels  and  the 
Christ  of  the  Eevelation.  Yet  they  both  are  one.  In  the  lowly  Jesus  of  the  Incar- 
nation all  the  Divine  glory  was  enshrined.  Men  did  not  see  its  outflashings,  but 
the  splendour  was  there.  But  now  in  heaven  there  is  no  longer  any  concealing  or 
hiding  of  His  glory.  In  our  Lord's  intercessory  prayer  at  the  Last  Supper  He  prayed, 
"  Now,  0  Father,  glorify  Thou  Me  with  Thine  own  self  with  the  glory  which  I  had 
with  Thee  before  the  world  was."  This  prayer  was  answered.  He  was  received  up 
into  heaven  and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  2.  We  must  not  fail  to  notice 
that  it  is  as  man — God-man — that  Jesus  Christ  is  glorified.  John  saw  in  vision 
♦*  one  like  unto  a  Son  of  Man"  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks.  That  is,  He 
bore  there  in  the  glory  the  form  of  our  humanity.  It  was  that  same  body  on  whose 
bosom  John  leaned,  whose  feet  Mary  bathed  with  her  ointment,  which  had  lain  in 
the  grave,  and  in  which  Thomas  saw  the  wounds — it  was  that  same  body  that  was 
taken  up  into  heaven  and  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  As  He  never  for 
a  moment  ceased  to  be  God  while  here  on  the  earth  in  lowly  flesh,  so  He  has  never 
for  a  moment  ceased  to  be  man  since  ascending  into  the  heavenly  places.  The 
Godhead  and  the  humanity  are  forever  inseparable.  How  near  it  brings  Him  to  ua 
to  think  of  Him  as  really  human  still,  in  His  eternal  glory  I  How  it  exalts  our 
thought  of  the  dignity  of  humanity  to  remember  that  one  of  our  race  is  on  the 
throne  of  thrones  !  3.  Another  feature  of  the  glorified  Christ,  as  He  appeared  in 
vision  to  John,  was  His  complete  victoriousness.  We  must  never  forget  that  His 
exaltation  was  won.  He  was  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  for  the  sufferings  of 
death.  Especially  does  He  appear  in  John's  vision  as  victor  over  death.  Those 
who  were  raised  up  before  Him  were  only  brought  back  to  a  few  more  years  of  the 
old  life  of  struggle,  pain,  and  sinning.  They  were  still  under  death's  power,  and 
had  to  die  again.  But  Christ  was  bom  from  death  into  life — not  the  old  life  of 
pain,  infirmity,  struggle,  tears,  and  mortality,  but  into  life — full,  rich,  blessed, 
immortal.  4.  The  vision  of  the  glorified  Christ  shows  Him  deeply  interested  and 
active  in  our  behalf  in  heaven.  In  John's  vision  the  risen  Lord  appears  in  the 
midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks.  The  golden  candlesticks  are  the  Churches  of  the 
Eedeemer  in  this  world.  The  vision  then  represents  Christ  as  in  the  midst  of  His 
Churches,  always  with  His  people.  He  is  still  the  Good  Shepherd.  The  same  truth 
is  taught  in  another  part  of  the  same  vision.  •'  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven 
stars."  The  stars,  we  are  told,  are  the  Churches  of  the  redeemed.  The  symbol  is 
very  beautiful.  Christ's  Churches  are  stars  in  this  dark  world.  But  He  held  the 
stars  in  His  right  hand,  the  hand  of  strength  and  honour  ;  so  He  holds  His  Churches 
in  His  right  hand.  The  picture  suggests  guidance,  security,  help.  Christianity 
cannot  fail  while  the  all-conquering  Christ  holds  the  Churches  in  His  right  hand. 
Let  us  look  a  little  more  closely  into  the  manner  of  Christ's  activity  in  heaven  for 
us.  What  does  He  do  there  on  our  behalf  ?  Several  things.  Having  all  power  in 
heaven  and  earth,  He  rules  so  that  all  things  work  together  for  good,  not  only  for 
His  Church  at  large,  through  the  ages,  but  for  every  individual  believer  who  trusts 
Him  and  follows  Him.  Shall  we  be  afraid,  amid  enemies  and  storms  and  convul- 
sions and  conflicting  providences,  while  the  government  of  all  things  is  in  the 
hands  that  were  pierced  with  the  nails  for  our  redemption  ?  Another  form  of  the 
activity  of  the  glorified  Christ  in  heaven  is  His  intercession  for  us.  {J.  R.  Miller, 
D.D.)  Thanksgiving  : — The  angel  of  requests — so  the  legend  runs — goes  back 
from  earth  heavily  laden  every  time  he  comes  to  gather  up  the  prayers  of  men.  But 
the  angel  of  thanksgiving,  of  gratitude,  has  almost  empty  hands  as  he  returns  from 
his  errands  to  this  world.     [Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  Behold,  He  cometh  with  clouds. — Behold,  He  cometh : — The  second  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  set  before  us  as  the  supreme  hope  of  the  Church,  that 
great  and  glorious  event  towards  which  all  is  leading  up,  or  for  which  all  is  preparing. 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

This  being  so,  our  feelings  in  regard  of  it  will  serve  us  as  a  test  by  which  to  gauge 
ourselves  with  respect  to  our  present  condition  before  God.  If  things  are  as  they 
should  be  with  us,  we  shall  be  able  to  say  from  our  heart,  "  Even  so.  Amen."  Have 
any  of  us  failed  before  this  simple  test  ?  Have  we  come  to  the  conclusion  that, 
though  we  hope  we  love  the  Lord,  we  do  not  love  His  appearing  ?  What  are  the 
causes  that  render  it  possible  for  any  true  child  of  God  to  shrink  from  the  thought 
of  his  Master's  return?  Conspicuous  amongst  these  is  that  secret  worldliness  of 
heart,  against  which  the  Master  so  solemnly  warned  us:  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves, 
lest  at  any  time  your  heart  be  overcharged  with  .  .  .  the  cares  of  this  life."  Have 
we  to  confess  that  we  have  been  living  and  labouring  to  win  wealth,  or  fame,  or 
social  distinction,  or  to  better  our  position,  and  to  gain  the  honour  that  cometh  from 
man  ?  Ah !  no  wonder  then  that  we  love  not  His  appearing,  for  has  not  our  worldly 
self  become  within  us  a  little  Antichrist,  whom  the  Lord  must  needs  destroy  by  the 
brightness  of  His  coming  ?  Or  perad venture  we  are  entangled  by  worldly  associa- 
tions. Listead  of  so  loving  the  world  as  Christ  loved  it,  and  going  into  it  to  save  its 
perishing  children,  we  have  gone  there  in  search  of  social  pleasure,  and  have  found 
a  social  snare  ;  and  instead  of  going  outside  the  camp  bearing  Christ's  reproach,  we 
have  become  conformed  to  the  world's  image,  and  accept  its  maxims  and  wear  its 
uniform.  Ah  !  how  can  we  desire  the  Lord's  appearing  if  we  have  been  false  to  our 
colours  ?  Or  again,  is  it  not  only  too  obvious  that  many  are  prevented  from  uttering 
this  prayer  from  the  heart  because  they  know  that  they  have  been  leading  an  indolent 
and  useless  life  ?  Have  you  an  inward  conviction  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  must, 
as  a  matter  of  simple  truth,  say  of  your  service,  were  He  now  to  appear,  "Thou 
wicked  and  slothful  servant  .  .  .  take  the  talent  from  him,  and  give  it  unto  him 
that  hath  ten  talents  "  ?  Or,  once  again,  how  many  a  Christian  is  robbed  of  his 
Advent  hope  by  some  secret  sin,  known  perhaps  only  to  God  and  himself,  extenuated 
and  even  defended  by  a  perverted  understanding,  but  ak-eady  condemned  by  the 
inward  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  heart  ?  It  may  be  some  crooked,  or  at  any 
rate  questionable,  practice  in  business ;  it  may  be  some  impurity  of  thought,  or  even 
of  action ;  it  may  be  some  habit  of  levity  and  frivolousness,  or  loose  and  giddy 
speech  ;  or  it  may  be  a  custom  of  exaggeration  and  untruthfulness  which  you  have 
familiarised  yourself  with  until  you  scarcely  are  aware  of  it  when  you  fall  into  the 
fault.  Or  perhaps  it  may  not  be  secret  sin  which  stands  between  us  and  our  hope, 
but  rather  an  open  and  obvious  inconsistency  apparent  to  all  around  as  well  as  to 
ourselves.  Many  real  Christians,  I  am  persuaded,  are  unable  to  love  the  Lord's 
appearing  because  they  are  walking  rather  after  the  flesh  than  after  the  Spirit. 
Now,  if  for  any  of  these  reasons  you  feel  yourselves  unable  to  love  and  pray  for  the 
Lord's  appearing,  consider,  I  pray  you,  whence  you  have  fallen,  how  your  highest 
glory  is  being  turned  into  your  deepest  shame.  Oh,  cast  away  all  that  robs  thee  of 
thy  Advent  hope  and  of  the  joys  of  anticipation,  and  make  a  fresh  and  full  surrender 
of  thyself.  But  if  the  thought  of  this  glorious  event  prove  so  very  heart-searching  to 
us,  who  have  already  come  under  the  influence  of  God's  grace,  how  very  powerfully 
should  it  weigh  with  those  who  have  not  yet  taken  the  very  first  step  in  the  Christian 
life !  It  is  surely  high  time  for  such  to  hsten  to  the  Advent  cry,  *'  Behold,  He  cometh 
with  clouds."  *'  Behold,  He  cometh."  Oh  that  men  would  respond  to  that  call !  for 
here  indeed  is  something  worth  looking  at.  Man  may  say  "  Behold !  "  about  many 
things  of  small  import,  but  when  God  says  "  Behold !  "  rest  assured  there  is  some- 
thing worth  looking  at  before  us.  A  voice  from  heaven  is  pleading  for  our  attention, 
and  it  seems  to  say,  "  Stop  and  think,  the  foredoomed  hour  draws  nigh,  return  and 
come  1  "  "  And  every  eye  shall  see  Him."  It  will  not  be  a  matter  of  choice  or 
preference  then,  as  it  is  now  ;  a  stern  necessity  will  compel  every  human  being  that 
God  has  made,  whether  he  will  or  no,  to  behold  the  approaching  King.  Drawn  as 
by  an  irresistible  force,  all  shall  be  brought  into  His  presence,  and  find  themselves 
arraigned  before  the  bar  of  the  Judge.  Who  are  they  to  whom  this  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ  will  cause  such  unspeakable  despair  ?  They  are  described  here.  And 
let  us  be  honest  with  ourselves,  and  face  the  question  candidly  :  "Do  I  belong  to  the 
classes  that  are  mentioned  here  as  being  plunged  into  such  dire  distress  ?  First  we 
hear  of  those  who  pierced  Him.  Have  any  of  us  pierced  Him  ?  True,  we  were  not 
present  at  Calvary,  we  had  no  part  in  driving  in  the  iron  nails  into  His  quivering 
palms,  or  in  thrusting  the  spear  into  His  side.  But  have  we  never  pierced  Him  ? 
Yes,  not  once  only,  but  over  and  over  again,  in  the  long,  dark  ages  of  man's  history, 
Jesus  Christ  has  been  pierced,  and  He  is  being  pierced  still.  How  do  men  pierce 
Him  ?  Surely  by  undisguised  hostility  and  contemptuous  scorn.  It  is  wonderful  to 
what  length  men  will  stiU  go  in  their  hatred  of  Christ.     Still  He  has  to  complain, 


CHAP.  1.]  REVELATION.  31 

"  They  hated  Me  without  a  cause."  The  bitter  things  that  men  of  the  world  say 
about  Christians,  what  is  it  but  a  determined  attempt  to  wound  the  Master  through 
the  servants  ?  Others,  again,  pierce  Jesus  by  cold  indifference  and  heartless 
ingratitude.  You  can  be  kind  and  tender  in  every  other  relationship  of  life ;  you  are 
a  generous  husband  and  a  considerate  and  sympathising  father ;  and  you  are  a  gentle 
and  devoted  wife  and  a  tender-hearted  mother  and  friend  ;  there  is  only  one  Person 
whom  you  habitually  slight  and  treat  with  ingratitude  and  neglect,  as  though  it  were 
a  matter  of  indifference  to  you  whether  you  pleased  or  pained  Him,  and  that  Person 
is  Divine.  Him  you  have  treated  with  contempt,  His  love  you  have  rejected,  and 
His  mercy  you  have  despised.  Ah,  how  wiU  you  face  Him  when  every  eye  shall  see 
Him,  and  you  shall  know  at  last  how  your  callous  indifference,  your  black  ingratitude, 
has  pierced  the  sensitive  heart  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who  lived  and  died  for  you  ?  How 
win  you  endure  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  ?  Some  of  you  again  have  pierced  Jesus  by 
deliberately  choosing  something  which  He  hates  in  preference  to  Himself.  Ah,  how 
often  this  is  done !  It  may  be  that  your  preference  falls  on  some  evil  habit  that  is 
destroying  you,  body  and  soul ;  it  may  be  some  accursed  sin  that  is  poisoning  your 
whole  being,  and  yet  you  prefer  it  to  Christ.  But  our  text  speaks  of  others  besides 
these.  It  tells  us  how  "  aU  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  Him."  To 
which  of  the  two  kindreds  do  you  belong  ?  Are  you  of  the  earth,  earthy,  or  are  you 
citizens  of  Mount  Zion  ?  for  to  one  or  other  of  these  two  classes  we  all  belong.  Judge 
yourselves,  lest  that  day  come  upon  you  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  revealing  to  you  your 
true  character  and  position  when  the  revelation  comes  too  late.  Again,  we  ask, 
"Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coming  ?  and  who  shall  stand  when  He  appeareth  ? 
Those  surely  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  Lord's  appearing  who  can  say,  "Unto 
Him  that  has  loved  us,"  &c.  Judgment  has  no  terrors  and  eternity  no  alarms  for  those 
who  are  living  in  the  conscious  enjoyment  of  the  benefits  of  redeeming  love.  {W. 
Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  revelation  of  the  mystery : — St.  John  is  speaking  in  the 
language  of  ancient  prophecy.  Christ  is  coming.  "  Behold,  He  cometh  with  clouds ; 
and  every  eye  shall  see  Him."  This  is  a  truth  of  the  faith,  and  St.  John  corroborates 
Daniel,  not  because  he  imitates  the  prophetic  spirit  by  echoing  prophetic  phrase,  but 
because  each  prophet  stands  on  a  mountain  peak  of  Kevelation,  and  surveys  an 
unalterable  fact.  For  the  mind  to  grow  into  the  force  of  that  fact  is  one  of  the  most 
necessary  methods  of  advance  in  the  Spirit  and  wiU  of  God.    I.  St.  John  is  speaxtng 

IN  THE  LANGUAGE  OF  A  SEER,  WHICH  IS  THE  REAL  LANGUAGE  OF  MAN's  IMMORTAL  LIFE.     His 

words  are  a  cry  of  relieved  tension  of  feeling,  of  suddenly  fulfilled  expectation ;  like 
the  watcher  from  Athens  catching  sight  of  the  corn-ships  as  they  doubled  Sunium ; 
like  the  anxious  gazer  descrying  in  the  distance  the  British  flag  which  announced 
approaching  relief  to  the  beleaguered  sufferers  in  Lucknow ;  like  the  dying  man 
straining  the  ear  through  the  silent  night  for  the  first  footfall  of  one  he  loves,  and 
longs  to  see  before  he  dies.  1.  Man  expresses  his  sense  of  relation  to  objects  and 
persons  external  to  himself  by  two  names — Time  and  Eternity.  These  names  of  course 
represent  real  ideas.  These  ideas  are  dim  and  vague  enough.  Surely  he  has  to 
learn  that  Time  is  *'  a  phantom  of  succession  "  ;  that  he  himself,  not  Time,  is  moving 
on  ;  that  now  his  life  is  partially  developed ;  surely  he  has  to  reahse  that  Eternity  can 
include  no  sense  of  succession,  but  represents  life  as  fuUy  possessed.  We  must  learn 
in  the  things  of  the  soul  to  weigh  and  measure  by  the  scales,  by  the  standard  of 
Eternity,  for  we  are  immortal.  Speaking,  then,  as  we  should  speak,  with  a  sense  of 
our  full,  our  endless  life,  the  close  of  the  great  conflict  is  not  far  off.  2.  To  each  one  of 
us  there  shall  be  a  fuU  consciousness  of  the  coming  and  the  presence  of  the  Lord, 
"  Every  eye  shall  see  Him."  The  eye  is  the  watch-tower  of  the  human  spirit,  whither 
it  ascends  to  view  God's  universe.  The  eye  is  the  instrument  by  which  impressions 
from  the  objects  of  an  outer  world,  impressions  of  colour  and  harmony  and  form,  are 
conveyed  to  the  lonely  soul.  The  eye  can  alone  convey  the  message,  the  power  to 
use  it  is  in  the  soul  itself.  My  friends,  it  would  seem  that  the  human  soul  has  a 
strong  likeness  to  the  poor  frail  human  body.  Living,  though  sick  with  sin,  it  is 
conscious,  in  a  dreamlike  consciousness,  of  the  presence  and  claims  of  God ;  if  Ufe  is 
ffiiling  in  it,  if  the  disease  of  sin  is  settling  into  spiritual  death,  it  loses  that  con- 
sciousness. But  one  thing  is  certain  :  the  hour  is  coming  when  each  of  us — with  a 
consciousness  of  soul  as  clear  as  the  sight  of  the  eye  of  the  body — when  each  of  us 
shall  see  the  fairest,  the  most  awful  vision,  the  coming  Christ.  Here  we  see  but 
dimly  ;  there  will  be  the  full  revelation.     II.  \Ve  are  brought  face  to  face  with  Him 

WHOSE  appearing  SHALL  BE  THE  INTERPRETATION   OF  ALL  DREAMS,  THE  SOLUTION  OF  ALL 
PERPLEXING  PROBLEMS,  "  BeHOLD,  He  IS  COMING  WITH  CLOUDS."      1.    St.  Johu's  aCCOUnt 

of  the  pageant  of  Christ's  appearing  is  an  appeal  to  an  instinct  of  humanity  face  to 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

face  with  nature.  Of  all  natural  objects  that  awaken  the  sense  none  can  rival  for 
power  mountains,  clouds,  and  sea.  But  clouds  combine,  in  a  measure,  the  resources 
of  sea  and  mountains ;  smoothed  out  at  dawn  or  sunset,  twisted  into  strange  contor- 
tions by  the  storm,  they  rival  the  solemnity  of  mountains  in  their  vast  proportions, 
and  imitate  in  their  changeful  movements  the  beating  of  the  waves.  Everywhere 
they  give  the  sense  of  thinly  veiled  depths  of  mystery  yet  to  be  revealed,  and  of  the 
wrath  and  power  of  God  against  human  sin.  When  Christ  comes,  then,  this  is 
certain.  He  will  come  reveaUng  "  hidden  things  of  darkness,"  ay  I  and  hidden  things 
of  hght.  It  wiU  be  a  time  of  unveiling.  But  more:  He  will  come  in  the  fully 
manifested  display  of  God's  irreconcilable  antagonism  to  human  sin.  It  will  be  a 
moment  of  startUng  and  complete  revelation.  2.  But  there  is  a  further  feature,  the 
most  striking  of  all.  It  is  an  unexpected  touch  in  the  picture  which  follows — "they 
also  that  pierced  Him  " — a  sudden  allusion  to  the  Passion.  Doubtless  there  is  a 
warning  in  such  words,  that  those  who  deride,  reject,  or  seek  to  destroy  the  highest 
goodness  now  shaU  one  day  see  the  magnitude  of  their  madness.  But  this  is  not 
all.  Pace  to  face  with  human  sin  in  its  closing  crisis,  the  great  Kepresentative  of 
the  race  displays  before  assembled  worlds  the  extent  of  its  malignity  in  wounding 
God.  Even  those  who  have  hated  it  most  shaU  then  for  the  first  time  vividly  reaUse 
its  actual  dreadf  ulness.  And  in  these  wounds  of  the  Passion  are  exhibited  the  stores 
of  the  experience  of  human  life.  He  is  in  direct  relation  to  all,  for  all  have  pierced 
Him,  and  He  has  learned  by  experience  the  sorrow  and  sin  of  that  humanity  which 
is  common  to  all.  And  then  we  are  reminded  that  the  judgment  to  follow  takes  its 
force  and  derives  its  necessity  from  the  necessities  of  His  nature.  With  the  knowledge 
of  God  He  comes,  and  with  the  feelings  and  experiences  of  man.  3.  The  great  wail 
of  the  human  family  recorded  in  the  close  of  the  verse  is  its  outspoken  sign  of  recogni- 
tion of  the  truth.  In  some — His  persecuting  enemies — the  cry  of  fear  and  fury  at  the 
certainty  of  the  triumph  of  goodiiess ;  to  some  undeveloped  soul  the  anguish  of  a 
fuller  recognition  of  that  marvellous  majesty,  which  on  earth  it  only  recognised  by  a 
stray  sigh  of  penitence  or  a  passing  thought  of  desire :  to  some  who  through  no  fault 
of  their  own,  by  a  specialite  of  circumstances,  or  mystery  of  mental  build,  or  owing 
to  a  fog  of  prejudice,  or  an  involuntarily  blinded  mind,  have  never  known  Him — the 
purifying  sorrow  of  awakening  at  last  to  the  unveiled  beauty ;  to  some  who  have 
known  and  loved  Him,  the  fuller  sense — for  love  is  the  real  illumination — of  how 
unworthy  they  have  been,  how  their  best  has  been  bad,  their  self-sacrifices  pitiful, 
face  to  face  with  the  unshrouded  loveliness  of  that  supernatural  sorrow.    HI.  What, 

THEN,  IS   THE   RELATION   OF   THAT   FINAL   VISION   WITH   THE    MYSTERY   OF   THE   PaSSION  ? 

This :  in  that  supreme  crisis  of  humanity  it  is  a  mystery  no  more ;  or  rather  the 
Bouls  of  those  who  are  passing  from  the  limitations  of  time  are  themselves  in  a  sphere 
of  mystery ;  they  see,  they  understand  such  visions  with  the  quickened  senses  of 
eternity.  Life  here  is  in  deepest  shadow,  but  nothing  since  the  beginning  of  creation 
has  been  so  wrapped  in  shadow  as  the  fact  and  the  consequences  of  Calvary  ;  if  that 
be  clear,  all  must  be  plain.  And  clear  it  will  be.  Christ  is  the  Great  Kevealer,  in 
Him  we  shall  see  all.  What  shall  we  see  ?  This.  The  real  meaning  of  humility. 
The  strange  and  now  interpreted  story  of  the  humiliation  of  the  Cross.  What  shall 
we  see  ?  The  perfected  sympathy  of  God  in  Christ  with  all  that  is  truly  human,  all 
that  would  permit  that  sympathy  by  a  surrendered  will.  What  shaU  we  see  ?  The 
evident  and  now  intelUgible  splendour  of  the  ideal  of  humanity.  But,  oh !  the 
surprise  of  the  souls  of  the  blessed  when  first  they  see  unveiled  in  awe  and  majesty 
the  ideal  of  Divine,  of  human  beauty — the  Fairest  of  the  fair !  What  shaU  we  see  ? 
The  meaning  of  suffering.  It  seemed  awful,  ahnost  cruel,  when  borne  in  the 
darkness  of  probation,  but  here  is  the  end.  In  the  light  of  the  Crucified  now  in 
unshrouded  beauty,  the  full  splendour  of  that  suffering  once  borne  with  difficulty, 
but  borne  in  patience,  will  reveal  what,  in  the  "  valley  of  the  shadow,"  lay  concealed 
within  it — some  inconceivable  secret  of  the  love  and  the  loveliness  of  God.  What 
shaU  we  see?  We  shall  see  in  its  overwhelming  glory  the  mystery  of  power.  It 
could  only  speak  on  earth  in  the  mystic  but  eloquent  symbol  of  the  Cross.  Here  it 
is  plain  in  the  clear  Revelation.  Power  elevating,  perfecting  the  uncreated  beauty. 
The  power  that  could  deal  with  the  ruin  of  the  creature,  the  redeemed  the  work  of 
the  Redeemer,  the  forces  of  redemption — God  in  Christ.  {Canon  Knox  Little.) 
The  Second  Advent  of  Christ : — I.  The  Judge.  "  Behold,  He  cometh."  Who  ? 
Christ  Jesus.  Were  He  only  a  man.  He  could  not  be  qualified  for  this  high  office, 
for  no  man,  however  acute  his  discernment,  can  know  "  the  thoughts  and  intents  of 
the  heart  "  ;  but,  being  God  as  weU  as  man.  He  is  omniscient.  His  justice  is  equal 
to  His  knowledge,  for  "justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne,  while 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  83 

a  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  BQs kingdom."  There  is  no  quality  more 
important  in  a  judge  than  this.  II.  Tele  certainty  of  His  approach.  "  Behold, 
He  Cometh,"  exclaims  the  apostle,  as  if  he  had  actually  seen  Him  on  His  way.  HI. 
The  manner  of  His  coming.  "  Behold,  He  cometh  with  clouds."  This  agrees  with 
the  exhibition  that  was  given  at  the  promulgation  of  the  law  from  Sinai,  when 
clouds  and  thick  darkness,  from  which  there  proceeded  flashes  of  lightning  and  peals 
of  thunder,  enveloped  the  mountain.  And  further,  since  clouds  are  always  spoken 
of  as  the  symbols  of  Divinity,  and  since  few  things  are  more  sublime  in  their  appear- 
ance and  motion,  could  any  representation  be  more  descriptive  of  the  God-like  manner 
of  His  operations,  or  better  calculated  to  convince  us  that  the  mighty  agent  in  this 
grand  movement  is  God?  IV.  The  universal  publicity  of  His  appearance. 
"Every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  Him;  and  all  kindreds 
of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  Him."  Men  of  all  creeds,  in  short,  of  all 
colours,  of  all  grades  of  talent,  and  of  all  conditions  of  society,  will  be  there. 
V.  The  way  in  which  these  two  different  classes  will  be  affected  by  the 
BIGHT  OF  THEIR  JuDGE.  Not  One  of  them,  we  may  well  conceive,  will  behold 
Him  with  indifference.  Still,  however,  there  will  be  a  vast  difference  between 
the  feelings  of  the  wicked  and  the  feelings  of  the  righteous.  {W.  Nisbet.) 
The  final  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment : — I,  Christ  will  come  to  judgment.  1. 
The  announcement  of  prophecy:  Enoch,  Job.  Christ  and  His  disciples  were 
frequent  in  their  reference  to  His  final  advent.  They  made  it  a  motive  for 
diligence,  an  incentive  to  watchfulness,  and  the  occasion  of  other  solemn 
instruction.  2.  The  statement  of  Scripture.  "Be  ye  also  ready,  for  in  such  an 
hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  "  He  will  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness  by  that  Man  whom  He  hath  ordained."  3.  The  conviction  of 
reason.     4.  The  dread  expectation  of  conscience.     U.  The  coming  of  Christ  to 

JUDGMENT  will  BE  ASSOCIATED  WITH  MAJESTY  AND  GLORY.      "  He  COmcth  with  clouds." 

1.  The  clouds  are  indicative  of  mystery.  Clouds  hide  many  things  from  mortal 
vision.  So  the  coming  of  Christ  will  be  associated  with  great  mystery.  There  will 
be  the  mystery  connected  with  a  judge  possessed  of  a  nature  at  once  human  and 
Divine.  There  will  be  the  mystery  associated  with  the  life  and  attendance  of 
angeUc  spirits.  There  will  be  the  mystery  consequent  upon  the  resurrection  and 
trial  of  humanity.  2.  The  clouds  are  indicative  of  beauty.  We  have  all  seen  and 
admired  them.  So  the  great  coming  of  Christ  will  be  associated  with  everything 
that  constitutes  moral  grandeur.  The  scene  will  be  one  of  supreme  rectitude,  of 
infinite  purity,  and,  therefore,  unrivalled  glory.  3.  The  clouds  are  indicative  of 
power.  With  what  force  do  the  clouds  rush  along  the  heavens ;  who,  or  what 
could  resist  them  in  their  rapid  march  ?  So  the  final  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment 
will  be  irresistible.  III.  The  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment  will  be  witnessed  by 
AN  assembled  universe.  "And  every  eye  shall  see  Him."  1.  He  will  be  seen  by 
the  devout  Christian.  By  men  who  have  consecrated  their  lives  to  His  service. 
These  will  be  in  sympathy  with  His  coming.  2.  He  will  be  seen  by  the  impious 
sceptic.  Hobbs  and  Hume  will  see  Him.  These  will  behold  His  coming  with 
surprise.  3.  He  will  be  seen  by  the  morally  impenitent.  Herod,  Judas,  Pilate ; 
sinner,  you  will  see  Him.  These  will  see  Him  with  dismay.  Hypocrite  and  back- 
slider, you  will  see  Him.  You  will  see  Him  with  despair.  IV.  The  coming 
OF  Christ  to  judgment  meets  with  the  solemn  approbation  of  the  good.  "  Even 
so.  Amen."  1.  They  approve,  not  because  they  desire  the  final  overthrow  of  the 
wicked.  The  good  man's  desire  is,  that  the  whole  world  should  be  saved.  2. 
They  approve,  because  it  is  the  legitimate  termination  of  mortal  affairs.  3.  They 
approve,  because  it  will  lead  them  into  a  bright  and  more  durable  vision  of  the 
eternal.  Lessons : — 1.  The  world  will  one  day  see  Christ.  2.  Will  you  "  wail 
because  of  Him,"  or  say,  "Even  so.  Amen"?  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  second 
advent : — Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  ordinance  of  Jehovah  for  bringing 
all  things  to  that  state  and  bearing  which  He  has  assigned  them  in  His  eternal 
mind.  The  whole  of  this  dispensation  of  God  to  man  is  called  the  mystery  of  God, 
and  the  whole  of  this  mystery  has  its  accomplishment  in  three  comings  of 
Christ ;  His  coming  in  the  flesh.  His  coming  in  the  Spirit,  and  His  coming  in  the 
clouds.  It  is  to  the  last  of  these  comings  that  John  refers  our  attention  in  the 
text.  "  Behold  He  cometh."  The  coming  of  Christ  in  the  clouds  is  yet,  perhaps, 
at  some  distance,  but  faith  anticipates  it,  realises  it.  1.  Now,  that  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  in  the  clouds  is  an  event  worthy  of  all  your  attention  and  wonder,  I 
think  wiU  appear,  if  we  consider— (1)  The  place  from  which  He  comes— from 
heaven.    Angelic  voices  sound  from  that  far  country  whither  He  has  gone  to 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOJl.  [chap.  i. 

receive  a  kingdom,  into  the  royalties  and  glories  of  which  He  has  entered  as  ihe 
reward  of  His  suffering.  From  that  country  He  shall  come  back.  2.  The  coming 
of  Christ  with  clouds  is  worthy  of  all  our  attention  and  wonder  because  of  the  place 
to  which  He  comes.  To  this  earth  once  more — to  this  earth  where  His  delights 
were  with  the  sons  of  men — to  this  earth  in  which  He  was  born — to  this  earth, 
again,  where  He  lived,  like  a  common  Jewish  peasant,  three  and  thirty  years — to 
this  earth  again,  from  which  He  was  hissed  away  by  a  scandalised  death.  3.  The 
coming  of  Christ  in  the  clouds  is  worthy  of  your  attention  and  regard,  because  of 
the  circumstances  of  glory  in  which  it  will  take  place.  "Behold,  He  cometh  with 
clouds."  Why,  He  came  with  clouds  before,  but  they  were  clouds  of  poverty, 
clouds  of  obscurity,  clouds  of  shame ;  but  now  He  comes  in  clouds  of  glory,  of 
brightness.  4.  This  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  clouds  is  an  event 
worthy  of  your  attention  and  wonder  also,  because  of  the  time  of  it.  He  says, 
"  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  He  will  not  delay  His  coming  beyond  the  time  assigned 
for  it.  5.  The  coming  of  our  Lord  in  the  clouds,  is  further  worthy  of  all  your 
attention  and  wonder,  because  of  the  solemn  preparations  which  shall  usher 
it  in.  There  will  be  signs  in  the  air,  signs  in  the  sea,  signs  in  the  sun,  signs  in 
the  stars,  "  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring," 
mighty  events  treading  on  the  heels  of  one  another.  6.  The  coming  of  Christ 
in  the  clouds  is  an  event  worthy  of  your  attention  and  wonder,  because  of  the 
solemn  work  He  then  comes  to  perform.  He  says,  "Behold  I  come ;  My  reward 
is  with  Me."      {J.   E.  Beaumont,  M.D.)  Christ  coming  with  clouds  : — John, 

who  once  heard  the  voice,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God!"  now  utters  the  voice, 
"  Behold,  He  cometh ! "  I.  Oue  Lord  Jesus  comes.  1.  This  fact  is  worthy 
of  a  note  of  admiration — "Behold!"  2.  It  should  be  vividly  realised  tiU 
we  cry,  "  Behold,  He  cometh ! "  3.  It  should  be  zealously  proclaimed.  We 
should  use  the  herald's  cry,  "Behold!"  4.  It  is  to  be  unquestioningly  asserted 
as  true.  Assuredly  He  cometh.  (1)  It  has  been  long  foretold.  Enoch  (Jude  14). 
(2)  He  has  Himself  warned  us  of  it.  "Behold,  I  come  quickly! "  5.  It  is  to  be 
viewed  with  immediate  interest.  (1)  "Behold!"  for  this  is  the  grandest  of  aU 
events.  (2)  "He  cometh,"  the  event  is  at  the  door.  (3)  "He,"  who  is  your  Lord 
and  Bridegroom,  comes.  (4)  He  is  coming  even  now,  for  He  is  preparing  all  things 
for  His  advent,  and  thus  may  be  said  to  be  on  the  road.  6.  It  is  to  be  attended 
with  a  pecuUar  sign — "  with  clouds."  (1)  The  emblems  of  His  majesty.  (2)  The 
ensigns  of  His  power.  (3)  The  warnings  of  His  judgment.  Charged  with  darkness 
and  tempest  are  these  gathered  clouds.  U.  OrB  Lord's  comixg  well  be  seen  of 
ALL.  1.  It  will  be  a  literal  appearance.  Not  merely  every  mind  shall  think  of  Him, 
but  "  every  eye  shall  see  Him."  2.  It  wiU  be  beheld  by  all  sorts  and  kinds  of  living 
men.  3.  It  will  be  seen  by  those  long  dead.  4.  It  will  be  seen  by  His  actual 
murderers,  and  others  like  them.  5.  It  will  be  manifest  to  those  who  desire  not  to 
Bee  the  Lord.  6.  It  will  be  a  sight  in  which  you  will  have  a  share.  Since  yon 
must  see  Him,  why  not  at  once  look  to  Him  and  live  ?  IH.  His  coming  well  cause 
SOBBOW.  "  AU  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  Him."  1.  The  sorrow 
wiU  be  very  general.  "All  kindreds  of  the  earth."  2.  The  sorrow  will  be  very 
bitter.  "Wail."  3.  The  sorrow  proves  that  men  will  not  be  universally  con- 
verted. 4.  The  sorrow  also  shows  that  men  will  not  expect  from  Christ's 
coming  a  great  deliverance.  5.  The  sorrow  will  in  a  measure  arise  out  of  His 
glory,  seeing  they  rejected  and  resisted  Him.  That  glory  will  be  against  them.  6. 
The  sorrow  will  be  justified  by  the  dread  result.  Their  fears  of  punishment  will  be 
well  grounded.  Their  horror  at  the  sight  of  the  great  Judge  will  be  no  idle  fright. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  coming  of  Christ : — I.  Tece  coming  of  Christ.  U.  The 
evidence  of  His  coming.  This  appears  from  the  character  of  God,  from  His 
holiness  and  righteousness,  His  faithfulness  and  truth,  from  His  holy  covenant, 
counsels  and  promises.  His  infinite  glory,  and  Divine  government.  The  truth  of 
this  appears  from  the  character  of  Christ — from  His  human  nature.  His  atoning 
death.  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  His  ascension  to  heaven,  and  Divine 
administration.  The  evidence  further  appears  from  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  who 
convinces  the  world  of  judgment  to  come — from  the  law  of  God,  which  is  perfect, 
pure,  and  spiritual,  holy,  just,  and  good.  The  truth  of  this  appears  from  the  types 
of  Holy  Writ  (Numb.  vi.  24-26  ;  Matt.  xxv.  34).  Again,  the  evidence  appears  from 
the  prophecy  of  Enoch  (Jude  14, 15) ;  from  the  character  of  God  as  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth ;  from  the  faith  of  Job  in  the  living  Redeemer  (Job  xix.  25,  27) ;  from 
many  of  the  Psalms ;  from  the  vision  of  Daniel  (vii.  10-14) ;  from  Christ's  parables, 
the  testimony  of  the  angels  when  Jesus  ascended,  arid  from  the  doctrines  and 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  35 

promises  of  the  prophets  and  apostles.  The  truth  of  this  will  be  rendered  obvious 
from  the  works  of  Providence,  and  the  unequal  distribution  of  Divine  dispensations. 
Verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous ;  verily  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the 
earth.  The  evidence  of  this  appears  from  reason,  the  light  of  nature,  the  power  of 
conscience,  and  the  inseparable  connection  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature. 
III.  The  manner  of  His  coming.  1.  We  have  in  these  words  the  solemnity  of 
His  coming.  This  great  event  is  ushered  in  with  a  "Behold!"  2.  We  have  in 
these  words  the  reality  of  His  coming.  He  will  come  personally :  "  The  Lord 
Himself  will  descend  from  heaven."  3.  The  certainty  of  His  coming.  4.  The 
nearness  of  His  coming.  5.  The  suddenness  of  His  coming.  His  first  coming 
was  slow  and  progressive.  IV.  The  majesty  of  His  comxnq.  "  Behold  He  cometh 
with  clouds."  Clouds  are  the  symbols  of  Divine  majesty.  He  shall  come  in  the 
Father's  glory,  invested  with  all  His  essential  perfections,  with  all  His  authority, 
excellence,  and  majesty.  He  shall  come  in  His  own  glory,  the  glory  of  His  Deity, 
His  person,  and  His  offices  as  mediator.  He  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  resting  upon  Him  as  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  under- 
standing, of  counsel,  and  of  might,  of  knowledge,  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  He 
shall  be  glorious  in  His  throne— the  great  white  throne.  He  shall  be  glorious  in 
His  apparel — robes  of  light ;  and  also  in  His  power — travelling  in  the  greatness  of 
His  strength,  mighty  to  save.  He  shall  be  glorious  in  His  chariot — the  clouds  of 
heaven,  the  wings  of  the  wind.  He  shall  be  glorious  in  His  attendants— the  holy 
angels,  the  beings  of  light.  He  shall  be  glorious  in  His  Church,  who  shall  bear 
His  blessed  image,  reflect  His  moral  glory,  and  exhibit  the  transcendent  excellence 
of  the  last,  the  finishing  touch,  of  His  glorious,  skilful,  wonder-working  hand.  He 
will  be  glorified  in  His  saints,  and  admired  in  all  them  that  believe.  He  shall  be 
glorious  in  His  last  great  work  of  judgment  and  mercy,  now  finished  for  ever,  and 
He  shall  contemplate  the  whole  scene  with  Divine  delight,  and  pronounce  it  to 
be  good.  V.  The  effects  of  His  coming.  The  first  effect  is  the  misery  of  the 
wicked  :  •'  All  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  Him."  There  is  here 
an  allusion  to  the  book  of  Zechariah  (chap.  x.  12).  The  second  effect  is  the  triumph 
of  the  righteous :  "  Even  so,  Amen."  The  first  word  is  Greek,  the  last  word  ia 
Hebrew.  The  expression  is  doubled,  to  strengthen  the  assertion.  It  expresses  the 
apostle's  acquiescence  in  the  promise :  even  so,  thus  let  it  be ;  it  is  just  and  right 
that  it  should  be  so.  It  expresses  the  soul's  approbation  of  the  promise  ;  of  all  the 
counsels  and  arrangements  of  heaven.  It  expresses  faith  in  the  promise  :  "  Lord, 
I  believe  that  Thou  wilt  come."  It  implies  hope  in  the  promise :  •'  Looking  for 
the  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  our  Saviour."  VI. 
The  uses  of  His  coming.  Hence  see  the  glorious  consummation  of  the  whole  plan 
of  mercy.  All  the  perfections  of  God  shall  be  displayed,  His  character  shall  be 
glorified.  His  law  shaU  be  honoured,  and  His  government  vindicated  ;  aU  His 
counsels  shall  be  fully  unfolded,  and  all  the  predictions  of  His  Word  shall  be 
verified;  and  God  shall  then  be  all  in  all,  in  His  ineffable  resplendent  glory. 
Hence  see  the  necessity  of  constant  preparation  for  the  coming  of  Christ.  We 
cannot  die  in  safety  unless  we  enjoy  peace  with  God.  {James  Young.)  Wail, — 
Despair  of  sinners  in  judgment : — I  cannot  put  into  English  the  full  meaning  of 
that  most  expressive  word.  Sound  it  at  length,  and  it  conveys  its  own  meaning. 
It  is  as  when  men  wring  their  hands  and  burst  out  into  a  loud  cry ;  or  as  when 
eastern  women,  in  their  anguish,  rend  their  garments,  and  lift  up  their  voices  with 
the  most  mournful  notes.  All  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail :  wail  as  a  mother 
laments  over  her  dead  child ;  wail  as  a  man  might  wail  who  found  himself  hope- 
lessly imprisoned  and  doomed  to  die.  Such  will  be  the  hopeless  grief  of  all  the 
kindreds  of  the  earth  at  the  sight  of  Christ  in  the  clouds :  if  they  remain  im- 
penitent, they  shall  not  be  able  to  be  silent;  they  shall  not  be  able  to  repress 
or  conceal  their  anguish,  but  they  shall  wail,  or  openly  give  vent  to  their 
horror.  What  a  sound  that  will  be  which  will  go  up  before  high  heaven 
when  Jesus  sits  upon  the  cloud,  and  in  the  fulness  of  His  power  summons 
them  to  judgment!  Then  "they  shall  wail  because  of  Him."  Will  your 
voice  be  heard  in  that  wailing?  Will  your  heart  be  breaking  in  that  general 
dismay?  How  will  you  escape?  If  you  are  one  of  the  kindreds  of  the  earth, 
and  remain  impenitent,  you  wiU  wail  with  the  rest  of  them.     (C.  H.  Sjpurgeon.) 

Ver,  8.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omeg-a,  the  beginning  and  the  ending. — Chnst  all  in 
all : — I.  Of  creation.  H.  Of  history.  III.  Of  Scripture.  IV.  Of  salvation. 
V.  In  the  life  op  the  believeb.  VI.  In  the  Christian  Church.   {D.  R.  Key,  M.A.) 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Alpha  and  Omega:— I.  Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  human  aspirations. 
He  meets  men's  strongest  yearnings.  1.  It  is  so  in  reference  to  theological 
aspirations.  2.  Immortal  aspirations  are  likewise  met  in  Jesus.  Men  believe  in 
a  hereafter.  On  the  last  page  of  life's  book  we  do  not  write  Finis,  but  "  To  be 
continued  in  our  next."  Christ  ministers  to  this  yearning  for  immortality.  "  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you  "  ;  "  This  day  thou  shalt  be  with  Me  in  Paradise  "  ; 
"  Where  I  am  there  also  shall  My  servant  be."  II.  Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega 
of  HUMAN  CHABACTER.  Christ  Comprehended  in  Himself  every  form  of  excellence. 
No  virtue  was  lacking ;  each  grace  was  present.  A  visitor  in  Spain,  delighted  with 
the  paintings  of  Eubens,  asked  where  his  bad  pictures  were  ?  He  failed  to  discover 
them.  Inquire  for  the  defects  of  Christ,  and  you  cannot  get  an  answer.  III. 
Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  human  privilege.  What  is  true  of  the  Bible  is 
true  also  of  Christ.  It  meets  all  moral  needs.  There  is  a  bridge  in  a  certain 
Austrian  city  on  whose  parapets  stand  twelve  statues  of  the  Saviour.  He  is 
represented  in  various  relationships,  as,  for  instance,  prophet,  priest,  king,  physician, 
pilot,  shepherd,  sower,  carpenter.  The  country  people,  coming  into  town  soon  after 
dawn  with  produce  for  the  market,  pause  before  the  sower  or  the  shepherd  Christ, 
and  offer  their  prayers  through  Him.  The  artisans,  two  hours  later,  repairing  to 
the  workshop,  bend  before  the  carpenter  Christ.  Later  on  the  sailor  kneels 
at  the  feet  of  the  pilot  Christ.  And  in  the  warm  sunlight  of  the  forenoon 
invalids,  creeping  out  to  enjoy  the  fresh  air,  rest  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Great  Physician.  Apt  symbol  of  our  Lord's  adaptation  to  universal  necessities! 
He  is  all  and  in  all.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  Christ  the  Alpha  and  Omega: — I. 
As  IT  respects  the  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  the  covenant  of  grace. 

II.  As  it  relates  to  the  personal  enjoyments  and  salvation  of  the  true  believer. 

III.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the  great  works  of  nature  and 
providence.  (T.  Hutchings.)  The  first  and  the  last : — I.  First,  consider  the  title 
as  expressive  of  the  eternal  duration  op  our  Saviour's  existence.  *'  I  am  the 
first,"  He  says,  and  thereby  claims  precedence  of  all  created  beings  and  things. 
He  is  before  all  things,  and  by  Him  are  all  things.  "  I  am  the  first,"  He  says,  and 
thereby  claims  to  be  coeval  with  the  Father;  for  if  the  Father  existed  prior  to 
Himself  He  could  not  be  said  to  be  the  first.  It  is  a  most  direct  and  unequivocal 
assertion  of  His  divinity.  He,  as  the  God-man,  the  Divine  taking  upon  Him  the 
human,  is  the  Centre  and  the  Sun,  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  of  His  own  world. 
This  statement  is  supported  by  the  second  part  of  His  title.  It  points  us  to  an 
impenetrable  future,  as  the  first  does  to  an  illimitable  past.  He  is  the  Omega  no 
less  than  the  Alpha  ;  the  end  even  as  He  is  the  beginning.  His  existence  bounds 
all  being.  As  no  one  preceded  Him,  so  no  one  can  outlive  Him.  The  Father  does 
not  live  longer  than  the  Son.  What  could  show  more  clearly  that  He  is  dependent 
on  none ;  that  all  are  dependent  on  Him.  It  is  of  no  small  importance  that  you 
should  practically  realise  this  truth.  It  bears  on  our  conduct,  for  if  the  Saviour  be 
what  this  title  claims.  He  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  man,  however  holy  and 
divinely  endowed,  but  to  be  worshipped  even  as  the  Father  is  worshipped.  It  is 
conducive  to  our  comfort,  for,  to  say  nothing  of  the  efl&cacy  which  His  dignity 
imparts  to  His  atoning  work,  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  know,  amid  the  trials  and  the 
vicissitudes  of  this  changing  scene,  that  there  is  a  Friend  who  ever  lives  and  who  is 
ever  the  same.  II.  Then  we  consider  the  title  as  expressive  of  our  Saviour's 
action  in  all  the  movements  of  the  universe.  The  self-existent  and  independent 
one  must  necessarily  be  the  author  and  upholder  of  all  created  existence.  Observe 
1.  How  unlimited  is  the  power  which  is  thus  attributed  to  our  Lord.  The  fact  of 
creation  is  in  one  point  of  view  the  most  stupendous  of  which  we  have  any 
knowledge.  While  all  this  is  awful,  is  it  not  delightful  to  reflect  how  that  power 
is  wielded  by  our  best  Friend,  by  One  whose  heart  is  as  tender  as  His  arm  is 
strong,  and  wielded  for  the  welfare  of  those  who  put  their  trust  in  Him  ?  2.  He 
carries  all  things  forward  to  their  consummation.  He  terminates  as  well  as 
originates  all  the  processes  of  the  universe— all  beings,  all  things,  aU  existence. 
We  are  not  to  think  of  Him  as  severed  from  Hi&  works,  but  as  pervading  and 
upholding  them,  and  still  conducting  them  all.  He  is  the  centre  of  all  forces,  the 
fountain  of  all  law,  the  sustainer  of  all  existence.  Look  around  you  in  your  own 
world ;  in  the  multitude  of  the  activities  that  you  witness  you  behold  the  exercise 
of  His  power.  It  is  seen  in  the  flowing  river,  in  the  restless  ocean,  in  the  rising 
and  setting  sun,  in  the  still  or  stormy  atmosphere,  in  all  activities  of  organic 
substance,  in  animal  and  vegetable  life.  It  is  His  power  that  bursts  in  the  budding 
of  the  plant;    His  beauty  which  is  unfolded  in  the  opening   flower;   it  is  His 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  37 

providence  which  shapes  the  life  of  the  buzzing  insect,  His  will  that  determines  the 
mode  and  manner  of  its  death.  Even  the  smallest  grain  of  dust  takes  its  shape 
from  His  hands ;  He  directs  the  course  of  every  particle  of  spray,  every  feather 
and  every  snowflake  in  the  breeze.  There  is  nothing  too  minute  for  His  care,  as 
there  is  nothing  too  great  for  His  might.  Look  into  the  inner  world  of  the  soul, 
and  with  equal  certainty  you  can  discern  His  movements  there.  Not  only  did  He 
lay  down  His  life  to  provide  redemption  for  us,  but  by  His  Spirit  He  applies  that 
redemption  to  the  individual  soul.  The  work  of  grace  in  its  beginning,  its  con- 
tinuance, its  consummation,  is  all  of  Him.  There  is  human  instrumentality,  but  the 
efficiency  is  all  Divine.  lU.  Again,  consider  the  title  as  intimating  that  all  things 
EXIST  ON  OUR  Saviour's  account,  and  actually  and  ultimately  tend  to  the  promotion 
or  His  glory.  It  is  not  a  subject  for  dogmatism,  scarcely  for  speculation,  when  we  say 
that  the  purpose  of  creation  was  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  attributes,  to  give 
expression  and  embodiment  to  the  truth,  the  purity,  the  beauty,  the  wisdom,  the 
goodness,  and  the  perfection  of  the  attributes  which  exist  in  the  Divine  mind,  that 
God  might  complacently  behold  and  rest  in  His  works,  and  that  His  intelligent 
creatures,  beholding  these  perfections  in  the  visible  universe,  might  respond  to 
those  expressions  of  the  Divine  with  devout  and  joyful  adoration.  Christ  came  to 
restore  the  Divine  order  which  sin  ha^  interrupted,  and  all  creation,  true  to  the 
purpose  of  its  existence,  co-operates  with  Him  for  this  end.  His  Incarnation  is  not 
an  isolated  fact ;  it  is  the  centre  of  the  universe,  pointing  to  the  past  order  which 
has  been  broken  and  is  yet  to  be  restored.  {W.  Landels.)  The  A  and  the  Z : — 
Alpha  is  the  first  letter  of  the  Greek  alphabet,  and  Omega  is  the  last ;  so  that 
Christ  in  this  text  represents  Himself  as  the  A  and  the  Z.  That  is  one  reason  why 
I  like  the  Bible  ;  its  illustrations  are  so  easy  to  understand.  When  it  represents 
the  gospel  as  a  hammer,  everybody  knows  it  is  to  knock  something  to  pieces  ;  or  as 
salt,  everybody  who  has  put  down  meat  in  barrels  knows  it  is  to  keep  things  from 
spoiling ;  or  as  a  salve,  that  is  to  cure  the  old  sores  of  the  heart.  Anybody  who 
Imows  the  ab  c  understands  that  the  text  means  that  Christ  is  the  Beginning  and 
the  End  in  everything  good.  I.  He  is  the  A  and  the  Z  of  the  physical  universe. 
By  Him  were  all  things  made  that  are  made.  It  is  exciting  to  see  a  ship  launched. 
The  people  gather  in  a  temporary  gallery  erected  for  their  accommodation.  The 
spectators  are  breathless,  waiting  for  the  impediments  to  be  removed,  when  down 
the  ship  rushes  with  terrific  velocity,  the  planks  smoking,  the  water  tossing,  the 
flags  flying,  the  people  huzzaing,  bands  of  music  playing.  But  my  Lord 
Jesus  saw  this  ship  of  a  world  launched  with  its  furnaces  of  volcano,  and 
flags  of  cloud,  and  masts  of  mountain,  and  beams  of  thunderbolt,  while  tho 
morning  stars  shouted,  and  the  orchestras  of  heaven  played,  "  Great  and 
marvellous  are  Thy  works.  Lord  God  Almighty !  "  The  same  hand  that  put  up 
this  universe  will  pull  it  down.  II.  Christ  is  the  A  and  the  Z  of  the  Bible.  ^  Here 
is  a  long  lane,  overshadowed  by  fine  trees,  leading  up  to  a  mansion.  What  is  the 
use  of  the  lane  if  there  were  no  mansion  at  the  end  ?  There  is  no  use  in  the  Old 
Testament,  except  as  a  grand  avenue  to  lead  us  up  to  the  Gospel  Dispensation. 
You  may  go  early  to  a  concert.  Before  the  curtain  is  hoisted,  you  hear  the 
musicians  tuning  up  the  violins,  and  getting  ready  aU  the  instruments.  After  a 
while  the  curtain  is  hoisted,  and  the  concert  begins.  All  the  statements,  parables, 
orations,  and  miracles  of  the  Old  Testament  were  merely  preparatory,  and  when 
all  was  ready,  in  the  time  of  Christ,  the  curtain  hoists,  and  there  pours  forth  the 
Oratorio  of  the  Messiah — all  nations  joining  in  the  Hallelujah  Chorus.  III.  Christ 
is  the  A  and  the  Z  of  the  Christian  ministry.  A  sermon  that  has  no  Christ  in  it 
is  a  dead  failure.  The  minister  who  devotes  his  pulpit  to  anything  but  Christ  is  an 
impostor.  What  the  world  wants  now  is  to  be  told  in  the  most  direct  way  of  Jesus 
Christ,  who  comes  to  save  men  from  eternal  damnation.  Christ  the  Light,  Christ 
the  Sacrifice,  Christ  the  Kock,  Christ  the  Star,  Christ  the  Balm,  Christ  the  Guide. 
IV.  Christ  is  the  A  and  the  Z  in  the  world's  rescue.  When  the  world  broke  loose, 
the  only  hand  swung  out  to  catch  it  was  that  of  Jesus.  V.  Christ  is  the  A  and  the 
Z  IN  heaven.  He  is  the  most  honoured  personage  in  all  the  land.  He  is  known  as 
a  World-Liberator.  The  first  one  that  a  soul  entering  heaven  looks  for  is  Jesus. 
At  His  feet  break  the  doxologies.  Around  His  throne  circle  the  chief  glories.  At 
heaven's  beginning — Christ,  the  Alpha.  Then  travel  far  on  down  the  years  of  eternity, 
and  stop  at  the  end  of  the  remotest  age,  and  see  if  the  song  has  not  taken  up  some 
other  burthen,  and  some  other  throne  has  not  become  the  centre  of  heaven's  chief 
attractions.  But  no ;  you  hear  it  thrummed  on  the  harps  and  poured  from  the  trumpets 
and  shouted  in  universal  acclaim,  "  Christ,  the  Omega  1 "    (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  Alpha  and  Omega : — I.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  because  He  is 
THE  MANIFESTATION  OF  GoD.  The  usc  of  the  various  letters  is  just  to  articulate  your 
truest  self — to  render  intelligible  to  others  your  thoughts  and  wishes,  your  feelings 
and  your  purposes.  And  in  this  sense  Immanuel  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the 
ever-blessed  Godhead.  He  is  the  articulation  of  Jehovah's  mind.  He  is  the  Word 
of  God.  He  is  the  visible  embodiment  of  all  that  is  in  the  invisible  Three-One. 
Whatever  the  mind  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is,  the  same  is  the  mind  of  God ;  whatever 
the  dispositions  of  the  Lord  Jesus  are  known  to  be,  the  same  are  the  dispositions  of 
Him  whom  no  man  can  see ;  and  whatever  perfections  were  seen  in  the  person  of 
Christ,  the  same  perfections  reside  in  the  great  I  AM.  11.  Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and 
the  Omega,  because  of  His  all-sufficiency.  Like  the  literal  Alpha  and  Omega,  He 
includes  everything  within  Himself.  He  is  the  beginning  and  the  ending,  which  is, 
and  was,  and  is  to  come — the  Almighty — the  All-sufficient.  There  is  nothing  which 
a  believer  needs  but  he  will  find  it  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  1.  A  sufficient  Saviour.  His 
name  was  called  •'  Jesus,"  because  He  saves  His  people  from  their  sins.  You  can 
do  nothing  which  more  truly  honours  Him,  than  to  trust  your  salvation  entirely  to 
Him.  2.  A  most  attractive  and  assimilating  pattern  of  all  moral  excellence.  Li 
His  direct  operations  on  the  mind,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  immediate  sanctifier  of 
God's  people  ;  but  it  is  by  revealing  the  great  model  of  all  excellence  in  the  person 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  changes  them  into  the  same  likeness.  3.  A 
wise  Counsellor  and  unerring  Guide.  He  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning ;  He 
sees  the  issue  of  every  undertaking,  not  only  in  time,  but  in  eternity.  His  counsel 
is  wonderful,  for  it  meets  the  very  case  ;  and — what  cannot  be  said  of  much  good 
advice — He  can  not  only  give  the  best  counsel,  but  He  can  make  you  willing  to  take 
it.  In  His  ever-living  Word,  He  has  left  principles  available  in  all  the  casuistry 
which  ever  can  occur  in  your  experience — formulse  which  only  need  to  be  filled  up 
with  your  particular  case,  and  the  doubt  is  at  once  dispelled — the  path  is  at  once 
made  plain.  HI.  Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  because  all  things  that  concern 
THE  Church  are  in  Him  summed  up  or  "recapitulated."  In  His  person  the 
Church  on  earth  finds  its  access  to  God,  and  the  earnest  of  its  everlasting  life  ;  and 
in  that  same  person  the  Church  of  the  glorified  finds  the  guarantee  of  permanent 
joy — the  stability  of  its  bliss  secured.  AH  that  belong  to  Him  are  safe  within  the 
circle  of  the  changeless  love  and  all-embracing  might  of  Him  who  fiUeth  all  in  all. 
rV.  Jesus  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  because  He  is  the  first  and  the  last,  the  be- 
ginning and  the  ending — He  that  liveth  and  is  alive  for  evermore.  There  is  a  power 
which  bade  Lebanon  rise,  and  a  power  which  can  bid  Lebanon  and  his  continental 
roots  subside  in  flat  chaos  again.  The  day  will  come  when  that  hoary  deep  must 
die — ^when  old  Ocean  will  lift  up  his  waves  and  clap  his  cymbal  hands  no  more. 
Yes,  old  apparatus  of  the  universe,  obsolete  version  of  a  system  fast  verging  to 
decay,  ye  soon  must  vanish,  and  make  room  for  a  world  where  there  is  no  more 
sea,  and  for  cities  which  don't  need  the  sun.  But  when  ye  are  gone  the  Fountain 
of  Life  will  still  include  in  His  all-encircling  fulness  everything  that  lives.  (Jos. 
Hamilton.)        The  security  of  the  Church  amid  the  vicissitudes  of  time : — I.  The 

IMPORTANT  information  THE  SaVIOUR  IS  PLEASED  TO  COMMUNICATE  IN  THIS  PASSAGE.     1. 

The  figurative  mode  of  expression  He  employs.  2.  The  evident  sense  of  His  communi- 
cation. Christ  precedes  all  things  by  the  eternity  of  His  nature ;  He  pervades  all 
things  by  the  omnipresence  of  His  Spirit ;  He  survives  all  things  by  the  immortality  of 
His  nature.  H.  The  solemn  confirmation  Christ  deigns  to  afford.  He  announces 
— 1.  The  eternity  of  His  duration.  2.  The  omnipotency  in  His  possession.  Christ 
says  that  He  is  the  Almighty.  III.  The  blessed  consolation  the  Saviour  designs 
10  BESTOW.  1.  The  security  it  affords  to  the  believer  amid  the  calamitous  changes 
of  life.  2.  The  stability  of  the  Church  amid  the  overthrow  of  empires.  3.  The 
immortality  of  the  Christian  amid  the  ravages  of  death.  {J.  Blackburn.)  Christ 
— the  Alpha : — Take  Christ  first,  before  you  think  of  doing  anything  else.  Did  He 
not  say,  "  Without  Me  you  can  do  nothing  "  ?  So,  then,  all  you  do  without  Him  is 
sheer  nothing,  however  pious  and  noble  it  may  appear  in  the  eyes  of  men.  Is  He 
not  the  Alpha,  and  is  not  the  Alpha  the  first  letter  ?  Then  do  not  try  to  put  a  letter 
before  it ;  do  not  say  to  yourself,  "I  will  try  to  obtain  a  true  recognition  of  my  sins, 
and  then  I  will  go  to  Jesus  and  obtain  salvation."  This  is  beginning  with  the  Z 
instead  of  with  the  Alpha.  By  doing  so  you  make  yourself  like  that  fool  who  said, 
*«I  will  learn  to  swim  first,  and  then  I  will  go  into  the  water."  Do  you  want  to 
know  your  sins  truly  ?  Who  is  to  give  you  that  knowledge  but  Christ  ?  Do  you 
want  to  become  better  and  more  heavenly  minded  ?  Who  can  give  you  that  godly 
disposition  of  heart  but  Christ?     {T.  Guthrie.)        The  Lord,  which  is,  and  which 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  39 

■was,  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Almighty. — The  eternity  of  God : — I.  The  diffebent 

SENSES   IN   WHICH  THE   WORDS  ETERNAL,  lilMORTAL,  AND  EVERLASTING,  ARE  USED  BY  THE 

SACRED  WRITERS.  1.  Sometimes  they  signify  nothing  more  but  only  a  long  duration 
(Gen.  xvii.  8;  Numb.  x.  8;  Gen.  xlix.  26;  Hab.  iii.  6  ;  1  Sam.  iii.  13  ;  Exod.  xxi. 
6).  2.  The  next  sense  they  are  used  in  is  to  denote  a  duration  continuing  as  long 
as  the  subject  exists,  and  then  putting  it  in  a  state  out  of  which  it  shall  never  be 
restored  (Numb.  xxiv.  20 ;  Deut.  xiii.  16 ;  Jude  7).  3.  In  other  places  of  Scripture  the 
words  "  eternal "  and  "  for  ever  "  signify  in  a  higher  sense  a  duration,  not  figuratively, 
but  properly  and  literally  everlasting,  without  end,  though  not  without  beginning. 
Thus  angels  and  the  souls  of  men  are  eternal,  or  immortal.  4.  The  last  and  highest 
and  most  absolutely  perfect  sense  of  the  words  "  eternal "  and  "everlasting,"  is 
when  they  signify  a  duration  of  inexhaustible  and  never-failing  permanency,  both 
without  beginning  and  without  end.  And  not  only  so,  but  including  also  necessary 
and  independent  existence,  so  as  in  no  manner  whatsoever  to  derive  from  any  other. 
II.  Some  observations  coNCERNiNa  this  doctrine  of  the  eternity  of  God  in 
PARTICULAR.  1.  This  eternity  is  a  perfection,  an  attribute,  by  which  God  is  very 
frequently  described  in  Scripture,  in  order  to  raise  in  our  minds  a  just  veneration  of 
His  Divine  majesty  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27  ;  Eom,  xvi.  26 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  15  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29  ; 
1  Tim.  i.  17,  vi.  16  ;  Psa.  cii.  24).  2.  Not  only  in  Scripture  is  God  frequently  described 
by  this  attribute  of  eternity,  but  even  under  the  light  of  nature  also  is  He  represented 
to  us  after  the  same  manner.  For  since  it  is  in  some  degree  a  perfection  to  be,  and 
a  greater  degree  of  that  perfection,  to  continue  in  being,  it  is  evident,  when  we 
conceive  of  God  the  most  perfect  being,  we  must  conceive  Him  to  be  infinite  in  this 
perfection  also,  as  well  as  in  others.  Again,  it  is  evident  even  to  the  meanest 
capacity  which  considers  things  at  all,  that  He  who  first  gave  being  to  all  other 
things  could  not  possibly  have  any  beginning  Himself,  and  that  He  who  hath 
already  existed  from  aU  eternity,  independently  and  of  Himself,  cannot  possibly  be 
liable  to  be  deprived  of  His  being,  and  must  therefore  necessarily  exist  for  an  eternity 
to  come.  3.  The  true  notion  of  the  Divine  eternity  does  not  consist  in  making  past 
things  to  be  still  present,  and  things  future  to  be  already  come,  which  is  an  express 
contradiction.  The  eternal,  supreme  cause  has  such  a  perfect,  independent,  and 
unchangeable  comprehension  of  all  things,  that  in  every  point  or  instance  of  His 
eternal  duration,  aU  things  past,  present,  and  to  come,  must  be,  not  indeed  them- 
selves present  at  once,  but  they  must  be  as  entirely  known  and  represented  to  Him 
in  one  single  thought  or  view,  and  all  things  present  and  future  be  as  absolutely 
under  His  power  and  direction  (Psa.  xc.  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  8).  III.  What  use  this 
MEDITATION  MAT  BE  TO  US  IN  PRACTICE.  1.  This  attribute  of  etcmity,  absolute, 
necessary,  and  independent,  is  one  of  the  principal  characters  by  which  the  true 
God  of  the  universe  is  distinguished  from  false  Gods.  2.  The  consideration  of  the 
eternity  of  God  is  an  argument  why  His  providence  ought  not  to  be  cavilled  at,  nor 
His  promises  doubted  of,  even  though  there  be  no  present  appearance  of  the 
performances  of  His  promises,  and  no  present  way  of  explaining  the  methods  of 
His  providence.  3.  The  consideration  of  God's  eternity  is  a  sure  ground  of  trust 
and  confidence,  of  hope  and  cheerfulness,  to  good  men  at  all  times,  seeing  His 
protection  may  be  relied  on  and  depended  upon  for  ever.  4.  The  consideration  of 
this  Divine  perfection,  the  eternity  of  God,  is  a  ground  for  frail  and  mortal  man  to 
hope  for  pity  and  compassion  from  Him.  5.  The  consideration  of  God's  being  eternal 
leads  us  to  a  right  knowledge  and  just  sense  of  the  excellency  of  that  reward,  where- 
with He  will  finally  crown  those  who  obey  His  commandments.  6.  If  God  is  eternal 
this  consideration  ought  to  be  matter  of  infinite  terror  to  all  impenitent  sinners  ;  that 
He  who  liveth  for  ever,  as  He  will  reward  His  servants  eternally,  so  He  can  punish 
His  enemies  as  long  as  He  pleases,  for  there  is  no  end  of  His  power.  (5.  Clarke,  D.D.) 
The  eternity  of  God  the  Son  : — Contemplate  God  our  Saviour — I.  As  He  was.  1. 
He  was — in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  from  all  eternity.  2.  He  was — a  little  help- 
less babe,  born  in  a  stable,  cradled  in  a  manger.  3.  He  was — "  a  man  of  sorrows, 
and  acquainted  with  grief."  4.  He  was — a  sacrifice  for  sin.  5.  He  was — again 
on  earth  forty  days  (Acts  i.  3).  II.  He  is — His  present  state  and  circumstances. 
1.  He  is — glorified.  2.  He  is — the  head  of  His  Church.  3.  He  is — preparing  a 
place  for  us.  4.  He  is — in  a  state  of  expectation.  HI.  He  is  to  come.  1.  His 
second  advent  is  as  certain  as  His  first,  and  depends  upon  it.  2.  He  is  to  come — 
suddenly  and  unexpectedly.  3.  He  is  to  come — with  power  and  great  glory.  4. 
He  is  to  come — for  the  final  consummation  of  aU  things.     {Dean  Close.) 

Vers.  9-11.  I  John,  who  also  am  your  brother. — St.  John — a  sublime  character: — 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

I.  A  character  of  distinguished  excellence  described.  1.  As  a  '•  brother  "  ;  his  heart 
glows  with  a  Christly  fraternity  for  the  good  of  all  the  Churches  throughout  all  the 
world.  2.  As  a  sufferer ;  he  is  in  "  tribulation."  The  best  men  on  earth  are  subject 
to  suffering.  11.  A  character  of  distinguished  excellence  banished  by  bloody  pebse- 
CUTORS.  "  In  the  isle  called  Patmos."  On  this  desolate  island,  amidst  the  greatest 
villains  of  the  age,  this  great  character  was  banished.  Strange  that  the  Providence 
of  heaven  should  have  allowed  one  of  the  most  Christly  men  on  the  earth  at  that 
time  to  live  for  an -hour  in  such  a  scene.  But  Patmos  to  John,  and  Patmos  to  the 
other  residents,  was  a  different  place.  To  John  it  was  a  theatre  of  sublimest 
revelations— the  very  gate  of  heaven.  lU.  A  character  of  distinguished  excellence 
banished  by  bloody  persecutors  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  He  bore  '•  testimony  of 
Jesus,"  and  preached  the  "Word  of  God."  {Homilist.)  Companions  in  the 
Divine  kingdom : — 1.  Holy  men  of  God,  who  committed  to  writing  the  oracles 
of  heaven,  frequently  mention  their  name,  their  office,  and  the  high  authority  with 
which  they  were  invested,  as  an  evidence  of  the  truth  of  their  sacred  message,  and 
as  a  ground  of  confidence  in  it.  2.  The  blessings,  the  promises,  the  hopes,  the 
privileges  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  glorious  prospects  of  life  and  immortality 
belonged  in  common  to  all  the  holy  brethren.  They  were  brethren  in  affection ; 
they  loved  one  another  with  a  pure  love  fervently  ;  they  were  brethren  in  profession, 
a  holy  band  of  brothers,  united  together  in  the  faith,  hope,  and  profession  of  the 
gospel ;  they  were  brethren  in  action,  holy  obedience,  devoted  effort,  in  deed  and 
in  truth,  in  work  and  in  warfare,  in  sorrow  and  suffering,  in  conflict  and  conquest, 
in  life  and  in  death.  3.  They  were  also  companions.  They  were  companions  in 
friendship,  like  David  and  Jonathan  ;  companions  in  love,  like  Paul  and  Timothy ; 
companions  in  arms,  as  soldiers  of  the  Cross.  They  had  aU  the  same  cause, 
interest,  and  object;  the  same  profession,  conflict,  and  triumph;  and  the  same 
cause,  prospects,  and  glory.  4.  The  objects  in  which  John  was  their  brother  and 
companion  were  three :  the  tribulation,  the  kingdom,  and  patience  of  Jesus.  (1) 
He  was  their  brother  in  tribulation.  This  supposes  subjection  to  all  the  common 
calamities  of  life ;  we  are  born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upwards.  It  includes 
persecutions  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  Of  these  the  primitive  saints  had  a  large 
share.  To  be  a  brother  and  companion  in  tribulation  includes  sympathy  with  the 
afflicted.  The  fellowship  of  saints  consists  greatly  in  sympathetic  feelings.  If  one 
member  suffers,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it.  (2)  He  was  a  brother  and  com- 
panion in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Observe  the  connection  between  the  tribulation 
and  the  kingdom  of  Jesus.  If  we  suffer  with  Him,  we  shall  reign  with  Him.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  King  of  this  kingdom.  He  is  the  King  of  Zion — the  King 
of  martyrs.  As  a  King,  he  was  prefigured  by  many  an  ancient  type — Melchizedek 
was  king  of  Salem ;  Moses  was  king  in  Jeshurun ;  Judah  was  the  lawgiver  from 
whom  the  Shiloh  came.  The  kingdom  was  foreshadowed  as  well  as  the  King.  The 
people  of  Israel  were  a  royal  priesthood,  a  kingdom  of  priests.  (3)  The  patience  of 
Jesus  Christ.  This  word  includes  a  patient  enduring,  a  patient  waiting,  and  a 
patient  persevering.  5.  The  exile  of  the  apostle.  His  grace  shall  be  sufficient  for 
us  ;  He  will  perfect  His  strength  in  our  weakness.  6.  It  was  for  the  sake  of  Jesus 
that  John  was  now  an  exile ;  but  He  for  whom  he  suffered  was  infinitely  worthy ; 
and  John  was  ready  to  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellence  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord.  {Jas.  Young.)  The  glorified  Saviour : — I.  The  revela- 
tion TO  THE  imprisoned  SAINT.  Though  coufiued  on  this  prison-isle,  the  disciple 
of  Christ  was  not  left  a  prey  to  regrets  or  mournful  contemplation  about  the  failure 
of  his  own  or  his  Master's  work.  Arabi  Pasha  from  his  coffee  plantation  in  Ceylon 
contemplates  without  hope  the  decline  of  the  arms  of  the  crescent  under  which  he 
fought  and  the  nationality  he  defended.  John  Baptist  from  his  dungeon  in  the 
Macheerus  when  Christ  was  on  the  earth  had  sent  to  make  sure  that  the  Messiah 
had  come ;  but  this  other  John,  though  a  captive,  and  a  disciple  of  a  departed 
Master,  yet  beheld  the  unmistakable  marks  of  victory  on  that  countenance  shining 
as  the  sun  in  his  strength.  The  restoration  would  not  come  in  his  day,  but  the 
victory  was  sealed.  In  the  inferences  we  draw  from  startling  events  concerning  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  to  earth,  there  are  some  facts  which  should  be  borne  in  mind. 
One  is  the  manifold  increase  of  population  and  human  activity  with  advancing 
years.  There  are  bound  to  be  with  this  enlarged  area  of  civilisation  a  vast  series 
of  crises  and  combinations.  Again,  the  means  of  communication  are  such  that  we 
read  of  all  the  world's  calamities  summed  up  in  one  day's  journal.  The  occasions 
of  trouble  are  multiplied  by  our  very  frequent  contact  with  nations  and  individuals. 
We  cannot  infer,  therefore,  a  disproportionate  increase  of  evils  because  we  hear  of 


CHAP.  1.]  BEVELATION.  41 

them  oftener  than  formerly.  Our  spirits  chafe  under  the  slow  advance  of  reform 
according  to  the  vernier  scale  when  we  wish  for  the  yard  measure  standard  of  pro- 
gress. But  we  are  still  with  our  brother  John  in  the  tribulation  and  patience  period 
of  the  kingdom,  and  yet  one  of  hope.  11.  The  fulness  of  the  revelation  to  a. 
SINGLE  SAINT.  " I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day."  That  was  a  magnificent 
service  which  was  performed  for  that  troubled  soul  on  his  seagirt  isle  that  Sabbath 
day.  The  presence  of  one  worshipper  is  sufficient  to  start  the  angelic  choir,  to 
secure  the  entrance  of  the  high  priest  in  his  robes  of  ascended  majesty.  One 
troubled  spirit  requires  the  whole  of  the  Divine  ministry.  The  disciple  of  Christ 
who  puts  himself  in  the  line  with  Divine  commands,  whatever  his  estate  or  humilia- 
tion, often  finds  the  whole  splendid  ritual  produced  for  him.  It  was  the  Lord's  day 
when  this  mighty  revelation  came  to  the  prisoner.  He  was  in  the  spirit,  though 
depressed  and  anxious.  Many  persons  will  stay  away  from  church  because  of  evils 
which  have  come  or  misfortunes  in  the  family.  But  they  thus  fail  of  the  very 
relief  God  has  vouchsafed  to  those  who  seek  to  serve  Him.  The  choicest  blessings 
are  for  those  who  are  in  the  line  of  appointed  duty.  The  individual  is  not  over- 
looked. We  are  taught  here  how  in  all  the  mighty  movements  of  nations  and  the 
universe  itself  Christ  has  time  to  spare  and  disposition  to  care  for  His  humble, 
persecuted  disciples.  HI.  The  continued  story  for  the  world.  "  Write  there- 
fore the  things  that  thou  sawest."  After  the  personal  revelation  comes  the 
permanent  message  for  the  ministry,  the  Church,  and  the  world.  There  was  to 
be  a  book  and  a  commentary  by  the  living  One.  Attention  was  here  called  to  the 
value  of  permanent  records  of  the  Lord's  will  for  the  Church  in  all  ages.  The 
Bible  was  not  only  largely  written  by  captives,  but  has  been  ever  the  prisoners* 
book.  {William  R.  Campbell.)  Brother  and  companion  : — I.  Brother  and  com- 
panion. He  does  not  write  as  a  lord  over  them,  but  as  one  of  themselves.  He  is 
one  of  the  many  "  brethren  "  in  Asia ;  one  of  the  "  household  of  faith."  He  is  no 
stranger,  no  master  or  ruler,  but  truly  a  part  of  themselves,  who  needed  their 
sympathy  and  love  even  more  than  they  needed  his.  Not  a  brother  only,  but  a 
"  companion"  :  a  co-partner  with  them  in  all  things;  a  sharer  with  them  in  the 
same  faith  and  hope,  the  same  sorrow  and  joy.  U.  Brother  and  companion  ik 
TRiBuiiATiON.  There  was  tribulation  in  the  Churches  then,  as  now ;  in  some  cases 
it  was  "much  tribulation"  (Acts  xiv.  22),  or  "great  tribulation"  (chap.  ii.  22, 
vii.  14).  "  Weeping  endured  for  a  night "  (Psa.  xxx.  5) ;  for  this  is  the  night,  and 
it  is  the  time  of  tears.  What  John  suffered,  these  Churches  suffered  ;  what  they 
suffered,  he  suffered :  for  the  sympathy  between  all  the  members  of  the  body  was 
quick  and  instantaneous  in  these  days  of  love.  Sympathy  between  the  members 
of  Christ's  body  is  little  known  in  these  last  days;  so  many  non-conducting 
materials  have  prevented  the  communication.  The  world  has  come  in ;  false 
brethren  have  come  in ;  the  members  do  not  realise  the  vitality  of  their  connection 
with  the  Head.  The  links  are  broken ;  the  fine  nerves  that  carried  the  spiritual 
feeling  through  every  part  have  frozen  or  become  insensible,  if  not  dead.  Who  of 
us  appreciates  this  deep,  true  spiritual  union,  with  which  no  external  unity  can 
intermeddle,  either  to  hinder  or  to  help  ?  III.  Brother  and  companion  in  thb 
KINGDOM.  The  kingdom  belongs  alike  to  aU  the  members  of  the  one  body  from  the 
beginning.  One  in  sorrow,  one  in  joy ;  one  in  shame,  one  in  glory;  one  in  tribula- 
tion, one  in  triumph  I  IV.  Brother  and  companion  in  the  patience  op  Jesus 
Christ.  Until  that  kingdom  come,  there  is  need  of  patience ;  patience  such  as  all 
the  saints  have  shown  in  the  days  of  their  pilgrimage;  the  patience  exhibited  by 
the  Master  Himself ;  the  patience  of  faith  and  hope ;  the  patient  waiting  for  the 
kingdom.  Be  patient  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Be  patient  under  wrong,  and 
suffering,  and  weariness,  and  hope  deferred.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Companion  In 
tribulation,  and  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ. — Tlie  threefold 
common  heritage  : — I.  The  common  royalty.  John  does  not  say,  "  I  am  going  to 
be  a  partaker,"  but  says,  here  and  now,  in  this  Httle  rocky  island  of  Patmos,  "  I 
yet,  like  all  the  rest  of  you,  who  have  the  same  bitter  cup  to  drink,  I  even  now  am 
a  partaker  of  the  kingdom  that  is  in  Christ."  What  is  that  kingdom?  It  is  the 
sphere  or  society,  the  state  or  realm,  in  which  His  will  is  obeyed  ;  and,  as  we  may 
say,  His  writs  run.  But  then,  besides  that,  there  is  a  wider  sense  of  the  expression, 
in  which  Christ's  kingdom  stretches  all  through  the  universe,  and  wherever  the 
authority  of  God  is,  there  is  the  kingdom  of  the  exalted  Christ,  who  is  the  right 
hand  and  active  power  of  God.  So  then  the  "  kingdom  that  is  in  Christ  "  is  yours 
if  you  are  "  in  Christ."  Or,  to  put  it  into  other  words,  whoever  is  ruled  by  Christ 
has  a  share  in  rule  with  Christ.    His  vassals  are  altogether  princes.     We  rule  over 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ourselves,  which  is  the  best  kingdom  to  govern,  on  condition  of  saying,  "  Lord,  I 
cannot  rule  myself  ;  do  Thou  rule  me."     So  we  do  not  need  to  wait  for  heaven  to 
be  possessors  of  the  kingdom  that  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him. 
But  while  the  kingdom  is  present,  its  perfect  form  is  future.     They  used  to  say  that 
in  the  days  of  the  first  Napoleon  every  French  soldier  carried  a  field  marshal's 
baton  in  his  knapsack.     That  is  to  say,  every  one  of   them  had  the  chance  of 
winning  it,  and  many  of  them  did  win  it.    But  every  Christian  soldier  carries  a 
crown  in  his,  and  that  not  because  he  perhaps  may,  but  because  he  certainly  will, 
wear  it,  when  the  war  is  over,  if  he  stands  by  his  flag,  and  because  he  has  it  already 
an  actual  possession,  though  for  the  present  the  helmet  becomes  his  brow  rather 
than  the  diadem.     II.  The  common  road  to  that  common  royalty.    There  are  no 
short  cuts  nor  bye-paths  for  the  Christian  pilgrim.     There  is  "  tribulation  in 
Christ,"  as  surely  as  in  Him  there  are  peace  and  victory,  and  if  we  are  in  Christ 
we  shall  be  sure  to  get  our  share  of  it.    The  Christian  course  brings  new  difficulties 
and  trials  of  its  own,  and  throws  those  who  truly  out-and-out  adopt  it  mto  relations 
with  the  world  which  will  surely  lead  to  oppositions  and  pains.    It  has  not  ceased 
to  be  a  hard  thing  to  be  a  real  and  thorough  Christian.    The  law  is  unrepealed — 
"  If  we  suffer  with  Him,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him."    But  this  participation  in 
the  tribulation  that  is  in  Christ  has  another  and  gentler  aspect.     The  expression 
points  to  the  blessed  softening  of  our  hardest  trials  when  they  are  borne  in  union 
with  the  Man  of  Sorrows.    HI.  The  common  temper  in  which  the  common  road 
TO  THE  common  ROYALTY  IS  TO  BE  TRODDEN.     Patiencc  is  the  link,  so  to  speak, 
between  the  kingdom  and  the  tribulation.     Sorrow  does  not  of  itself  lead  to  the 
possession  of   the  kingdom.     All  depends  on  the  disposition  which  the  sorrow 
evokes,  and  the  way  in  which  it  is  borne.    We  may  take  our  sorrows  in  such  a 
fashion  as  to  be  driven  by  them  out  of  our  submission  to  Christ,  and  so  they  may 
lead  us  away  from  and  not  towards  the  kingdom.     The  worst  affliction  is  an 
affliction  wasted,  and  every  affliction  is  wasted  unless  it  is  met  with  patience,  and 
that  in  Christ  Jesus.    A  vivid  metaphor  underlies  the  word — that  of  the  fixed 
attitude  of  one  bearing  up  a  heavy  weight  or  pressure  without  yielding  or  being 
crushed.    Such  immovable  constancy  is  more  than  passive.    The  true  Christian 
patience  implies  continuance  in  well-doing,  besides  meek  acceptance  of  tribulation. 
The  first  element  in  it  is,  no  doubt,  unmurmuring  acquiescence  in  whatsoever 
affliction  from  God  or  man  beats  against  us  on  our  path.     But  the  second  is,  con- 
tinual effort  after  Christian  progress,  notwithstanding  the  tribulation.    The  storm 
must  not  blow  us  out  of  our  course.    We  must  still  "bear  up  and  steer  right 
onward,"  in  spite  of  all  its  force  on  our  faces,  or,  as  "  birds  of  tempest-loving  kind  " 
do,  so  spread  our  pinions  as  to  be  helped  by  it  towards  our  goal.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.B. ) 
The  efficiency  of  the  passive  virtues  : — Kingdom  and  patience !  a  very  singular  con- 
junction of  terms,  to  say  the  least,  as  if  in  Jesus  Christ  were  made  compatible 
authority  and  suffering,  the  impassive  throne  of  a  monarch  and  the  meek  subjection 
of  a  cross,  the  reigning  power  of  a  prince  and  the  mild  endurance  of  a  lamb.    What 
more  striking  paradox  !     And  yet  in  this  you  have  exactly  that  which  is  the  prime 
distinction  of  Christianity.    It  is  a  kingdom  erected  by  patience.    It  reigns  in  virtue 
of  submission.     Its  victory  and  dominion  are  the  fruits  of  a  most  peculiar  and 
singular  endurance.     We   too  commonly  take  up  the  impression  that  power  is 
measured  by  exertion  ;  that  we  are  effective  simply  because  of  what  we  do,  or  the 
noise  we  make ;  consequently,  that  when  we  are  not  in  exertion  of  some  kind,  we  are 
not  accomplishing  anything ;  and  that  if  we  are  too  humble,  or  poor,  or  infirm,  to 
be  engaged  in  great  works  and  projects,  there  is  really  nothing  for  us  to  do,  and  we 
are  living  to  no  purpose.    This  very  gross  and  wholly  mistaken  impression  I  wish  to 
remove,  by  showing  that  a  right  passivity  is  sometimes  the  greatest  and  most  effec- 
tive Christian  power,  and  that  if  we  are  brothers  and  companions  in  the  kingdom 
and  patience  of  Jesus,  we  are  likely  to  fulfil  the  highest  conception  of  the  Christian 
life.     Observe,  then,  first  of  all,  that  the  passive  and  submissive  virtues  are  most 
of  all  remote  from  the  exercise  or  attainment  of  those  who  are  out  of  the  Christian 
spirit  and  the  life  of  faith.    It  is  commonly  not  difficult  for  men  to  be  active  or 
even  bravely  so ;  but  when  you  come  to  the  passive  or  receiving  side  of  life,  here 
they  fail.     To  bear  evil  and  wrong,  to  forgive,  to  suffer  no  resentment  under  injury, 
to  be  gentle  when  nature  burns  with  a  fierce  heat  and  pride  clamours  for  redress, 
to  restrain  envy,  to  bear  defeat  with  a  firm  and  peaceful  mind,  not  to  be  vexed  or 
fretted  by  cares,  losses,  or  petty  injuries,  to  abide  in  contentment  and  serenity  of 
spirit  when  trouble  and  disappointment  come — these  are  conquests,  alas  how  difficult 
to  most  of  us  1  Accordingly  it  will  be  seen  that  a  true  Christian  man  is  distinguished 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  43 

from  other  men  not  so  much  by  his  beneficent  works  as  by  his  patience.     Consider 
also  more  distinctly  the  immense  power  of  principle  that  is  necessary  to  establish 
the  soul  in  these  virtues  of  endurance  and  patience.     Here  is  no  place  for  ambition, 
no  stimulus  of  passion,  such  as  makes  even  cowards  brave  in  the  field.    Here  are  no 
exploits  to  be  carried,  no  applauses  of  the  multitude  to  be  won.    The  disciple,  know- 
ing that  God  forgives  and  waits,  wants  to  be  like  Him ;  knowing  that  he  has  nothing 
himself  to  boast  of  but  the  shame  of  a  sinner,  wants  to  be  nothing,  and  prefers  to 
suffer  and  crucify  his  resentments,  and,  since  God  would  not  contend  with  him,  will 
not  contend  with  those  who  do  him  injury.     He  gets  the  power  of  his  patience 
wholly  from  above.     We  can  act  out  of  the  human,  but  to  suffer  well  requires  a 
participation  of  what  is  Divine.     Hence  the  impression  of  greatness  and  sublimity 
which  all  men  feel  in  the  contemplation  of  that  energy  which  is  itself  energised  by 
a  self-sacrificing  and  suffering  patience.     And  accordingly  there  is  no  power  over 
the  human  soul  and  character  so  effective  and  so  nearly  irresistible  as  this.     Notice 
again,  yet  more  distinctly,  what  will  add  a  yet  more  conclusive  evidence,  how  it  is 
chiefly  by  this  endurance  of  evil  that  Christ,  as  a  Kedeemer,  prevails  against  the  sin 
of  the  human  heart  and  subdues  its  enmity.     Just  upon  the  eve  of  what  we  call  His 
Passion,  He  says,  in  way  of  visible  triumph,  to  His  disciples,  "  The  prince  of  this 
world  is  judged  "  ;  as  if  the  kingdom  of  evil  were  now  to  be  crushed,  and  His  own 
new  kingdom  established  by  some  terrible  bolt  of  judgment  falling  on  His  adver- 
saries.   It  was  even  so ;  and  that  bolt  of  judgment  was  the  Passion  of  the  Cross. 
When  law  was  broken,  and  all  the  supports  of  authority  set  up  by  God's  majesty 
were  quite  torn  away,  God  brought  forth  a  power  greater  than  law,  greater  than 
majesty,  even  the  power  of  His  patience,  and  by  this  He  broke  for  ever  the  spirit  of 
evil  in  the  world.     The  new-creating  grace  of  Christianity  is  scarcely  more,  in  fact, 
than  a  Divine  application  of  the  principle,  that  when  nothing  else  can  subdue  an 
enemy  patience  sometimes  will.      Again,  it  is  important  to  notice  that  men,  as  being 
under  sin,  are  set  against  all  active  efforts  to  turn  them,  or  persuade  them  ;  but 
never  against  that  which  implies  no  effort — viz.,  the  gentle  virtues  of  patience. 
They  provoke  no  opposition,  because  they  are  not  put  forth  for  us,  but  for  their  own 
sake.     They  fix  our  admiration,  therefore,  win  our  homage,  and  melt  into  our  feeling. 
They  move  us  the  more,  because  they  do  not  attempt  to  move  us.     They  are  silent, 
empty  of  all  power  but  that  which  lies  in  their  goodness,  and  for  just  that  reason 
they  are  among  the  greatest  powers   that  Christianity  wields.     Once  more,  it  i& 
important  for  every  man,  when  he  will  cast  the  balance  between  the  powers  of  action 
and  of  passion,  or  when  he  will  discover  the  real  effectiveness  of  passive  good,  to 
refer  to  his  own  consciousness.     See  how  little  impression  is  often  made  upon  you 
by  the  most  strenuous  efforts  to  exert  influence  over  you,  and  then  how  often  you 
are  swayed  by  feelings  of  respect,  reverence,  admiration,  tenderness,  from  the  simple 
observation  of  one  who  suffers  well ;  receiving  injury  without  resentment,  gilding 
the  lot  of  poverty  and  privation  with  a  spirit  of  contentment  and  of  filial  trust  in 
God;  forgiving,  gentle,  unresisting,  peaceful,  and  strong,  under  great  storms  of 
affliction.    Let  every  Christian  carefully  observe  his  own  consciousness  here,  and 
he  will  be  in  the  least  possible  danger  of  disesteeming  patience  as  a  barren  or  sterile 
virtue,  or  of  looking  upon  effort  and  action  as  the  only  operative  and  fruitful 
Christian  powers.      Let  us  notice   some  of  the   instructive   and   practical  uses 
of  the  truth  illustrated.      1.  It  is  here  that  Christianity  makes  issue  with  the 
whole  world  on  the  question  of  human  greatness.      It   works  out  the  recovery 
of  transgressors  by  the  transforming  power  of  sacrifice.      And  so   it  establishes 
a  kingdom,  which  is  itself  the  reign  of  the  patience  of  Jesus.     The  whole  plan 
centres  in  this  one  principle,  that  the  suffering  side  of  character  has  a  power  of  its 
own,  superior  in  some  respects  to  the  most  active  endeavours.    And  in  this  it  proves 
its  originality  by  standing  quite  alone.     2.  The  office  of  the  Christian  martyrs  is 
here  explained.     We  look  back  upon  the  long  ages  of  woe,  the  martyr  ages  of  the 
Church,  and  we  behold  a  vast  array  of  active  genius  and  power,  that  could  not  be 
permitted  to  spend  itself  in  works  of  benefaction  to  the  race,  but  was  consecrated  of 
God  to  the  more  sacred  and  more  fruitful  grace  of  suffering.     The  design  was,  it 
would  seem,  to  prepare  a  Christly  past,  to  show  whole  ages  of  faith  populated  with 
men  who  were  able,  coming  after  their  Master  and  bearing  His  cross,  to  suffer  with 
Him,  and  add  their  human  testimony  to  His.     3.  We  see  in  this  subject  how  it  is 
that  many  persons  are  so  abundantly  active  in  religion  with  so  little  effect ;  while 
others  who  are  not  conspicuous  in  action  accomplish  so  much.     The  reason  is  that 
one  class  trust  mainly  to  the  virtues  of  action,  while  the  others  unite  also  the  virtues 
of  patience.     One  class  is  brother  and  companion  in  the  kingdom  and  works  oi 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Jesus,  the  other  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus.  4.  The  reason  why  we 
have  so  many  crosses,  trials,  wrongs,  and  pains,  is  here  made  evident.  We  have 
not  one  too  many  for  the  successful  culture  of  our  faith.  The  great  thing,  and  that 
which  it  is  most  of  all  difficult  to  produce  in  us,  is  a  participation  of  Christ's  for- 
giving, gentleness,  and  patience.  This,  if  we  can  learn  it,  is  the  most  difficult  and 
the  most  distinctively  Christian  of  all  attainments.  Therefore  we  need  a  continual 
discipline  of  occasions,  poverty,  sickness,  bereavements,  losses,  treacheries,  mis- 
representations, oppressions,  persecutions ;  we  can  hardly  have  too  many  for  our 
own  good,  if  only  we  receive  them  as  our  Saviour  did  His  cross.  {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
The  kinghood  of  patience  : — That  is  a  very  remarkable  phrase — ♦•  the  kingdom  and 
patience."  It  might  almost  seem  to  be  an  arbitrary  and  fanciful  phrase.  And  more 
than  this,  the  two  ideas  would  appear,  to  some  minds  at  least,  to  be  contradictory. 
Patience  does  not  appeal  to  such  minds  as  a  kingly  virtue,  but  rather  as  a  common- 
place quality  befitting  people  of  humbler  rank.  Impatience  is  somehow  conceived 
as  a  king's  privilege.  The  Bible  puts  this  whole  matter  directly  the  other  way. 
Kinghood,  instead  of  being  dissevered  from  patience,  is  bound  up  with  it :  the  kingly 
virtues  are  all  intertwined  with  patience  and  dependent  upon  it.  This  truth,  when 
we  come  to  examine  it,  is  not  confined  to  the  region  of  Scripture  or  of  religion.  It 
is,  in  part  at  least,  an  every-day,  business  truth.  It  is  a  familiar  enough  fact  that 
the  great  successes  of  the  world  have  been  won  by  hard  and  patient  work,  and  not 
by  inspired  flashes ;  and  we  are  beginning  to  have  greater  respect  for  the  power  of 
holding  on  than  for  the  power  of  brilliant  striking  out.  And,  as  in  so  many  cases, 
Christ  shows  us  how,  in  these  familiar  views,  we  have  gotten  hold  of  one  end  of  a 
truth  which  runs  up  through  the  whole  spiritual  economy ;  a  truth  which  takes  the 
form  of  a  principle :  patience  is  kinghood.  But  if  that  principle  is  to  commend 
itself  practically  to  mankind  it  must  be  incarnated.  Men  wUl  not  believe  it  on  the 
strength  of  mere  assertion.  In  Jesus  there  are  these  two  elements,  dominion  and 
patience.  Now,  I  ask  you  to  consider  the  peculiar  trial  of  patience  applied  to  a 
cultured  mind  and  a  pure  character  in  contact  with  dense  ignorance,  wicked  cruelty, 
intense  bigotry,  enormous  conceit,  and  personal  degradation  in  every  conceivable 
form.  Look  at  the  matter,  for  instance,  on  its  lowest  side.  Did  you  ever  do  a  full 
day's  work  in  a  hospital,  surrounded  from  morning  until  evening  with  the  sick  and 
wounded  and  dying  ?  If  you  have,  you  know  how  weary  in  body  you  were  when 
the  night  came.  And  yet  your  worst  experience  of  that  kind  was  but  a  faint  shadow 
of  many  days  in  Christ's  life,  especially  those  in  which  He  was  pressed  all  day  long 
by  that  fearful  oriental  crowd,  thrusting  their  various  ailments  upon  His  attention. 
Wise  and  good  men  who  devote  their  lives  to  the  ignorant  have  nevertheless  some 
compensation.  They  step  out  of  their  own  congenial  circle,  where  their  character 
and  thoughts  are  appreciated,  and  down  into  the  lower  circle ;  but  they  can  step  back 
again  at  intervals,  and  refresh  themselves  with  the  contact  and  sympathy  of  con- 
genial minds.  But  this  compensation  was  denied  Christ.  There  was,  indeed,  a 
small  band  that  loved  Him,  listened  to  Him,  and  believed  in  Him,  but  even  these 
could  sympathise  with  Him  only  to  a  very  small  extent.  Nothing  is  more  beautiful 
than  the  patience  of  Christ  as  related  to  His  uncompromising  fidelity  to  His  standard 
of  duty  and  of  truth :  His  holding  by  His  principles  while  He  holds  on  at  the  same 
time  to  those  slow,  backward  pupils  in  the  school  of  faith  and  of  self-sacrifice. 
Many  a  man,  by  his  severe  devotion  to  his  moral  ideals,  cuts  himself  loose  from 
other  men.  They  admire  his  courage  and  consistency,  but  refuse  to  follow  him  ; 
and  a  reason  for  this  is  often  found  in  his  impatience  with  their  slowness.  It  was 
the  patience  of  Christ  which  enabled  Him  to  bate  not  one  jot  of  His  high  claims 
and  at  the  same  time  to  lose  none  of  those  whom  the  Father  had  given  Him.  He 
could  mourn  over  slow  faith  and  uneducated  conscience  and  low  ideals  of  duty,  yet 
He  could  go  on  teaching,  and  continue  to  wait  long  and  patiently  while  they  toiled 
slowly  and  painfully  up  toward  His  higher  level.  Once  more  let  me  briefly  refer 
you  to  Christ's  patience  as  shown  in  His  method  of  securing  friends  and  helpers. 
Most  reformers,  in  their  zeal  to  secure  partisans,  are  willing  to  receive  them  under 
the  influence  of  momentary  enthusiasm.  They  are  willing  to  have  a  man  commit 
himself  while  his  reason  is  unconvinced  and  only  his  fancy  captivated.  You  cannot 
but  observe  how  Christ  guarded  against  this  mistake,  though  His  caution  doubtless 
cost  Him  many  followers.  He  had  patience  to  wait  for  followers  who  should 
embrace  His  cause  dehberately,  from  conviction ;  and  in  this  light  the  plainness  of 
His  statements  concerning  the  terms  and  consequences  of  His  service  are  worth 
noting.  Nothing  is  concealed.  And  now  I  should  like  to  dwell  upon  the  patience 
of  Clurist  as  shown  in  His  waiting.     Christ's  mission,  in  its  very  nature,  involved 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  45 

long,  patient  waiting.  It  was  the  mission  of  a  sower,  sowing  seed  of  slow  growth. 
The  harvest  of  Christ's  ideas  was  not  going  to  be  reaped  in  three  years  nor  in  a 
hundred.  He  knew  perfectly  that  He  should  return  from  earth  leaving  behind 
Him  almost  nothing  in  the  way  of  visible  results.  He  was  content  to  await  the  slow 
growth  of  the  gospel  seed ;  to  wait  for  the  consummation  of  a  sovereigrity  based  on 
the  spiritual  transformation  wrought  by  the  gospel.  His  course  in  this  stands  out 
as  the  sublimest  illustration  of  patience  in  all  time,  and  stamps  Him  as  the  true 
King  of  the  ages.  Christ,  therefore,  by  His  own  example,  no  less  than  by  His  word, 
commends  to  us  this  kingly  virtue  of  patience.  So,  then,  if  you  and  I  are  expecting 
to  win  moral  and  spiritual  dominion,  this  element  must  come  to  the  front  in  our 
lives.  Suppose  we  want  to  be  good,  truthful,  pure  in  heart,  single  in  purpose, 
Christlike  in  temper.  Are  these  things  wrought  in  us  on  the  instant  ?  No,  you  and 
I  know  it  is  not  so.  We  know  that  each  morning  we  wake  to  a  twofold  fight,  with 
the  world  outside  and  with  the  self  within.  God  help  us  if  patience  fail.  God  help 
us  if  there  be  not  something  within  which  keeps  firm  hold  of  the  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises  ;  which  will  not  suffer  faith  to  fail,  that  He  that  hath  begun 
a  good  work  wiU  perfect  it ;  which  is  not  disheartened  at  slow  progress,  and  which, 
spite  of  the  tears  and  the  dust,  keeps  our  faces  turned  toward  the  place  where  we 
know  the  crown  and  the  glory  are,  though  we  cannot  see  them.  So,  too,  like  Christ, 
we  have  a  work  to  do  among  men.  We  shall  not  do  it  without  patience.  We  must 
try  and  get  a  firmer  hold  of  the  great  principle  of  Christ's  life  :  "  not  to  be  ministered 
unto,  but  to  minister  "  ;  and  when  we  shall  have  gotten  it  clearly  into  our  minds 
that  our  main  purpose  in  life  is  not  to  be  blessed  by  the  world,  but  to  bless  the  world, 
then  we  shall  find  ourselves  on  the  road  where  every  day  and  every  hour  will  beget 
a  prayer  for  the  patience  of  Jesus  Christ.  Bearing,  waiting,  enduring — these  do 
not  seem  to  be  means  to  kinghood;  but  if  we  aim  at  spiritual  kinghood, 
dominion  over  our  hearts,  dominion  over  self,  dominion  over  character  —  the 
kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  —  that  and  that  only  is  the  way  to  it.  {M.  B. 
Vincent,  D.D.)  In  the  isle  that  is  called  Patmos.— Jo/in  in  Patmos  .-—When- 
ever a  man  is  sent  anywhere  for  the  Word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
Christ,  he  is  not  in  prison,  he  is  not  in  Patmos  only.  Jesus  Christ  said  ••  the  Son 
of  Man  who  is  in  heaven  "  at  the  very  moment  when  He  was  sitting  upon  the  earth 
and  was  visible  to  spectators ;  and  so  John  might  have  said — I  was  in  Patmos  yet 
I  was  in  heaven ;  in  the  body  I  was  confined  to  a  limited  island,  but  in  the  spirit  I 
was  with  my  Lord  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  skies,  lost  in  contemplation  and  adora- 
tion, and  preparing  to  return  to  the  earth  with  fuller  equipment  as  a  gospel  preacher. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  influence  of  solitude  and  suffering  upon  a  Christian  life  : — 
I.  To  MAKE  IT  TRULY  SYMPATHETIC.  "  I  Johu,  who  also  am  your  brother."  U.  To 
MAKE  IT  INTENSELY  SAD.  "  And  Companion  in  tribulation."  Not  even  aged  apostles 
are  exempt  from  sorrow.  But  while  in  this  solitude,  St.  John  was  not  wholly  occu- 
pied with  his  own  suffering ;  he  remembered  that  of  his  fellow  Christians.  The 
companionship  of  pain  will  merge  into  the  companionship  of  praise.  HI.  To  make 
IT  SUPREMELY  GODLY.  "  And  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ."  FV.  To 
MAKE  IT  DEEPLY  CONSCIOUS  OF  ITS  INNOCENCE.  "  For  the  Word  of  God,  and  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  A  consciousness  of  rectitude  is  always  a  soul-sustaining 
influence  in  periods  of  trial.  V.  To  make  it  subserve  the  Divine  purpose.  "  What 
thou  seest  write  in  a  book."  God  can  make  the  wrath  of  persecutors,  the  tribula- 
tions of  saints,  to  praise  Him.  Lessons :  1.  That  wicked  men  have  a  strange 
power  of  rendering  sad  the  lives  of  the  good.  2.  That  loneliness  may  augment  the 
eflficiency  of  ministerial  work.  3.  That  the  common  sufferings  of  the  Christian 
life  should  have  a  uniting  tendency.  4.  That  God  gives  bright  visions  to  tried  saints. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Solitude  for  Christ :— 1.  See  here  how  far  graceless  and 
profane  persecutors  may  prevail  against  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Solitari- 
ness for  Christ  is  not  the  worst  condition.  Christ  can  make  up  that  another  way, 
and  if  there  be  a  necessity  of  withdrawing  men  from  their  duty  :  neither  doth  John 
lose  anything  by  his  banishment ;  for  he  finds  more  intimate  communion  with 
Christ,  and  gets  more  of  His  mind  :  nor  doth  the  Church  lose  anything  by  it ;  for 
she  gets  this  revelation  of  God's  mind.  If  we  believed  this  we  would  never  go  out 
of  God's  way  to  make  up  His  work  :  for  if  He  please  to  lay  us  by  He  knows  how  to 
make  up  that  both  to  ourselves  and  God's  people.  The  Christian  Church  is  as 
much  beholden  to  Paul's  imprisonment  in  epistles,  as  to  his  liberty  in  preaching. 
3.  Honest  suffering  for  Christ  hath  often  with  it  the  clearest  manifestations  of 
Christ.  Folks  that  will  continue  faithful  and  bide  by  their  duty  through  sufferings, 
they  shall  not  only  not  be  losers  but  gainers  (1  Pet.  iv.  14).     {James  Durham.)        I 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

was  in  the  Spirit. — St  John  in  the  Spirit  in  Patmos  : — 1.  To  be  in  the  Spirit  is  to 
possess  the  Spirit.  2.  The  second  thing  referred  to  is  the  time  of  the  vision  : 
*'  The  Lord's  Day."  It  is  His  Day  because  it  is  the  day  of  His  Divine  appoint- 
ment. This  is  the  day  which  the  Lord  hath  made ;  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice 
in  it.  And  it  is  His  day  because  He  is  the  subject  of  it.  His  personal  glory  ; 
His  victory  and  triumph  over  death  and  the  grave  ;  His  holding  the  keys  of  heU  and 
of  death;  from  the  subjects  of  holy  meditation  on  this  blessed  day.  {J.  Young.) 
Inspiring  injluences  : — I.  The  Lord's  Day.  All  days  are  His,  but  this  belongs  to 
Him  by  special  right.  1.  It  is  the  memorial  of  His  resurrection.  2.  It  eternises 
the  sabbatic  ideal.  A  day  of  fulfilment,  completion,  and  rest.  3.  It  is  the  earnest 
of  the  ultimate  enfranchisement  of  the  race.  A  day  of  enlarged  liberty  and  not  of 
more  stringent  bondage.  II.  The  Spirit's  Day.  1.  It  "  takes  of  the  things  of 
Christ"  and  shows  them  unto  us.  2.  The  entire  being  is  uplifted  and  trans- 
formed. Inspiration  is  no  fruitless  ecstacy,  no  mere  festival  of  the  emotions; 
it  is  full  of  practical  impulse,  intellectual  enlightenment,  and  moral  purifica- 
tion. 3.  Only  "in  the  Spirit "  can  the  Lord's  Day,  especially  the  great  Easter 
Day,    be   fully   and   profitably   observed.      [St.    J.    A.    Frere,    M.A)  On  the 

Lord's  Day. — The  Lord's  Day  : — What  is  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  "  the 
Lord's  Day"?  Does  it  mean  the  day  of  judgment?  Such  a  meaning  would 
not  serve  St.  John's  purpose  here.  He  is  plainly  giving  the  date  of  his  great  vision, 
not  the  scene  to  which  it  introduced  him.  Does  it,  then,  mean  the  annual  feast  of 
our  Lord's  resurrection  from  the  dead,  our  Easter  Day  ?  That  day,  as  we  know 
from  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  was  observed  in  apostolic  times.  But  it  could 
hardly  have  served  for  a  date  ;  because  in  those  days,  as  for  some  time  afterwards, 
there  were  different  opinions  in  the  Church  as  to  the  day  on  which  properly  it 
ought  to  be  kept.  Does  the  phrase,  then,  mean  the  Sabbath  Day  of  the  Mosaic 
Law  ?  God  calls  the  Sabbath  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  "  My  holy  day."  And 
the  language  of  the  fourth  commandment,  "  the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the 
Lord  thy  God,"  might  well  seem  to  justify  the  expression.  But  there  is  no  known 
instance  in  the  New  Testament  of  the  Sabbath  being  alluded  to  except  by  its  own 
name,  "  the  Sabbath."  If  St.  John  had  meant  the  Sabbath,  or  seventh  day  of  the 
week,  he  would  certainly  have  used  the  word  "  Sabbath."  He  would  not  have  used 
another  word  which  the  Christian  Church,  from  the  days  of  the  apostles  downwards, 
has  applied  not  to  the  seventh  day  of  the  week,  but  to  the  first.  There  is  indeed  no 
real  reason  for  doubting  that  by  "  the  Lord's  Day  "  St.  John  meant  the  first  day  of 
the  week,  or,  as  we  should  say,  Sunday.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  made  that 
day,  in  a  special  sense.  His  own,  by  rising  on  it  from  the  dead,  and  by  connecting  it 
with  His  first  six  appearances  after  His  resurrection.    I.  The    first   principle 

EMBODIED  IN  THE  OBSERVANCE  OF  THE  LoRD'S  DaY  IS  THE  DUTY  OF  CONSECRATING 
A    CERTAIN    PORTION    OF    TIME,    AT     LEAST     ONE    SEVENTH,    TO    THE    SERVICE    OF    GOD. 

This  principle  is  common  to  the  Jewish  Sabbath  and  to  the  Christian  Lord's  Day. 
"  Remember  that  thou  keep  holy  the  Sabbath  Day."  "  Keep  the  day  holy  " — con- 
secrate it — so  the  precept  runs.  Such  a  consecration  implies  two  things.  It  implies 
a  separation  of  the  thing  consecrated  from  all  others,  and  a  communication  to  it  of 
a  quality  of  holiness  or  purity  which  it  had  not  before.  The  day  is  to  be  unlike 
other  days,  and  it  is  also  to  be  marked  by  some  positive  characteristics  which 
shonld  proclaim  its  dedication  to  God.  Now,  to  this  idea  of  a  special  consecration 
of  a  section  of  time,  it  is  sometimes  objected  that  in  a  true  Christian  life  all  time  is 
already  consecrated.  Does  not  this  consecration  of  a  section  of  time  ignore  the 
obligation  to  a  service  which  knows  no  limits?  The  answer  is,  that  the  larger 
obligation  of  love  is  not  ignored  because  the  smaller  obligation  of  duty  is  insisted 
on.  All  a  Christian's  time  is,  properly,  consecrated  time.  But,  practically,  in 
many  cases,  none  at  all  would  be  consecrated,  unless  an  effort  were  made  to  mark  a 
certain  portion  of  it  off  by  a  special  consecration.  And  apart  from  its  importance 
in  the  life  of  a  servant  of  God,  the  public  setting  apart  of  a  certain  measure  of  time 
to  God's  service,  is  a  witness  to  God's  claims  borne  before  the  world,  calculated  to 
strike  the  imaginations  of  men.  Such  an  observance  makes  room  for  the  thought 
of  God  amidst  the  pressing  importunities  of  business  and  enjoyment.    II.  A  second 

PRINCIPLE     REPRESENTED     IN    THE    LoRD'B    DaY    18    THE    PERIODICAL    SUSPENSION     OP 

HUMAN  TOIL.  This  principle  is  closely  connected  with  that  of  the  consecration  of 
time.  In  order  to  make  the  day,  by  this  particular  prohibition,  unlike  other  days  ; 
in  order  to  make  room  for  the  acknowledgment  of  God  on  it,  ordinary  occupations 
are  suspended.  Here  we  have  a  second  principle  which  is  common  to  the  Jewish 
Sabbath  and  to  the  Christian  Lord's  Day.     In  the  Old  Testament  a  variety  of 


CHAP.  I.  ]  RE  VELA  TION.  47 

particular  occupations  are  expressly  forbidden  on  the  Sabbath — sowing  and  reaping, 
gathering  wood,  kindling  a  fire  for  cooking,  holding  markets,  all  kinds  of  trade, 
pressing  grapes,  carrying  burdens  of  all  kinds ;  and  in  a  later  age  the  Pharisees  and 
the  lawyers  added  very  largely  to  these  prohibitions.  It  was  against  the  Pharisaic 
perversions  of  the  Sabbath  that  our  Lord  protested  both  by  act  and  word,  remind- 
ing His  countrymen  that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  the  moral  good  of  man,  and 
not  man  for  the  later  legal  theory  of  the  Sabbath.  But  the  broad  principle  of 
abstinence  from  labour,  however  it  was  caricatured  in  the  later  Jewish  practice,  was 
itself  a  sacred  principle,  and  it  passed  on  as  such  into  the  Christian  observance  of 
the  Lord's  Day.  Thus  the  Sabbath  and  the  Lord's  Day  agree  in  affirming  two 
principles,  the  hallowing  of  a  seventh  part  of  time,  and  the  obligation  of  abstinence 
from  servile  work  on  one  day  in  seven.  But  are  they  identical  ?  May  we  rightly, 
scripturally,  call  the  Lord's  Day  the  Sabbath  ?  These  questions  must  be  answered 
in  the  negative.  The  Jewish  Sabbath  and  the  Christian  Lord's  Day,  whQe  agreeing 
in  affirming  two  principles,  dififer  in  two  noteworthy  respects.  First,  they  differ,  as 
has  already  been  implied,  in  being  kept  on  distinct  days.  The  change  was  made 
because  there  was  an  imperative  reason  for  making  it.  For  the  Lord's  Day  and  the 
Sabbath  differ,  secondly,  in  the  reason  or  motive  for  observing  them.  The  Sabbath 
is  the  weekly  commemoration  of  the  rest  of  God  after  creation.  It  brought  before 
the  mind  of  the  Jew  the  ineffable  majesty  of  the  great  Creator,  between  whom  and 
the  noblest  work  of  His  hands  there  yawns  an  impassable  abyss.  Now,  the 
Christian  motive  of  observing  the  Lord's  Day  is  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the 
dead.  That  truth  is  to  the  Christian  creed  what  the  creation  of  the  world  out  of 
nothing  is  to  the  Jewish  creed.  It  is  the  fundamental  truth  on  which  all  else  that 
is  distinctively  Christian  rests ;  and  it  is  just  as  much  put  forward  by  the  Christian 
apostles  as  is  the  creation  of  all  things  out  of  nothing  by  the  Jewish  prophets. 
The  Jewish  Sabbath  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  the  Lord's  Day  as  does  circum- 
cision to  Christian  baptism ;  as  does  the  Paschal  Lamb  to  the  Holy  Communion ; 
as  does  the  law  in  general  to  the  gospel.  It  is  a  shadow  of  a  good  thing  to  come. 
It  is  only  perpetuated  by  being  transfigured,  or  rather  it  is  so  transfigured  as  to 
have  parted  with  its  identity.  The  spiritual  consecration  of  a  seventh  part  of 
time,  the  abstinence  from  labour,  these  remain ;  but  the  spirit,  the  governing 
motive  of  the  day,  is  fundamentally  changed.  III.  But  here  a  third,  and  a  last 
principle,  comes  forward,  which  is  embodied  by  the  day.  And  this  third  principle 
is,  THE  NECESsruY  OF  THE  PUBLIC  woBSHip  OF  GoD.  The  ccssation  of  ordinary 
work  is  not  enjoined  upon  Christians,  only  that  they  may  while  away  the  time,  or 
spend  it  in  self -pleasing  or  in  something  worse.  The  Lord's  Day  is  the  day  of  days, 
on  which  Jesus  our  Lord  has  a  first  claim.  On  this  great  day  every  instructed  and 
believing  Christian  thinks  of  Him  as  completing  the  work  of  our  redemption,  as 
vindicating  His  character  as  a  teacher  of  absolute  truth,  as  triumphing  publicly 
over  His  enemies,  as  conquering  death  in  that  nature  which  had  always  hitherto 
been  subject  to  the  empire  of  death,  as  deigning,  now  that  He  has  overcome  the 
sharpness  of  death,  to  "  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  And  when 
the  religious  obligations  of  the  day  have  been  complied  with,  there  are  duties  of 
human  kindliness  which  may  well  find  a  place  in  kind  deeds  and  words  to  friends, 
in  visits  to  the  sick,  in  acts  of  consideration  for  the  poor ;  all  of  these  are  in  keeping 
with  the  spirit  of  the  day.  Above  all,  the  day  should  be  made — mark  it  well, 
parents  and  guardians — a  bright,  as  well  as  a  solemn  day,  for  children — first 
solemn,  but  then  and  always  bright ;  so  that  in  after  life  they  may  look  back  on  the 
Sundays  of  childhood  as  on  the  happiest  days  of  youth.  Among  the  thoughts  which 
Sunday,  more  than  other  days,  brings  to  us  is  the  memory  of  those  whom  we  have 
known  and  loved,  and  who  have  passed  away — the  memory  of  the  dead.  We  do 
well  to  make  the  most  of  these  thoughts.  They  are  sent  to  us  from  above  to  enable 
us  to  prepare,  after  our  measure,  and  by  God's  grace,  to  follow.  But,  as  I  have 
said,  the  mental  atmosphere  of  a  true  Christian,  on  Sunday  especially,  is  above  all 
things  an  atmosphere  of  worship.  He  may  think  it  right  and  reverent  to  say 
little ;  but  the  day  says  to  him  from  its  early  dawn,  "  Lift  up  thy  heart,"  and  his 
answer  is,  "I  lift  it  up  unto  the  Lord."  He  is,  in  his  way,  like  St.  John,  •'  in  the 
Spirit."  He  sees  the  higher  and  the  everlasting  realities ;  he  measures  earth  against 
heaven,  and  time  against  eternity,  and  poor,  weak  man  against  the  almighty  and 
everlasting  Creator.  Sundays  such  as  these  are  to  the  human  life  like  shafts  in  a 
long  tunnel—  they  admit  at  regular  intervals  light  and  air ;  and,  though  we  pass 
them  all  too  soon,  their  helpful  influence  does  not  vanish  with  the  day.  It 
furnishes  us  with  strength  and  light  for  the  duties  which  await  us,  and  makes  it 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

easier  to  follow  loyally  the  road  which  God's  loving  providence  may  have  traced  for 
each  one  of  us,  on  towards  our  eternal  home.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  Christian'g 
Sabbath : — I.  A    delightful    encouragement    to    those    who    are    the    Lord's 

PRISONERS,  AND  WHO  ARE  HINDERED,  IN  THE  MYSTERIOUS  WISDOM  OF  HiS  PROVI- 
DENCE,    FROM    ATTENDING    PUBLIC     WORSHIP    ON    THE     CHRISTIAN     SaBBATH.      But    the 

example  of  the  beloved  John  hath,  in  the  next  place,  a  manifest  application  to 
those  who  are  permitted  to  enjoy  the  privileges  of  public  worship.    II.  It  is  their 

DUTY  TO  BE    IN  THE   SPIRIT  ON   THE  LoRD'S  DaY,  AND  IN   HiS   HOUSE   OF  PRAYER.      III. 

The  danger  of  those  who  neglect  the  privilege  of  Sabbath  ordinances,  and 
forsake  the  assembling  of  themselves  together  in  the  house  of  prayer.  did  it 
ever  occur  to  you  why  the  Creator  made  man  in  His  own  image  and  likeness,  on  the 
evening  before  the  Sabbath  ?  Let  me  say  that  surely  it  was  thus  done  in  order  that 
His  gifted  creature  might  forthwith  enter  upon  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath ;  that 
he  might  begin  his  life  with  that  worship  of  the  Most  High  which  was  the  chief  end 
of  his  being.  It  is  related  concerning  one  of  the  richest  mines  of  Peru,  that 
thousands  passed  over  it  without  noticing  the  wealth  beneath  their  feet,  until  at 
length  a  poor  Indian,  just  falling  down  a  precipice,  snatched  at  a  bush  to  save  his 
life,  an^  exposed  a  mass  of  ore,  of  which  it  appeared  that  the  whole  surface  of  the 
mountain  was  composed.  If  ye  had  attended  in  the  house  of  prayer,  and  caught  at 
the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  the  treasures  of  the  love  of  Christ  would  have  been 
discovered,  and  they  would  have  made  you  rich  indeed.  (R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.) 
St.  John's  view  of  the  Sabbath  rest : — This  in  truth  is  not  his  thought  at  aU.  His 
primary  question  is,  not  what  he  shall  see,  but  whether  he  shall  be  fit  for  the  sight. 
The  arduous  part  of  the  work  to  him  is  not  the  opening  of  heaven  nor  the  revelation 
of  heaven ;  it  is  the  preparation  for  heaven.  He  feels  that  what  he  needs  before  all 
things  is  the  spirit  of  the  sabbath.  The  question  now  is,  What  in  the  view  of 
St.  John  is  the  spirit  of  the  Lord's  day — that  spirit  which  the  seer  regards  as 
essential  and  preliminary  to  any  rending  of  the  veil  between  earth  and  heaven. 
Every  anniversary  day  requires  its  appropriate  spirit.  Without  that  spirit,  nothing 
which  hj^ens  outside  will  reveal  anything  to  the  spectator.  The  day  of  a  Queen's 
jubilee  requires  the  spirit  of  loyalty ;  without  this,  no  streaming  of  flags  will  convey 
it  to  the  eye,  no  blast  of  trumpets  will  communicate  it  to  the  ear.  The  day  which 
commemorates  a  victory  needs  the  spirit  of  patriotism ;  without  this  the  roll  of 
artillery  is  all  in  vain.  The  day  which  keeps  the  anniversary  of  Shakespeare's 
birth  demands  the  spirit  of  poetry ;  without  this  the  banquet  has  no  significance. 
The  sabbath  is  in  John's  view  also  an  anniversary.  It  is  the  anniversary  of  creation 
and  resurrection.  It,  too,  can  only  be  understood  by  its  appropriate  spirit.  What 
is  the  appropriate  spirit  of  this  day  as  it  appears  to  the  seer  of  Patmos  ?  Do  we 
find  in  this  passage  any  trace  of  the  thought  which  lay  beneath  the  words,  and 
•which  led  him  to  connect  the  visions  of  his  book  with  the  breath  of  the  seventh 
morning  ?  I  think  we  do.  I  believe  that,  if  we  join  the  second  clause  of  the  verse 
to  the  first,  we  shall  reach  a  luminous  understanding  of  the  idea  which  dominated 
the  mind  of  the  apostle,  '*  I  was  in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and  heard  behind 
me  a  great  voice  as  of  a  trumpet."  I  take  the  explanatory  clause  to  be  the  hearing 
of  the  trumpet  behind  him.  The  idea  is  clearly  that  of  retrospect,  looking  back. 
Now,  John's  ideal  of  the  sabbath  rest  is  that  of  a  satisfied  past.  It  is  the  ability  to 
look  back  and  say,  "  It  was  all  very  good."  Now,  this  view  of  the  sabbath  rest  is 
borne  out  both  by  the  Old  Testament  and  by  the  New.  In  the  book  of  Genesis  it 
is  described  as  God's  rest  from  creation ;  but  it  is  a  retrospective  rest.  It  is  not 
the  joy  of  prospect  but  the  joy  of  memory.  It  is  the  looking  back  upon  the  work 
that  has  been  done,  and  finding  that  it  has  been  done  well,  "  God  saw  everything 
that  He  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good."  In  the  New  Testament  the 
day  has  the  significance  of  a  triumph.  It  is  the  rest  of  the  soldier  who  has  fought 
the  battle  and  ascended  up  on  high  leading  captivity  captive.  Yet  here  again  it  is 
a  retrospective  rest.  It  is  the  triumph  of  a  work  done.  The  spirit  of  the  Lord's 
day  is  the  spirit  of  retrospective  rest.  We  come  next  to  ask.  What  is  it  that 
renders  this  the  fitting  spirit  for  the  Apocalypse  ?  We  often  think  that  our  chief 
desire  in  seeking  the  rending  of  the  veil  is  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  future.  In  that 
we  deceive  ourselves.  No  man  would  be  satisfied  with  such  a  revelation  if  he  got 
it  to-morrow.  We  want,  not  mainly  a  sight  of  the  future,  but  a  sight  of  the  past. 
The  desire  of  man  in  this  world  is  not  simply  to  feel  that  in  another  world  it  wiU 
be  all  right  with  him.  He  wants  to  feel  that  it  is  all  right  now.  His  hope  is  that 
in  a  future  life  the  clouds  of  this  will  be,  not  simply  rolled  away,  but  explained. 
This  was  John's  vision.    He  put  himself  in  the  spirit  of  the  Lord's  day.    He 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  49 

conceived  himself  to  be  standing  in  the  seventh  morning  of  creation,  and  looking 
back.  He  heard  a  trumpet  behind  him — the  voice  of  the  vindicating  past  proclaim- 
ing that  it  was  all  very  good ;  and  it  was  the  sabbath  of  his  soul.  Now,  I  believe 
that  psychologically  St.  John  is  right.  I  think  that  to  our  age,  even  more  than 
to  his,  the  greatest  religious  rest  in  the  world  is  that  which  comes  from  the 
retrospect  of  history.  {G.  Matheson,  D.D.)  The  Christianas  Sabbath  : — I.  As 
A  DAY  or  Divine  sanction.  1.  The  sanctification  of  the  day  of  our  Lord's 
resurrection  by  the  new-covenant  Church  was  prophetically  notified  by  David 
when  he  wrote  Psalm  cxviii.  22-24.  2.  The  example  of  the  apostles  and  early 
Christians  carries  with  it  the  weight  of  conclusive  authority.  3.  The  usefulness 
with  which  the  observance  of  the  Christian  Sabbath  has  been  attended  is  a 
full  ratification  of  all  it  has  claimed.  II.  As  a  day  of  holy  employment.  1.  The 
Sabbath  should  be  hallowed  by  the  cessation  of  secular  business  and  toil.  In  this 
respect  it  should  strictly  answer  to  the  signification  of  its  name,  and  be  a  day  of 
rest.  2.  The  Sabbath  should  be  hallowed  by  the  careful  avoidance  of  all  frivolities, 
and  all  pleasures  which  do  not  advance  the  spiritual  welfare.  3.  The  Sabbath 
should  be  hallowed  by  devotional  attendance  on  the  public  worship  of  God.  Nor 
must  you  imagine  that  an  occasional  attendance  on  the  engagements  of  public 
worship  is  an  adequate  discharge  of  obligation.  To  be  regular,  to  be  punctual,  to  be 
devout — these  must  characterise  your  habits  in  the  service  of  your  God.  4.  The 
Sabbath  should  be  hallowed  by  performance  of  the  relative  and  private  duties  of 
religion.  III.  As  a  day  of  Christian  gladness  and  anticipation.  1.  Gladness, 
on  this  blessed  season,  must  inspire  every  Christian  mind.  A  source  of  joy  exists 
in  the  events  it  commemorates.  2.  Anticipation  necessarily  arises  out  of  the 
nature  of  the  institution.  The  Sabbath  is  emphatically,  as  it  always  has  been,  a 
type.  We  anticipate,  from  the  rest  of  the  Sabbath,  that  age  so  earnestly  desired, 
when  religion  shall  have  completed  her  triumphs.  '•  The  Lord's  Day  "  is  a  distinct 
memorial  of  the  period,  when  the  latter  glory  shall  dawn ;  and  when  the  incense  of 
pure  worship  shall  be  offered  to  the  living  God  from  every  kindred  and  tongue 
and  people.  {J.  Parsons.)  Heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet. — 
A  great  voice  as  of  a  trumpet : — 1.  What  John  heard.  It  was  "  a  voice."  It  was 
not  a  mere  sound,  but  it  was  a  voice.  Words  are  the  expression  of  thoughts,  the 
language  of  mind,  the  utterance  of  the  heart,  and  the  wishes  of  the  soul ;  they  are 
the  medium  of  mental  and  moral  communication  of  man  with  man,  of  mind  with 
mind.  The  voice  of  God  is  the  utterance  of  His  will,  the  revelation  of  His  mercy, 
and  the  medium  of  Divine  communication  with  man.  2.  Whose  voice  was  this  he 
heard  ?  It  was  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man,  a  brother  and  a  friend.  It  was  a 
voice  infinitely  gracious,  unutterably  tender,  full  of  compassion.  3.  What  was  the 
voice  which  the  prophet  heard  ?  It  was  "  a  great  voice."  (1)  It  was  great  in  its 
author,  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour.  (2)  It  was  great  in  its  nature,  its  power 
and  excellence,  magnitude  and  mystery.  (3)  It  was  great  in  its  subject,  the  plans 
and  arrangements  of  providence  and  grace.  (4)  It  was  great  in  its  design,  to  arouse 
the  regards  of  a  slumbering  world.  4.  What  the  voice  resembled.  It  was  "  as  of  a 
trumpet."  It  was  not  a  mere  sound,  but  an  articulate  voice.  It  was  as  the  voice  of 
a  trumpet,  sonorous,  powerful,  solemn,  and  majestic ;  gracious,  awful,  clear,  and 
commanding ;  giving  forth  a  distinct  and  certain  sound.  It  was  as  the  trumpet  of 
the  God  of  Israel,  the  symbol  of  His  presence.  5.  Whence  the  voice  came:  "I 
heard  a  voice  behind  me."  It  came  from  behind  as  the  voice  of  a  Watchman, 
whose  eye  never  slumbers,  whose  eye  never  sleeps.  It  came  from  behind  as  the 
voice  of  a  Teacher  :  "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers ;  and  thine  ears  shall  hear 
a  word  behind  thee,  saying.  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye 
turn  to  the  right  hand,  or  when  ye  turn  to  the  left."  {J.  Young.)  Voices 
and  visions  from  eternity : — I.  A  wonderful  voice  from  eternity  comes  to 
MAN.  1.  The  voice  was  marked  by  clearness.  2.  By  fulness.  Is  there  any  voice 
in  nature  equal  to  the  voice  of  the  old  ocean — majestic,  full,  continuous,  drowning 
all  other  sounds?  H.  A  wonderful  personage  from  eternity  appears  to  man.  1. 
The  scene  of  the  appearance.  2.  Its  characteristics.  (1)  Koyalty.  (2)  Purity. 
(3)  Penetration.  (4)  Firmness.  (5)  Dominion.  (6)  Victory.  (7)  Brightness. 
III.  A  wonderful  impression  from  eternity  is  made  upon  man.  What  wore 
John's  emotions  ?  Was  there  amazement  at  seeing  One  whom  he  loved  above  all 
others,  and  with  whom  he  had  parted,  some  thirty  years  before  ?  Was  it  dread  ? 
Was  he  terror-struck  at  the  marvellous  apparition  ?  Was  it  remorse  ?  Did  the 
effulgence  of  its  purity  quicken  within  him  such  a  sense  of  guilt  as  filled  him  with 
self-loathing  and  horror  ?    Perhaps  all  these  emotions  blended  in  a  tidal  rush  that 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

physically  paralysed  him  for  a  while.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  What  thou  seest, 
write  in  a  hook. — The  two  Bibles  (with  Heb.  x.  16) : — Here  are  two  Bibles,  two 
Divine  books.  The  first  passage  refers  to  God's  writing  through  man  upon  parch- 
ment ;  this  constitutes  the  book  which  we  commonly  call  the  Bible.  The  second 
passage  refers  to  God's  writing  through  the  Bible  by  His  Spirit  on  the  human 
soul.  Christianity  in  human  life  is  better  than  Christianity  in  cold  ink.  Why  ? 
I.  Because  it  contains  the  Divine  things,  the  other  only  contains  the  symbols. 
Divine  virtues  are  not  in  the  letter  press,  they  are  only  represented  there.  But  in  the 
Christly  Ufe  they  themselves  are  breathing,  operative,  soul-fashioning  forces.  II. 
Because  it  is  the  end  of  culture,  the  other  only  the  means.  When  men  get  into 
them  the  true  spiritual  graces,  the  moral  principles  and  temper  of  Christ,  they  have 
realised  the  end  of  Divine  training.  The  paper  Bible  is  the  means  of  this.  III. 
Because  it  is  self-obvious,  the  other  requires  explanation.  A  Christly  life  is  a 
Bible  that  a  child  can  read,  that  men  of  all  tribes  and  languages  can  interpret. 
Not  so  with  the  paper  Bible,  it  contains  many  things  "  hard  to  be  understood." 
IV.  Because  it  is  imperishable,  the  other  is  temporary.  The  principles  of 
truth,  love,  and  goodness  that  are  written  on  the  human  soul  are  not  only 
indestructible  in  themselves,  but  the  substance  on  which  they  are  written  is  inde- 
structible, it  is  eternal  life.  Conclusion :  Prize  the  paper  Bible  by  all  means,  but 
don't  superstitiously  worship  it.  Prize  the  Christly  life,  it  is  greater  than  aU 
Uterature.  {Homilist.)  Christian  authorship  in  its  higher  moods  : — I.  That  rr 
writes  upon  a  heavenly  suggestion.  "  What  thou  seest  write  in  a  book."  1.  It 
does  not  write  merely  upon  the  suggestion  of  some  interesting  topic.  2.  It  does 
not  write  for  the  desire  of  popular  authorship.  3.  It  does  not  write  in  the  hope  of 
financial  remuneration.  4.  It  writes  upon  the  prompting  of  a  Divine  impulse.  II. 
That  it  RECORDS  celestial  visions.  1.  It  does  not  record  the  fancies  of  fiction.  2.  It 
does  not  record  the  vagaries  of  philosophy.  3.  It  records  the  higher  moral  experiences 
of  the  soul.  III.  That  it  writes  for  the  moral  instruction  of  the  Church. 
"  And  send  it  unto  the  seven  Churches  which  are  in  Asia."  1.  The  Church  needs 
the  instruction  of  Christian  authorship.  2.  Christ  requires  that  Christian  author- 
ship should  seek  the  moral  good  of  the  Church,  Lessons: — 1.  God  commands 
good  men  to  write  books  for  the  welfare  of  the  Church.  2.  Let  men  seek  the  higher 
moods  of  authorship.  3.  Let  us  cultivate  an  experience  of  soul  worthy  of  record. 
{Joseph  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Christ  and  literature: — The  first  century  of  our  era 
was  by  no  means  an  unlettered  age.  Yet  there  is  no  point  in  which  the  contrast 
between  the  first  century  and  the  nineteenth  is  more  striking  than  the  place 
that  literature  takes.  Now  reading  is  not  confined  to  a  cultivated  circle :  it  is 
a  universal  acquisition.  This  diffused  power  of  literature  is  of  very  modern  growth  : 
its  origin  was  in  the  invention  of  printing  four  hundred  years  ago,  and  its 
stalwart  youth  to-day  is  due  simply  to  the  cheapening  of  paper  and  the  improve- 
ments in  the  processes  of  production.  Its  future  is  altogether  incalculable.  Now 
this  vast  change  in  the  habits  and  the  conditions  of  the  world  necessarily  creates 
a  number  of  problems  which  could  not  be  alluded  to  in  the  New  Testament, 
such  problems  as  ihese :  How  should  we  read  ?  What  should  we  read  ?  How  are 
we  to  regard  printed  matter  ?  What  principles  should  regulate  us  in  the  use  of  it  ? 
Now  it  is  to  be  observed  that  though  the  Bible  can  give  no  direct  answer  to  these 
questions,  the  Bible  by  its  very  existence  is  in  a  certain  sense  the  euggestion  of  an 
answer:  for  this  ancient  book  is  a  proof  that  from  the  very  beginning  God  laid 
claim  to  the  human  faculty  of  reading  and  writing  for  His  own  purposes.  We  find 
Jesus  Christ  in  the  text  claiming  the  pen  of  a  certain  man  in  order  that  He  may 
communicate  with  men  through  ages  to  come.  From  the  recognition  of  this  fact  I 
want  to  pass  to  a  very  broad  and  general  statement.  Looking  at  the  whole  mass  of 
printed  and  written  matter  with  which  the  world  at  the  present  day  teems,  I  propose 
that  we  should  divide  it  into  two  parts,  and  of  the  one  part  we  should  say  :  "  This 
is  such  that  Christ  said,  or  might  have  said,  *  Write  it,'  such  as  He  could  approve 
and  use,  and  that  is  such  that  you  could  not  possibly  conceive  Him  saying,  either 
'Write  or  read  it,'  such  that  it  could  have  no  imprimatur  of  His,  and  stands 
condemned  in  the  light  of  His  countenance."  That  stern  edict  of  the  Caliph 
Omar,  commanding  the  library  at  Alexandria  to  be  burnt,  because,  as  he  said,  "  If 
it  contains  what  is  in  the  Word  of  God,  the  Word  of  God  is  sufl&cient,  and  if  it 
contains  what  is  against  it,  it  ought  to  be  destroyed,"  has  frequently  been  cen- 
sured. But  I  would  suggest  that  we  actually  take  his  recommendation,  with  a 
little  modification,  as  the  principle  of  modern  reading ;  we  may  say,  with  regard 
to  every  book  or  paper  or  pamphlet  that  we  wish  to  read,  "  Is  this  a  thing  about 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  51 

■which  my  Lord  might  have  said,  '  Write,'  or  even  '  Read  '  ?  Then  I  propose  to  read 
it  and  understand  it  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  Is  it,  on  the  other  hand,  a 
writing  of  a  kind  concerning  which  He  would  have  said  neither  '  Write '  nor  *  Read '  ? 
for  me  it  shall  be  an  unwritten  book,  a  blank,  illegible  paper ;  by  no  means  shall 
my  eyes  peruse  it."  First,  consider  the  penetrating  and  insidious  power  of  a 
printed  page.  Suppose  it  is  bad,  suppose  it  is  corrupting  ;  it  comes  before  us  with 
a  quiet,  demure,  and  decent  aspect;  nothing  could  be  less  aggressive,  less 
dangerous  than  this ;  it  may  even  be  bound  in  the  costliest  binding  and  printed 
upon  the  best  paper.  Now,  if  a  living  companion  approached  us  with  the  same 
corrnpt  influences  in  him  as  are  contained  in  this  innocent  page,  every  decent  mind 
would  keep  him  at  a  distance,  and  would  insist  upon  some  satisfactory  introduction. 
He  would  give  more  or  less  an  indication  of  what  he  is,  and  as  we  got  to  see  what  he 
is  we  should  decline  his  acquaintance.  But  this  companion,  this  written  page  leaps 
into  the  breast  at  a  bound  ;  it  is  there  at  once  unquestioned  and  uncensured ;  it  is 
like  that  wooden  horse  which  was  introduced  into  Troy  with  the  approbation  of  all 
the  people,  containing  within  its  belly  the  armed  men  that  were  to  be  the  ruin  of 
the  city,  but  not  disgorging  itself  until  it  was  well  within  the  walls.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  suppose  that  the  writing  be  good,  consider  what  a  winged  and  miracu- 
lous power  this  written  thing  possesses.  It  can  fly  where  no  human  voice  can 
reach  it,  can  arrest  and  hold  a  man  whom  no  human  hand  can  touch,  and  when  it ' 
has  laid  its  spell  upon  him  it  wiU  be  like  a  two-edged  sword,  piercing  to  the 
dividing  of  the  bone  and  of  the  marrow.  The  Press  is  a  great  pulpit  to-day,  the 
greatest  of  pulpits.  Those  who  have  learnt  to  write  at  the  bidding  of  Jesus  reach  a 
wider  audience  than  could  ever  be  assembled  in  St.  Paul's  or  the  Metropolitian 
Tabernacle.  But  another  reason  for  a  principle  of  selection  arises  from  the  simple 
fact  that  the  printed  literature  of  the  world  is  so  vast.  None  of  us  can  read  every- 
thing ;  and  is  it  not,  therefore,  best  to  make  up  our  mind  that  we  will  read  all  that 
is  good  ?  and  if  we  go  upon  that  principle,  we  shall  not  have  time  to  read  anything 
that  is  bad.  But  the  principle  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  is  a  little  more 
specific,  that  we  read  only  what  Christ  has  said  "  Write,"  and  refuse  aU  the  rest. 
Now,  is  it  possible  that  some  of  you  are  afraid  that  in  adopting  this  principle 
you  would  restrict  your  reading  within  very  narrow  limits,  and  is  it  possible, 
too,  that  some  of  you  say,  "  How  are  we  to  know  which  things  are  in  accordance 
with  the  literary  censorship  of  Jesus  Christ "  ?  Let  me  point  out  that  you  need 
not  be  troubled  by  the  narrowness  of  the  literature  that  is  thus  suggested,  and, 
secondly,  that  there  is  a  very  easy  way  of  knowing  which  literature  Christ 
approves.  A  good  critic  knows  the  mark  of  any  well-known  writer  before  he 
has  gone  half-way  down  the  first  page,  and  a  good  Christian  seldom  has  to 
read  more  than  two  or  three  sentences  before  discovering  whether  that  is  a  piece  of 
Christ's  literature  or  not.  But  in  this  matter  of  determining,  I  frankly  admit  that  if 
you  adopt  my  principle  you  wiU  not  always  be  in  the  fashion.  It  is  no  part  of  the 
Christian's  duty  to  read  a  book  because  it  happens  to  be  in  vogue.  Again,  if  you 
adopt  this  principle,  you  will  not  find  it  necessary  to  read  through  your  daily 
paper :  you  will  read,  perhaps,  a  good  deal  less  of  the  daily  paper  than  most 
people  do  read.  But  I  said  that  the  literature  to  be  read  on  this  principle  is  not 
limited  as  some  people  suppose.  Let  me  tell  you  what  it  is.  There  is  the  Bible 
to  begin  with.  There  is  another  branch  of  literature  that  has  to  be  read  by 
Christians,  the  reports  of  the  progress  of  the  Master's  kingdom,  the  news  which 
comes  from  the  front  of  the  Lord's  battle  in  the  world.  Then,  leaving  the  Bible 
and  the  reports  of  the  Master's  kingdom,  there  is  the  noble  pile  of  books  on 
science ;  and  I  wonder  if  it  has  occurred  to  every  one  here  that  if,  as  the  Bible 
teaches  us,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Creator  of  this  universe,  every  true  fact  about  this 
universe  is  a  record  of  Jesus  Christ's  handiwork  ?  and,  considering  the  incalculable 
mass  of  scientific  detail  to-day,  no  one  can  say  that  the  literature  is  limited. 
Then  there  are  all  the  accredited  records  of  human  history — an  almost  unlimited 
sphere  of  reading.  Then,  again,  there  are  the  poets — not  all  the  poets,  nor  all  of 
any  poet,  but  you  may  mark  this,  that  no  poet  of  the  first  rank  ever  wrote  but, 
when  he  gets  into  the  higher  region  of  his  thought  and  utterance,  he  has  become  a 
mouthpiece  of  God.  Then  there  are  all  the  wise,  true  masters  of  thought  in  this 
age  and  ages  that  have  gone  by,  so  numerous,  so  great,  and  some  of  them  even  so 
voluminous  that  we  are  never  likely  to  finish  them ;  and  then  there  are  all  the 
stories — I  dare  not  call  them  novels,  for  the  name  has  been  defiled — but  all  the 
stories  that  have  come  from  the  pure  and  purifying  imagination  of  great  writers 
and  thinkers,  the  mass  of  which  very  few  of  us  have  read.    {R.  F.  Horton,  M.A.) 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 

Send  it  unto  the  seven  Clmrches  wlucli  are  in  Asia. — Things  common  in  all  the 
letters  : — I.  Chkist  sustains  a  common  relationship  to  them  all.  1.  The  relation- 
ship of  authority.  The  only  Lord  in  the  kingdom  of  souls.  2.  The  relationship  of 
oversight.  Christ  knows  all  Churches,  reads  their  inner  heart,  sounds  the  depths 
of  their  impulses.  3.  The  relationship  of  moral  discipline.  In  all  the  letters 
there  is  commendation,  rebuke,  promise,  threatening.  His  spiritual  providence  and 
power  run  through  all.  II.  Chbist  speaks  through  their  "angels,"  or  messen- 
gers to  all.  III.  Christ  promises  GREAT  blessings  to  the  VICTORIOUS  IN  ALL.  1.  The 
resistance  of  evil  is  the  characteristic  of  all  Christians.  Other  men  may  speak 
against  evil — condemn  evil  in  words ;  but  the  Christian  resists  it.  2.  The  resistance 
of  evil  must  in  all  cases  be  personal.  To  be  supposed  that  there  can  be  any  social 
or  ecclesiastical  resistance  of  sin  as  sin  is  a  delusion.  It  is  to  Him  "  that  over- 
cometh,"  not  it.  3.  The  resistance  of  evil  is  a  matter  of  difficulty.  Every  warfare 
implies  difficulty,  peril,  enterprise,  perseverance,  and  so  forth.  4.  The  resistance 
of  evil,  though  difficult,  may  be  achieved.  "  To  Him  that  overcometh,"  &c. 
Thank  God,  in  the  case  of  every  man  evil  may  be  overcome,  and  the  triumph  is 
one  of  the  most  blessed  in  the  history  of  intelligent  beings.  IV.  Christ  demands 
ATTENTION  TO  THE  VOICE  OF  THE  Spirit  to  ALL.  The  "  Spirit."  What  Spirit  ?  God. 
God  in  Christ's  ministry.  {Caleb  Morris.)  The  seven  Epistles  compared  : — I. 
The  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  THESE  LETTERS  COMMON  TO  ALL.  1.  In  all  Christ  assumes 
different  aspects.  2.  In  all  Christ  addresses  Himself  through  a  special  officer.  3. 
In  all  Christ  declares  His  thorough  knowledge  of  their  moral  history.  4.  In  all 
Christ  promises  great  blessings  to  the  morally  victorious.  5.  In  aU  Christ 
commands  attention  to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit.  6.  In  all  Christ's  grand  aim  is 
spiritual  culture.  7.  In  all  Christ  observes  a  threefold  division.  (1)  A  reference 
to  some  of  the  attributes  of  Him  who  addresses  the  Church.  (2)  A  disclosure  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  Church,  with  appropriate  admonition,  encouragement,  or 
reproof.  (8)  Promises  of  reward  to  all  who  preserve  in  their  Christian  course 
and  overcome  the  spiritual  enemies  who  assault  them.  II.  Circumstances  in 
WHICH  some  of  them  DIFFER.  1.  We  find  two  (Smyrna  and  Philadelphia)  who 
receive  commendation.  2.  Two  (Sardis  and  Laodicea)  are  censured.  3.  Three 
(Ephesus,  Pergamos,  and  Thyatira)  contain  mingled  censure  and  commendation. 
In  these  cases  the  approbation  precedes  the  blame,  showing  that  it  was  more 
grateful  to  commend  than  to  reprove.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  I  saw  seven  golden 
candlesticks. — The  seven  golden  candlesticks : — 1.  The  nature  of  the  symbol.  The 
Church  is  called  a  candlestick,  in  allusion  to  the  candlestick  in  the  ancient  sanctuary — 
in  allusion  also  to  the  exposition  of  the  symbol  given  by  the  prophet  (Zech.  iv. 
2-6) ;  and  on  account  of  her  own  celestial  light — she  receives,  resembles,  embodies, 
and  dispenses  the  light,  glory,  and  gladness  of  heaven  (Isa.  Ix.  1).  2.  The  precious 
material  of  which  they  are  formed.  They  are  golden  candlesticks.  The  formation 
of  the  Church  is  the  doing  of  the  Lord,  and  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  The  plan,  the 
contrivance,  the  direction,  and  formation  of  the  golden  candlesticks  were  all  Divine 
and  heavenly ;  bearing  the  impress  of  the  hand  that  formed  them.  They  are 
caUed  golden  candlesticks,  to  express  their  intrinsic  excellence,  their  purity  and 
value,  their  glory  and  beauty,  their  splendour  and  their  preciousness.  They  are 
called  golden  candlesticks,  to  express  the  estimation  in  which  they  are  held  by  the 
family  of  heaven.  3.  The  form  and  number  of  the  golden  candlesticks.  They 
were  seven;  There  was  but  one  candlestick  in  the  ancient  sanctuary,  which  repre- 
sented the  one  Church  of  Israel — complete  within  itself.  (1)  The  number  implies 
the  purity  of  the  light ;  it  proceeds  from  the  pure  celestial  oil.  (2)  The  fulness  of 
the  light ;  a  plenitude  of  glory  is  poured  from  the  Churches,  to  enlighten  and  cheer 
a  dark  world.  (3)  The  power  of  the  light ;  it  has  a  power  of  holy  influence  and 
everlasting  consolation ;  the  power  of  sweet  attraction.  (4)  The  variety  of  the  light ; 
the  beauty  and  variety  of  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  meet  and  mingle  here.  (5)  The 
unity  of  the  light ;  there  is  a  blessed  unity  without  uniformity  ;  although  there  are 
seven,  they  are  all  one ;  they  have  all  one  support,  they  are  formed  of  one 
material,  nourished  by  the  same  means.  4.  The  use  and  design  of  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks.  The  use  of  a  candlestick  is  to  receive,  exhibit,  and  dispense  the  light. 
Now,  the  Church  of  Christ  does  this  by  her  purity  ;  her  purity  of  doctrine,  purity  of 
communion  ;  purity,  simplicity,  and  spirituality  of  worship ;  and  by  her  spiritual 
power  to  command  heavenly  purity.  She  does  it  by  her  testimony  to  the 
character  of  God,  in  the  embodied  form  of  Divine  truth,  in  the  pure  essential 
doctrines  of  grace,  and  she  does  it  by  her  efforts  to  publish  the  gospel ;  as  a 
witnessing  Church,  in  maintaining  the  truth;  and  a  missionary  Church,  in  dispensing 


CHAP.  1.]  REVELATION.  53 

the  truth  throughout  the  whole  world.  {Jos.  Young.)  The  cedars  and  the  candle- 
sticks (with  Gen.  iii.  8)  :— The  Book  of  Revelation  is  a  mosaic,  in  which  the  previous 
parts  of  the  Bible  are  brought  together  and  formed  into  a  new  picture,  illustrative 
of  the  fortunes  of  the  Church  and  the  world.  As  Genesis  is  the  book  of  begin- 
nings, so  Revelation  is  the  book  of  completions.  1.  Between  the  two  revelations 
of  God  to  man  which  meets  us  respectively  at  the  commencement  and  at  the 
close  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  we  find  the  closest  connection.  He  who  appeared 
to  our  first  parents  walking  among  the  trees  of  the  garden,  appeared  in  vision 
to  the  beloved  disciple  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks  in  the  Isle 
of  Patmos.  The  two  Divine  manifestations  were  essentially  the  same,  although 
they  differed  in  outward  form  and  circumstances.  Between  them  there  were 
connecting  links.  The  experience  of  the  exile  on  Horeb,  for  instance,  was 
repeated  in  the  case  of  the  exile  in  Patmos.  The  same  vision  of  the  burning 
bush  which  appeared  to  Moses  appeared  to  John  in  the  vision  of  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks.  The  Son  of  Man  associated  Himself  with  the  one  symbol  in  the 
same  way  that  He  had  associated  Himself  with  the  other.  The  occasion  in 
both  cases  was  similar.  The  burning  bush  was  never  to  be  extinguished,  it  was 
to  become  a  candlestick ;  and  the  fire  of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  for  their 
purification  was  to  become  a  conspicuous  light  held  aloft  to  lighten  the  whole  world. 
The  same  truth  is  still  further  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  vision  of  John  in  Patmos 
was  based  upon  the  Jewish  tabernacle  and  temple.  Separated  outwardly  from  the 
solemnities  of  the  ancient  worship — from  the  priesthood,  the  altars,  the  sacrifices,  the 
festivals,  the  Hebrew  Christians  could  still  enjoy  all  that  was  most  precious  and 
enduring  in  the  possession  of  their  race.  And  the  modification  in  the  old  form  which 
the  apostle  beheld  was  itself  full  of  significance.  The  single  candlestick  of  pure  gold, 
whose  light  illumined  the  holy  place  which  was  the  pattern  of  the  Church  upon 
earth,  appeared  before  John  in  the  darkness  and  loneliness  of  his  exile,  multiplied 
into  seven  distinct  candlesticks,  as  if  each  branch  of  the  prototype  had  become  a 
separate  candlestick  ;  in  token  that  the  original  Jewish  Church,  which  was  one— the 
Church  of  a  single  people — had  differentiated  into  a  Christian  Church,  which  while 
one  as  to  its  unity  of  faith  and  love,  is  also  many  as  regards  its  organisation  and 
individual  life,  the  Church  of  all  nations  and  people  and  tribes  and  tongues.  And  as 
the  vision  of  Patmos  was  thus  connected  with  the  tabernacle  and  temple,  and  with  the 
vision  of  Horeb,  so  we  can  trace  them  all  back  to  the  Adamic  revelation,  whose  symbol 
was  the  tree  of  life  in  the  midst  of  the  garden.  The  difference  between  the  living  tree 
and  the  dead  fuel  on  the  hearth  or  in  the  lamp,  is  that  the  fire  in  the  one,  owing  to  the 
conserving  power  of  the  vital  principle,  is  burning  without  being  consumed ;  whereas 
in  the  other  is  the  burning  and  consuming — reducing  to  dust  and  ashes,  because 
of  the  absence  of 'the  vital  conserving  principle.  The  bowls  which  contained  the  oil 
were  shaped  like  "an  almond-nut,  the  knops  looked  like  the  flower  buds,  and  the 
carved  flowers  resembled  the  fully-expanded  blossoms  of  the  almond  tree.  This 
tree  was  selected  as  the  pattern  of  the  golden  candlestick,  and  as  that  which  yielded 
Aaron's  miraculous  rod,  because  it  is  the  first  to  awaken  from  sleep  of  winter,  as  its 
Hebrew  name  signifies.  It  was  a  symbol  of  the  life  of  nature,  rising  in  perpetual 
youth  and  beauty  out  of  the  decaying  ruins  of  man's  works.  And  so  the  Hebrew 
candlestick  might  be  regarded  as  emblematical  of  the  life  of  the  Church,  being  the 
first  to  awaken  out  of  the  wreck  of  human  sin,  exhibiting  its  beauties  of  holiness 
and  fruits  of  righteousness,  while  all  around  the  world  is  wrapt  in  the  winter 
sleep  of  spiritual  torpor.  2.  But  between  the  revelation  of  Eden  and  the  revelation 
of  Patmos  there  are  some  striking  points  of  contrast.  The  revelation  of  Eden 
was  given  in  circumstances  of  peace  and  happiness.  Nature  was  a  faithful  outward 
reflection  of  man's  moral  state.  Its  beauty  and  fruitfulness  coincided  with  man's 
moral  beauty  and  fruitfulness.  But  the  revelation  of  Patmos  was  amid  widely 
different  circumstances.  The  symbol  of  it  was  not  the  tree  that  grew  spon- 
taneously by  the  laws  of  natural  growth,  but  the  candlestick  wrought  by  human 
hands,  with  the  sweat  of  the  face.  The  gold  of  which  it  was  composed  was 
dug  with  toil  and  trouble  from  the  mine,  melted  in  the  furnace,  purified  from 
its  ore,  and  not  cast  into  a  mould,  but  beaten  out  of  a  solid  piece  with  the 
hammer  into  the  form  in  which  it  appeared.  The  oil  for  the  light  was  also 
beaten  from  the  olive  berries  grown,  gathered,  and  expressed  by  human  toil  and 
skill ;  and  the  wick  in  like  manner  was  a  human  manufacture  made  of  the  fine 
twined  linen  which  formed  part  of  the  curtains  of  the  tabernacle.  The  whole 
idea  of  the  candlestick  implied  toil  and  trouble.  And  this  is  the  great  characteristic 
of  the  revelation  of  which  it  is  the  symbol.    EverytJirjQg  coimected  with  it  indicates 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

salvation  from  sin  through  toil  and  suffering.  Every  image,  every  symbol  and 
type  in  sacred  Scripture,  speaks  of  tjie  curse  of  the  ground  and  the  sorrow  of 
the  soul  which  sin  had  brought  into  the  world.  This  great  factor  is  taken  into 
account  in  all  remedial  schemes.  The  first  promise  to  our  race  announces 
redemption  through  pain  and  toil  and  sorrow.  The  bruising  of  the  serpent's  head 
is  to  be  accomplished  only  through  the  wounding  of  the  victor's  heel.  The 
Levitical  institutions  disclose  the  painfulness  of  the  covenant  of  grace  in  a  most 
remarkable  manner.  Their  limitations,  their  restrictions,  their  heavy  burdens, 
their  awful  sanctions,  their  sacrifices  of  blood  and  death,  all  speak  in  the  most 
impressive  manner  of  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  costliness  of  the  deliverance  from 
it.  And  the  life  and  death  of  our  Saviour  disclose  this  in  a  way  stiU  more  solemn  and 
emphatic.  The  trees  of  Eden  in  His  case  were  converted  into  the  Cross  of  Calvary ; 
and  the  glorious  fiat  of  the  first  creation,  "  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light," 
into  the  awful  cry  of  darkness  and  death — the  birth-pang  of  the  new  creation,  "  My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  In  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks  the  beloved  disciple  heard  Him  saying,  "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was 
dead."  In  the  midst  of  the  throne,  John,  through  his  tears,  saw  "  a  Lamb  as  it  had 
been  slain."  3.  Another  point  of  contrast  between  the  revelation  of  Patmos  and  the 
revelation  of  Eden  is  the  clearness  and  fulness  of  the  one,  in  comparison  with  the 
dimness  and  obscurity  of  the  other.  God  talked  with  Adam  not  only  among  but 
through  the  medium  of  the  trees  of  the  garden,  conveyed  to  him  spiritual  instruction 
by  the  objects  and  processes  of  nature  around  him.  Keligion  meant  to  Him  simply 
the  knowledge,  worship,  and  service  of  God  as  He  was  revealed  by  the  objects  and 
processes  of  nature ;  and  on  these  points  nature  could  give  him  aU  the  light  that  he 
needed.  But  we  have  sinned  and  fallen,  and  religion  to  us  includes,  besides  these 
elements,  repentance  of  sin  and  dependence  upon  an  atonement.  Nature  therefore 
cannot  solve  the  awful  doubts  which  arise  in  the  human  heart  regarding  the  justice 
of  God.  "  How  shaU  man  be  just  with  God  ?  "  We  need  that  He  who  at  first 
commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  should  give  us  the  light  of  tho 
knowledge  of  His  glory  in  the  face  of  Je&as  Christ.  God  has  given  to  us  this 
special  revelation,  suited  to  our  altered  sinful  state,  in  the  economy  of  redemption. 
4.  And  now  we  come  to  the  last  point  of  contrast  between  the  revelation  of  Eden 
and  the  revelation  of  Patmos,  namely,  the  transitory  nature  of  the  one  and  the 
permanence  of  the  other.  God  appeared  to  our  first  parents  walking  among  the 
trees  of  the  garden.  These  trees  were  in  their  very  nature  evanescent.  But,  on 
tho  other  hand,  God  in  Christ  appeared  to  the  beloved  disciple  in  Patmos  in  the 
midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks ;  and  these  candlesticks  were  the  symbols  of  the 
"Word  of  the  Lord  which  endureth  for  ever.  The  form  and  substance  of  these  candle- 
sticks indicated  the  imperishable  nature  of  the  revelation  which  they  symbolised. 
They  were  all  beaten  out  of  solid  gold — the  most  enduring  of  all  earthly  materials 
— the  very  pavement  of  heaven  itself.  They  were  carved  with  the  figures  of 
flowers  and  fruits,  preserving  the  exquisite  loveliness  of  the  fading  flowers  and 
fruit  of  earth  in  an  imperishable  form.  Thus  they  are  appropriate  emblems 
of  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  new  creation  of  God,  a  creation,  though  new,  yet 
founded  as  it  were  on  the  ruins  of  the  old,  fashioned  of  lasting  and  unfadLig 
materials,  and  yet  combining  all  the  beauty  and  glory  of  that  which  shall  pass  away. 
{H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  seven  golden  lamps: — 1.  The  candlesticks.  It  ia 
not  so  much  to  the  light  as  to  the  utensil  or  stand  for  holding  it  that  his  attention  is 
turned,  for  the  hght  of  these  lamps  is  not  from  an  earthly  source,  but  from  Him 
who  is  •'  the  Light  of  the  world."  Israel,  for  ages,  was  the  world's  only  light — a 
light  confined  within  narrow  boundaries ;  not  diffused  over  earth,  nor  set  upon  a 
hill.  Of  this  the  one  seven-branched  candlestick  m  the  tabernacle  and  temple  was 
the  symbol.  The  lamp-stand  was  doubly  shut  in — first,  by  the  outer  curtain,  or 
wall  of  the  house  ;  and,  secondly,  by  the  inner  curtain,  or  wall  of  the  holy  place. 
But  now  that  lamp  stands  in  uncurtained,  unhidden  splendour,  shining  out  over  all 
the  world.  II.  The  materials  of  which  the  candlesticks  are  made.  They  are 
of  gold.  Generally  in  Scripture  gold  symbolises  the  holy,  the  perfect,  the  Divine. 
The  Churches  are  "  in  G'^d  the  Father,  and  in  Christ  Jesus,  our  Lord."  They  are 
not  from  beneath,  but  from  above ;  they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  is  not 
of  the  world.  They  are  composed  of  men  born  from  above.  With  Divine  glory 
they  shine  ;  with  Divine  beauty  they  stand  forth  before  the  world,  representing  the 
surpassing  and  all-precious  excellence  of  Him  in  whose  beauty  they  are  beautiful, 
and  in  whose  perfection  they  are  perfect.  Golden  Churches  1  Golden  men !  Golden 
witnesses  for  Christ  and  His  truth!    How  far  the  Church  of  God  in  the  past 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  55 

centuries,  since  John  wrote,  has  fulfilled  the  description,  ecclesiastical  history  can 
tell.  The  age  of  gold  was  not  a  long  one  ;  and  then  followed  the  silver,  the  brass, 
and  the  iron.  How  much  of  gold  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Churches  of  our  day  ?  III. 
The  number  of  the  candlesticks.  Seven — 1.  Perfection.  As  the  one  sunbeam 
is  composed  of  seven  parts,  and  thus  perfected  into  whiteness,  so  seven  is  the  Divine 
number  of  perfection,  or  completeness.  2.  Variety.  The  manifold  gifts  of  the 
one  Spirit,  sent  from  the  one  Christ.  3.  Unity.  Seven  is  oneness ;  oneness  with 
diversity :  one  firmament,  many  stars.  4.  Covenant-certainty.  Seven  is  the 
covenant-number  (Gen.  xxi.  31).  The  Churches  are  the  Churches  of  the  everlasting 
covenant — the  covenant  between  the  Father  and  the  Son^"  ordered  in  all  things, 
and  sure."    (H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-20.    In  the  midst  of  tlie  seven  candlesticks  One  like  unto  4;lie  Son  of 
Man. — The  Son  of  Man  amid   the  candlesticks : — His  wonderful  position.     "  In 
the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks."     1.  This  implies  His  presence  with  His 
people  (Exod.  xxxiii.  14,  15;  Psa.  cxxxii.  13,  14;  Isa.  xliii.  1,  2).     He  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks  as  the  great  High  Priest,  trimming,  preparing,  and 
lighting  the  lamps.     2.  The   symbol  supposes  communion  and  fellowship;  He 
walks  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks.     3.  The  words  imply  Divine  superin- 
tendence ;    His  peculiar  power  and  providence ;   His   gracious  inspection ;    His 
unceasing  care.     4.  The  words  are  expressive  of  Divine  operation.     Jesus  works 
while  He  walks  ;  He  is  never  idle.     (1)  He  works  by  His  Spirit.     (2)  He  works  by 
His  providence.     (3)  He  works  by  His  judgments,  as  well  as  by  His  mercy.     (4) 
The  effects  of  Christ's  working  are  manifold  and  gracious.    The  first  effect  is 
holiness.    The  next  effect  is  happiness,  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope 
through  grace.     A  third  effect  is  glory  :  Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee.     5.  His  presence  implies  the  stability  of  the 
Church.    He  is  in  the  Church  as  the  God  of  nature,  providence,  and  grace ;  and 
no  weapon  formed  against  her  shall  prosper.     II.  His  Divine  person.     1.  The 
human  nature  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ—"  I  saw  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man." 
(1)  The  likeness.    There  is  the  likeness  of  resemblance  :  God  sent  forth  His  Son 
in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.     He  was  not  sinful  flesh,  but  He  bare  the  Hkeness. 
There  is  the  likeness  of  identity  :  He  that  was  in  the  form  of  God  was  really  God ; 
He  that  was  in  the  form  of  a  servant  was  really  a  servant ;  and  He  that  was  made 
in  the  likeness  of  men,  and  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  was  reaUy  a  man. 
There  is  also  the  likeness  of  equality:  He  not  only  took  the  nature  of  man,  but  his 
frail,  afflicted,  mortal  state.    And  there  is  here  also  the  likeness  of  representation  : 
in  His  low  and  afflicted  condition  on  earth,  we  have  an  image  of  man  as  a  mourner 
and  a  mortal ;  and  in  His  glorified  condition  at  the  Father's  right  hand,  we  have  a 
representation  of  what  the  saints  in  heaven  shall  for  ever  be.    As  we  have  borne 
the  image  of  the  earthly,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.     (2)  The 
reality  of  His  human  nature.    Although  comparison  is  here  employed,  yet  the 
reality  is  implied  in  the  comparison.   The  incarnation  of  the  Son  was  an  important 
part  of  the  counsels  of  eternity.     This  great  doctrine  was  tafUght  by  types  and 
symbols.    AU  his  appearances  to  the  holy  patriarchs  were  preludes  and  pledges  of 
His  coming  in  the  flesh.     (3)  The  necessity  of  His  human  nature.    As  a  Prophet, 
it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren  ;  as  a  Priest,  to  be  taken  from 
amongst  men ;  as  a  King,  to  be  made  of  the  house  of  David.     Thus  in  the  glorious 
description  that  follows.  He  appears  in  the  likeness  of  the  Son,  and  human  members 
are  ascribed  to  His  Divine  person.     2.  The  Divine  nature  of  our  blessed  Lord.    (1) 
The  likeness  of  the  Son  of  God.    There  is  here,  as  in  His  human  nature,  the 
likeness  of  resemblance — He  resembles  God ;  He  resembles  Him  in  everything ;  He 
is  the  perfect  image  of  the  invisible  God.     (2)  The  reality  of  His  Deity.     (3)  The 
necessity  of  His  Deity.    It  behoved  Jesus  to  be  God  as  weU  as  man,  that  He  might 
be  the  Daysman  between  both  parties  ;  that  His  Deity  might  impart  infinite  value 
to  His  obedience  and  suffering  and  atoning  sacrifice;  that  He  might  be  the  object 
of  faith,  hope,  and  confidence ;  and  that  His  Deity  might  impart  power  and  dignity 
to  His  intercession  and  His  government.    3.  The  wonderful  union  between  the  Divine 
and  human  natures  in  His  one  Divine  person ;  as  Immanuel,  God  with  us.     He  is 
both  God  and  man  in  two  distinct  natures,  and  one  person  for  ever.     This  union  is 
ineffable,  unsearchable,  mysterious,  and  Divine.    It  is  the  great  mystery  of  godli- 
ness ;  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.     4.  The  effects  of  this  union.     {Jas.  Young.) 
The  Christ  of  Patmos: — The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever.    Having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  years,  He  is  a  priest  for 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ever  after  the  order  of  MelcHsedec.  But  the  views  which  His  people  have  of  Him 
are  extremely  varied.  According  to  our  progress  in  grace  will  be  the  standpoint 
from  which  we  view  the  Saviour ;  and  according  to  the  position  from  which  we 
look  at  Him,  will  be  what  we  see  of  Him.  I.  The  value  of  this  vision  to  us. 
1.  It  is  a  representation  of  the  same  Christ  who  suffered  for  our  sins.  2.  It 
represents  to  us  what  Christ  is  now.  3.  It  represents  what  He  is  to  the  Churches. 
4.  The  effect  it  would  have  upon  us  if  we  really  felt  and  understood  it.  We  should 
fall  at  His  feet  as  dead.  Blessed  position !  We  are  never  so  truly  Hving  as  when 
the  creature  dies  away  in  the  presence  of  the  all-glorious  reigning  King.  II. 
The  meaning  of  the  vision.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  St.  John's  vision : — 
Ordinarily,  if  we  would  enjoy  the  Divine  presence  and  blessing,  we  must 
seek  them  in  the  ordinances  of  Divine  appointment.  But  the  case  is 
different  when  our  absence  from  the  public  means  of  grace  is  unavoidable. 
God  is  not,  in  the  bestowment  of  spiritual  good,  confined  even  to  the 
means  which  He  Himself  has  instituted.  The  truth  of  this  St.  John  realised. 
I.  Explain  the  vision  which  St.  John  beheld,  and  notice  its  effect  upon 
him.  1.  The  personage  described  as  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  was  a 
representation  of  Him  who  was  accustomed,  while  upon  earth,  to  designate  Him- 
self, "  The  Son  of  Man."  2.  St.  John  further  describes  His  situation  :  He  was  in 
the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  (1)  This  exhibits  the  character  and  duty  of 
the  Churches  of  Christ.  They  are  candlesticks.  Having  been  themselves  enlight- 
ened from  above,  it  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  diffuse  Ught.  (2)  The  light  which 
Christians  are  required  to  shed  on  the  gloom  of  a  sinful  world  is  not  their  own,  but 
a  borrowed  light.  The  light  which  they  possess  has  been  kindled  within  them  by 
the  Father  of  lights.  (3)  The  care  which  Christ  manifests  towards  the  Churches. 
3.  The  glorious  Person  who  appeared  to  John  is  also  described  in  His  habit.  He 
was  "  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot,  and  girt  about  the  paps  with  a 
golden  girdle."  The  dress  was  sacerdotal.  He  is  not  only  a  prophet  and  a  king 
but  also  an  high  priest.  4.  In  this  representation  of  Christ  He  is  more  particularly 
described  by  the  parts  and  members  of  His  body.  (1)  "His  head  and  His  hairs 
were  white  like  wool,  as  white  as  snow."  A  hoary  head  denotes  age ;  and  may  not 
our  adorable  Saviour  be  thus  set  forth  as  the  "  Ancient  of  Days  "  ?  (2)  His  eyes 
are  described  as  "  a  flame  of  fire,"  clearly  to  denote  His  piercing  knowledge.  (3) 
His  feet  are  described  as  "  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace." 
This  is  symbolical  of  the  power  of  Christ,  which  nothing  can  resist.  Whatever 
opposition  may  be  made  to  the  Divine  plans  and  proceedings,  it  will  utterly  fail. 
(4)  His  voice  was  "  as  the  sound  of  many  waters."  The  same  simile  is  employed 
by  the  prophet  (Ezek.  xliii.  2).  The  roar  of  waters  is  powerful,  and  is  heard  afar. 
Aiid  so  Christ  wiU  command  attention.  By  the  representation  before  us,  He 
probably  intended  to  signify  that,  however  His  words  had  been  disregarded  by  the 
fallen  Churches,  they  could  not  drown  His  voice.  5.  The  glorious  Personage 
whom  the  apostle  beheld  in  the  vision  is  also  described  as  holding  in  His  hand 
seven  stars.  Stars  appear  when  the  sun  has  withdrawn  himself ;  so  Christian 
ministers  are  the  ambassadors  of  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness,  praying  men, 
in  Christ's  stead,  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  Of  what  service  are  the  stars  to  the 
mariner,  as  he  sails  over  the  trackless  deep !  The  Christian  is  a  mariner, 
voyaging  over  the  sea  of  life,  anxiously  tending  towards  the  haven  of  the  skies, 
yet  fearing  lest  he  should  make  shipwreck  of  faith.  The  ministers  of  Christ  are 
stars.  Their  peculiar  office  is  to  hold  forth  the  light  of  God's  truth,  and,  by  their 
course  in  the  world,  by  their  life  and  conversation,  to  be  examples  and  guides  to 
their  flocks.  Christian  ministers  are  stars,  and  have,  therefore,  orbits  assigned 
them  in  which  to  move.  The  Head  of  the  Church  plants  each  in  His  proper  place 
within  it.  6.  The  protection  which  Christ  affords  to  His  ministers  is  also 
strikingly  set  forth  in  this  description.  He  holds  them  in  His  right  hand.  He 
holds  the  stars  in  His  right  hand,  and  every  one  of  them  is  immortal  tiU  His  work 
is  done.  7.  Of  the  glorious  Personage  whom  St.  John  saw  in  the  vision,  he  says 
that  there  went  out  of  His  mouth  a  sharp  two-edged  sword.  This  sword  manifestly 
denotes  the  word  of  truth  which  Christ  has  spoken.  If  it  fail  to  cut  the  heart  of 
the  sinner  with  conviction,  it  will  pierce  and  destroy  him.  8.  In  the  vision  under 
our  notice,  we  have  Christ  represented  as  with  a  countenance  like  the  sun  shining 
in  his  strength.  Oh,  how  changed  from  that  visage  which  was  so  marred  more  than 
any  man  1  II.  Deduce  one  or  two  suitable  remarks  from  the  subject  before 
us.  1.  The  clearer  the  discoveries  which  Christ  makes  of  Himself,  the  more 
humbled  shall  we  be  under  a  sense  of  bur  own  vileness.    2.  God  vouchsafes  special 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  67 

comfort  and  support  to  those  who  suffer  for  His  sake.  3.  What  cause  will  the 
enemies  of  Christ  have  to  tremble,  when  He  appears,  in  the  last  day,  to  judge  them  I 
{W.  Cardall,  B.A.)         The  first  scene  in  the  gr'eat  revelation: — I.  The  kecipient 

OF   THIS   GLORIOUS   REVELATION.        "I     John,"    &G.        JI.    ThB   MANNER   IN   WHICH   THE 

FIRST  SCENE  WAS  USHERED  IN.  1.  The  fulfilment  of  the  vision  is  guaranteed.  "  I  am 
Alpha  and  Omega."  God  will  ever  live  to  carry  on  His  work.  2.  The  permanency 
of  the  revelation  is  implied.  "  What  thou  seest,  write."  3.  The  universal  reference 
of  this  revelation  is  expressed.     HI.  The  real  significance  of  the  scene  itself. 

I.  The  Saviour's  relation  to  His  Church.  (1)  He  occupies  a  central  position,  "  in 
the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks."     This  was  a  position  of  authority  and  honour. 

(2)  He  assumes  a  brother's  form.  This  was  intended  for  the  comfort  of  the  saints ; 
for  while  the  Saviour  wore  a  brother's  nature,  He  would  retain  a  brother's  heart. 

(3)  He  performs  the  office  of  an  intercessor.  Long  robes  were  worn  by  men  of  lofty 
station :  but  the  girdle  seems  to  refer  to  the  priest's  official  robe.  2.  The  Saviour's 
relation  to  the  opponents  of  His  cause.  (1)  His  supreme  authority.  The  white 
hair  is  intended  to  remind  us  of  the  knowledge,  experience,  and  authority  of  age. 
(2)  His  clearness  of  vision.  Not  a  tear  was  ever  shed,  but  the  eye  of  Jesus  saw  it ; 
not  an  act  of  cruelty  or  of  crime  was  ever  perpetrated,  but  the  Saviour  marked  it  in 
His  book.  (3)  His  irresistible  force.  He  can  tread  to  dust  His  fiercest  foes.  (4) 
His  terrible  majesty.  Nothing  is  more  majestic  than  the  crash  of  the  cataract. 
Those  who  have  seen  the  Fall  of  Niagara  never  can  forget  the  impression  it  made 
upon  the  mind.  3.  The  Saviour's  relation  to  Christian  enterprise.  (1)  The  safety 
and  guidance  of  His  agents.  "  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven  stars."  (2)  The 
power  of  His  word.  "  And  out  of  His  mouth  went  a  sharp,  two-edged  sword." 
The  two  edges  show  the  manifold  efifects  of  Christian  teaching.  (3)  The 
unsullied  glory  of  the  Saviour.  Whatever  happens,  the  glory  of  Jesus  will 
never  pass  behind  a  cloud.  No  greater  comfort  can  the  Christian  find  than  this. 
{Evan  Lewis,  B.A.)  The  introductory  vision: — I.  John  mentions  the  day  on 
which  this  vision  occurred  :  *'  the  Lord's  Day."  The  loss  of  the  Sabbath  was 
felt  by  John  in  Patmos.  Our  pleasures  brighten  as  they  take  their  flight.  This  is 
particularly  the  case  with  the  experience  of  Christians  in  relation  to  the  Sabbath. 

II.  The  apostle  alludes  to  his  frame  of  mind  at  the  time  this  vision  was  given  him  : 
*'  I  was  in  the  Spirit."  The  blessing  of  God  comes  in  the  use  of  His  appointed 
means ;  and  supernatural  communications  begin  where  the  highest  effort  of 
ordinary  grace  ends.  God  honoured  His  Sabbath,  and  He  honoured  the  prayerful 
endeavours  of  His  servant,  by  His  revelations  at  that  time.  There  is  a  spirit  of  the 
Sabbath  which  all  believers  should  seek  to  attain,  and  which,  when  cultivated  to  the 
ujanost,  will  bring  them  well  nigh  to  the  borders  of  inspiration,  and  to  the  gate  of 
heaven.  HI.  We  come  to  the  first  supernatural  sign.  "And  heard  behind  me 
a  great  voice  as  of  a  trumpet,  saying,"  or  as  of  a  speaking-trumpet,  the  epithet 
"saying"  agreeing  not  with  the  "voice,"  but  with  the  "trumpet."  Such  an 
instrument  was  much  in  use  amongst  the  ancients.  It  was  employed  by  generals  to 
give  orders  to  their  armies.  The  brazen  lungs  of  Stentor,  mentioned  by  Homer,  in 
the  wars  of  Troy,  were  probably  of  this  kind.  Hence  the  "  voice  of  a  trumpet  "  is 
used  in  Scripture  for  a  loud  and  authoritative  word  of  command.  IV.  The 
LANGUAGE  HE  HEARS.  How  important  it  is  to  note  down  impressions  as  they  occur ! 
How  needful,  for  correct  preservation,  to  record  them  at  once !  Our  memories  are 
treacherous.  New  scenes  arise  to  obscure  the  deepest  impressions  in  our  minds. 
V.  The  vision  he  beholds.  "  And  I  turned  to  see  the  voice  that  spake  with  me." 
The  true  reason  why  natural  beauty  and  tasteful  proportions  are  disregarded  in  the 
image  before  us  is,  that  it  is  solely  of  a  hieroglyphical  character.  Hieroglyphics 
have  no  pretension  to  beauty.  Symmetry  is  the  last  quality  that  is  studied  in  their 
construction.  In  conformity  with  this  method  of  instruction,  we  have  the  image 
assumed  by  Christ  in  vision  to  John,  with  this  difference,  that  it  is  given  only  as  a 
heiroglyphical  representation,  and  not  as  a  delineation  of  His  real  form.  The  value 
of  hieroglyphics  lies  in  their  meaning,  and  their  beauty  in  their  design.  What 
beauty  could  our  first  parents  see  in  the  imagery  by  which  their  restoration  was 
promised,  apart  from  the  design  ?  What  beauty  was  there  in  the  serpent  of  brass, 
in  the  altar  of  burnt  offering,  in  the  figures  of  the  cherubim,  in  themselves 
considered?  What  glory  is  there  in  the  Cross,  apart  from  its  design?  What 
beauty  in  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  even  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  ?  What  is 
there  to  gratify  the  eye,  the  ear,  or  the  taste,  in  the  only  relics  of  a  symbolical 
ritual,  in  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  ?  We  have  here  the  utmost  simplicity  of 
emblems  combined  with  the  highest  grandeur  of  design.   Visible  signs  are  employed 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ito  lead  to  the  contemplation  of  invisible  realities.    Under  these  impressions,  we 
turn  again  to  the  vision  before  us.     We  expect  now  no  external  loveliness  and 
attractions,  and  are  prepared  to  look  for  its  whole  beauty  in  the  moral  sentiments 
it  inspires.    His  appearance,  as  when  known  to  John  in  the  flesh,  would  have  been 
equally  incompatible  with  the  purpose  and  the  time.     He  assumes  the  very  figure 
the  occasion  required.      It  was  modelled  by  the  revelations  He  came  to  unfold. 
It  was  not   His   natural  dress,  but  His   adornment  for  a  particular  interview; 
not  His  home  attire,  but  His  equipment  for  a  special  expedition.    It  is  not  the 
beau  ideal  of  the  Christian's  God,  but  the  symbolical  representation  of  the  means  by 
-which  His  kingdom  would  be  established  in  the  whole  earth.    If  the  whole  aspect 
had  been  mild  and  alluring,  it  would  have  given  a  false  impression  to  John  of 
what  it  was  intended  to  prefigure    and  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  assumed. 
It  revealed   the   combination  of  those  perfections    in  Christ  which  would    be 
required;  the  resources  at  His  command,  His  unslumbering  zeal.  His  terror  in 
battle,  the  certainty  of  His  conquest,  the  serenity  of  His  government,  and  the  glory  of 
His  reign.    The  high  priest's  breast-plate  is  associated  with  the  warrior's  coat  of 
maU,  the  snow-white  locks  of  age  with  the  sparkling  eye  of  youth,  unconquerable 
prowess   with   melting  pity,  the  awfulness  of  justice  with  the  endearments  of 
love,  the  thunder  of  His  arm  with  the  radiance  of   His  smiles.      {G.  Rogers.) 
The  power  of  an  objective  faith : — If  we  were  asked  to  fix  upon  the  most  prominent 
want  in  the  spiritual  life  of  the  present  time,  we  might  perhaps  not  untruly  say 
that  it  is  the  want  of  objective  faith.    Visions  pass  before  us,  and  we  believe  that 
in  them  is  our  life,  but  where  is  the  entranced  consciousness  of  their  reality? 
"Where  is  the  fresh,  warm  faith  which  ever  sees  One  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man 
moving  amid  sacraments,  and  taking  the  shape  of  human  symbols  ?   Where  is  the 
rapturous  conviction  that  pierces  at  once  through  the  veil  of  visions,  and  sees  the 
well-known  features  by  a  perpetual  inspiration  ?     And  yet,  this  is  undeniably  the 
character  of  the  faith  which  has  drawn  the  soul  to  God  at  all  times.   If  we  consider 
the  practical  bearing  of  this  great  truth,  we  shall  see  its  efficacy  to  be  of  the  most 
momentous  kind.    1.  And  first,  it  is  the  true  sustaining  power  of  the  spiritual  life. 
2.  Again,  as  objective  faith  is  the  sustenance  of  spiritual  life,  so  is  it  the  true  anti- 
dote of  one  of  the  greatest  dangers  which  beset  the  soul  in  times  of  strong  religious 
excitement — that  of  morbid  self-contemplation.    Eemorse,  terror  of   conscience, 
growing  scrupulousness,  deepening  awe  at  the  sanctities  of  religion — all  tend  to  fix 
file  eye  of  the  awakened  soul  on  itself  in  a  minutely  introspective,  anxious  study, 
which  tends  to  despondency  and  alarm,  and,  sadder  still,  depressing  the  soul's 
energies,  creates  fresh  hindrances  to  restoration  and  to  peace.    The  remedy  is  to  be 
found  in  an  objective  faith.    Combine  with  the  care  of  the  soul  a  deeper  care  to 
realise   the  presence  of  Him  in  whom  it  lives.     This  vision  of  His  love  is  the 
counteracting  stay.  The  soul  looks  safely  on  itself,  if  it  look  still  more  earnestly  on 
its  Gk>d.    The  one  vision  is  the  true  complement  of  the  other.    S.  Once  more :  the 
same  truth  holds  good  as  to  our  progress  in  any  single  grace.    We  gain  more  by 
looking  on  what  is  perfect  than  by  striving  against  what  is  imperfect.    One  of  the 
strongest  laws  of  our  nature  is  the  law  of  imitation.    We  grow  into  what  we  behold. 
St.  Paul  is  only  expressing  this  great  law  of  assimilation  in  its  highest  reality,  when 
he  says  that,  ••  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into 
the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."     Objective 
faith  is  therefore  the  ordained  process  in  the  perfecting  of  the  inner  life.    We  sub- 
due our  pride  not  by  mourning  over  it,  but  by  feeding  on  the  lowliness  of  Jesus. 
We  learn  how  to  give  way  to  others  by  contemplating  His  self-sacrifice.    Anger  has 
no  power  over  us,  while  He  who  was  smitten  on  the  cheek  is  vividly  before  our 
mind.  We  are  stronger  to  bear  pain  whUewe  look  on  the  Crucifixion.  In  conclusion : 
The  catholic  principle  of  life  is  Christ  revealed  to  the  soul.    His  work  in  us  is  the 
impression  of  the  look  on  which  we  feed.     Our  likeness  to  Him  is  the  reproduction 
in  us  of  the  features  of  a  Countenance  towards  which  we  are  continually  turned. 
We  live  by  going  out  of  ourselves ;   we  become  what  we  look  upon.    "  We  live  by 
faith ;   not  by  sight."    We  are  what  we  believe.    As  some  of  the  lower  creatures 
change  their  colour  according  to  the  food  on  which  they  feed,  so  are  we  transformed 
by  that  which  we  have  received  within  as  the  daily  food  of  our  soul's  communings. 
The  realities  in  which  we  learn  to  live  become  our  own  real  life.     {Canon  T.  T. 
Carter.)        With  a  garment  down  to  the  foot,  and  ...  a  golden  girdle. — The 
worliVs  great  High  Priest : — I.  That  the  Son  of  Man,  who  was  on  the  eabth,  is 
THE  world's  High  Pbiest.     1.  The  apostle  saw  the  ascended  Saviour  as  the  High 
Priest  of  men.      2.  The  apostle  saw  in  the  High  Priest  of  men  the  tokens  of  His 


CHAP.  1.]  REVELATION, 


human  Incarnation.  II.  That  Christ  is  rROM  the  great  eternity.  "  His  head 
and  His  hairs  were  white  like  wool,  as  white  as  snow."  1.  As  from  the  great 
Eternity,  Christ  can  give  men  counsel.  2.  As  from  the  great  Eternity,  Christ 
should  win  the  reverence  of  men.  3.  As  from  the  great  Eternity,  Christ  is  the 
pattern  of  men.  III.  That  Christ  is  most  penetrating  in  His  scrutiny.  "And 
His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."  1.  That  Christ  is  most  penetrating  in  His  scrutiny 
of  the  creed,  conduct,  and  activity  of  His  Church.  2.  He  scrutinises  with  terrible 
wrath  the  conduct  of  the  enemies  of  His  Church.  IV.  That  Christ  is  most  un- 
wearied in  His  purposes.  "  And  His  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned 
in  a  furnace."  1.  Christ  is  unwearied  in  His  purpose  of  love  toward  His  Church 
and  Gospel.  2.  Christ  is  unwearied  in  His  purpose  of  moral  retribution  toward 
the  enemies  of  His  Church.  V.  That  Christ  is  most  sublime  and  effective  in 
His  utterances.  "  His  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters."  "  Out  of  His  mouth 
went  a  two-edged  sword."  1.  The  voice  of  Christ  is  majestic.  It  is  as  the 
resounding  of  many  waters.  2.  The  voice  of  Christ  is  diffusive.  The  sound  of  many 
waters  can  be  heard  at  a  great  distance,  in  almost  any  direction.  3.  The  voice  of 
Christ  is  piercing.  It  is  like  a  two-edged  sword.  VI.  That  Christ  is  supreme  in 
His  beneficent  glory.  "  And  His  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his 
strength."  1.  Because  of  the  glorious  majesty  that  is  in  Him.  2.  Because  of  the 
influence  He  exerts  upon  growth.  3.  Because  of  the  joy  He  inspires.  Lessons : 
1.  That  Christ  is  the  hope  of  His  Church  in  time  of  persecution.  2.  That  soul- 
yisions  are  given  to  men  at  times  of  holy  communion  with  Ood.  3.  That  the  world 
has  a  Divine  High  Priest.  {Joseph  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  offices  of  Christ  con- 
tinued  in  heaven: — 1.  The  authority  and  warrantableness  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ's  kingly  and  princely  office,  as  that  which  followeth,  doth  of  His  prophetical 
office :  hereby  letting  us  know,  that  our  Lord  Jesus's  being  in  heaven  and  in 
glory  hath  not  made  Him  lay  by  His  offices,  or  the  executing  of  them ;  but  He 
remains  King  and  Priest  for  ever  (Psa.  ex.) :  even  in  heaven  He  bears  His  offices 
to  His  Churches.  2.  That  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  not  only  bears  these  offices,  but 
in  an  excellent  and  glorious  manner.  There  is  no  such  king,  no  such  priest,  no 
such  prophet  as  He.  3.  It  holds  out  that  our  Lord  Jesus's  stateliness  and  glory 
doth  not  mar  nor  hinder  Him  in  the  application  of  His  offices,  and  executing  them 
for  the  good  of  His  Church.  Christ's  greatness  and  glory  is  so  far  from  unfitting  Him 
for  the  discharge  of  His  offices,  that  He  hath  robes  compacted,  and  Himself  so 
fitted,  as  He  may  handsomely  go  about  the  discharge  of  them,  being  still  girded, 
though  the  girdle  be  of  gold.  {James  Durham.)  His  head  and  His  hairs  were 
white. — The  exalted  Saviour : — 1.  "  His  head  and  His  hairs  were  white  like 
wool,  as  white  as  snow."  There  is  here  an  allusion  to  Daniel's  vision  of  the 
Ancient  of  Days  (Dan.  vii.  9-13).  (1)  His  head  of  snow  is  the  symbol  of  eternity. 
It  implies  the  perpetual  existence  of  His  Godhead.  (2)  His  hoary  head  is  the 
symbol  of  sovereignty.  (3)  The  hoary  head  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom.  This  is 
closely  connected  with  His  crown.  (4)  His  head,  and  His  hairs  of  wool  and  snow 
were  symbols  of  His  essential  holiness  and  immaculate  purity.  His  beauty  is  the 
beauty  of  holiness.  His  crown  is  the  crown  of  purity,  His  sceptre  is  the  sceptre  of 
righteousness.  The  best  and  fairest  of  the  sons  of  men  have  their  spots 
or  stains  ;  but  He  is  pure,  perfect,  and  unsullied.  (5)  The  head  of  snow  is 
the  symbol  of  glory.  The  word  "white,"  is  shining  or  resplendent;  it  is 
silvery,  glistening;  shining  like  lightning,  it  is  radiantly  bright,  pure,  white, 
effulgent,  expressive  of  the  purest  splendour.  2.  "  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame 
of  fire"  (Dan.  x.  6).  His  eyes  are  the  symbol  of  His  Deity  or  omniscience. 
His  knowledge  is  absolutely  perfect  and  infinite.  (1)  The  words  imply  the 
splendour  of  His  knowledge.  He  not  only  beholds  all  objects,  and  every 
object,  but  His  eyes  shed  a  splendour  on  everything  He  sees.  (2)  The  words  imply 
the  purity  of  His  knowledge.  He  beholds  holiness  with  infinite  delight.  He  is  of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  He  cannot  look  upon  sin.  He  is  light,  and  in 
Him  is  no  darkness  at  all.  (3)  The  words  imply  the  minuteness  of  His  knowledge. 
3.  "  And  His  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace."  This  is  the 
symbol  of  the  Deity  of  Christ,  His  Divine  power,  His  glory  and  majesty.  His 
eternity  and  immutability.  It  is  the  symbol  of  His  gracious  presence  with 
His  people.  4.  "And  His  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters."  There 
is  a  twofold  voice  attributed  to  Christ — the  voice  of  His  mercy,  and  the  voice 
of  His  majesty.  5.  "  And  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven  stars."  Stars  are 
symbols  of  rulers,  who  are  of  two  classes — civil  and  sacred.  We  proceed  to  con- 
sider the  next  symbol  mentioned,  the  "  right  hand  "  of  Christ.    The  right  hand  is 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  symbol  of  wisdom.  God's  hand  and  His  counsel  are  synonymous  terms :  it  is 
the  symbol  of  power — "  Thy  right  hand  is  become  glorious  in  power."  It  is  the 
symbol  of  honour.  It  is  the  symbol  of  favour:  The  man  of  God's  right 
hand  is  the  Son  of  His  love.  It  is  the  symbol  of  comfort :  "In  Thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy  ;  at  Thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  ever- 
more." It  is  the  symbol  oL  security:  The  child  was  caught  up  to  the 
throne  of  God,  beyond  the  reach  of  every  foe.  It  is  the  symbol  of  mercy: 
"  God  saves  by  His  right  hand,  and  the  arm  of  His  strength."  6.  "  Out  of  His 
mouth  went  a  sharp  two-edged  sword."  There  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  twofold  view 
of  the  voice  of  Christ :  the  voice  of  His  majesty,  and  the  voice  of  His  mercy.  It 
is  the  last  of  these  that  is  here  intended.  (1)  Why  is  the  Word  compared  to  a  sword  ? 
The  Word  is  compared  to  a  sword,  to  express  its  keen  and  penetrating  power,  its 
blessed  properties  and  mighty  operations.  It  has  a  moral  power  to  touch  the  heart,  to 
impress  the  image  of  the  truth  upon  the  mind,  to  lead  the  sinner  to  look  with  holy 
mourning  on  Him  whom  he  hath  pierced.  (2)  The  Word  of  God  is  called  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  because  it  was  indited  by  the  Spirit ;  because  it  is  employed  by 
the  Spirit ;  because  it  is  blessed  by  the  Spirit,  in  its  sweet  and  gracious  influences  ; 
because  it  is  explained  by  the  Spirit  — He  that  inspired  it  is  the  best  and  the  only 
infallible  expositor  ;  and,  finally,  because  its  gracious  effects  arise  from  His  power- 
ful operation  on  the  soul.  (3)  It  proceeds  out  of  Christ's  mouth,  as  the  only- 
begotten  Son  of  God  came  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father  to  reveal  Him.  (4)  It 
must  be  used  and  improved  by  every  child  of  God.  (5)  What  are  some  of  its  won- 
derful effects  ?  There  is  a  twofold  effect  of  the  Word  of  God — one  of  mercy,  and 
one  of  judgment.  7.  "  His  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength." 
(1)  There  is  majesty  in  the  symbol.  (2)  There  is  might  in  the  symbol.  (3)  There  is 
mercy  in  the  symbol.  What  a  blessing  to  creation  is  the  influence  of  the  sun ! 
What  a  blessing  to  the  universe  is  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  arising  with  healing 
and  salvation  in  His  wings  1  (4)  There  is  beauty  in  the  symbol.  The  sun  is  the 
loveliest  object  in  creation.  And  who  can  express  the  beauty  of  the  Saviour? 
(5)  It  is  also  the  symbol  of  His  favour  and  His  love.  When  the  face  is 
mild,  placid,  and  serene,  like  the  sun  without  a  cloud,  it  is  the  index  or 
emblem  of  favour  and  affection.  (6)  It  is  the  symbol  of  anger  as  well  as 
of  love :  "The  face  of  God  is  set  against  them  that  do  wickedly."  (7)  It  is  the  symbol, 
in  a  word,  of  knowledge,  of  holiness,  and  happiness.  Thus  the  Sun  of  Eighteous- 
ness shines  upon  the  saint,  and  pours  the  marvellous  light  of  His  glory,  in  incom- 
prehensible sweetness  and  majesty,  upon  the  weary  pilgrim  in  passing  through 
the  wilderness.  (Jas.  Young.)  The  white  hair  of  Jesus  : — I  will  tell  you  of  the 
sorrow,  the  beauty,  and  the  antiquity  of  Jesus.  1.  There  is  nothing  that  so  soon 
changes  the  colour  of  the  hair  as  trouble.  Well,  surely,  Jesus,  my  Lord,  had 
enough  suffering  to  whiten  His  hair.  2.  My  text  sets  forth  the  beauty  of  Christ. 
Whimsical  fashion  changes  its  mind  very  often  as  to  which  is  the  best  colour  for 
the  hair.  The  Eomans  sprinkled  theirs  with  silver  and  gold.  Our  ancestors 
powdered  theirs  white.  Human  custom  decides  this  and  declares  that ;  but  God 
declares  that  He  likes  frost  colour  best  when  He  says  :  "  The  hoary  head  is  a  crown 
of  glory  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness."  3.  The  antiquity  of  the  Jesus.  It 
is  no  new  Christ  that  has  come.  He  saw  the  first  star  beam  on  the  darkness,' the 
first  wave  swing  to  its  place,  and  He  heard  the  first  rock  jar  down  to  its  place  in  the 
mountain-socket.  "His  hair  is  white  as  the  wool,  as  white  as  the  snow" — an 
aged  Christ.  Ah,  that  gives  me  so  much  confidence  1  It  is  the  same  Jesus  that 
heard  David's  prayer  —  the  same  Jesus  on  whose  breast  John  laid.  You 
cannot  bring  Him  a  new  case.  He  has  had  ten  thousand  cases  just  like 
it  before.  He  is  an  aged  Christ.  There  are  times  when  we  want  chiefly  the 
young  and  the  gay  about  us ;  but  when  I  am  in  deep  trouble  give  me  a 
fatherly  old  man  or  a  motherly  old  woman.  More  than  once  in  the  black  night 
of  sorrow  have  I  hailed  the  grey  dawn  of  an  old  man's  hair.  When  I  want 
courage  for  life  I  love  to  think  of  Christ  as  young  and  ardent;  but  when 
I  feel  the  need  of  sympathy  and  condolence  I  bring  before  me  the 
picture  of  an  old  Jesus :  "  His  hairs  as  white  as  the  wool,  as  white  as 
the  snow."  Is  there  not  a  balm  in  this  for  the  aged?  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fixe.— Christ  the  Truth : — Fire  is  the  element  used  to 
consume ;  and  when  we  think  of  our  Master's  character  in  the  light  of  that  fiery 
vision,  what  do  we  see  ?  Well,  putting  it  into  the  plain  language  of  e very-day  life, 
what  St.  John  must  have  remembered,  and  what  you  and  I  must  remember,  is  not 
so  much  the  actual  authority  of  the  Judge  as  the  innate  sincerity  of  Christ.    Christ 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  61 

■was  true.  He  never  flinched  from  the  entirety  of  truth.  He  met  philosopher 
and  Pharisee  and  Sadducee  as  He  met  all  others,  with  perfect  calmness  and 
decision ;  but  with  firmness  and  without  relenting  He  dragged  out  their  con- 
temptible baseness  of  thought  and  purpose,  and  set  it  out  in  the  sunshine  before 
the  eyes  of  all,  and  said  to  them  all,  "Oh,  ye  hypocrites!"  And  when  He  met 
those  who  talk  about  the  religion  of  impulsiveness  and  not  the  religion  of  principle 
— with  the  men  whose  religion  varied  with  every  breath  of  public  opinion,  who 
held  no  truth  long,  who  grasped  this  thing  as  being  very  useful  to-day,  and  flung 
it  to  the  winds  this  day  week — with  this  sort  of  people  He  dealt,  to  their  intense 
and  surprised  mortification,  in  order  to  wound  their  consciences  and  teach  them 
that  religion  requires  permanent  self-denial.  And  when  He  met  the  soul  which 
was  at  least  approximately  near  to  Him,  the  soul  that  felt  and  acknowledged  its 
sin,  and  did  not  play  a  part,  or  put  on  airs,  or  have  a  stately  gait  or  philosophic 
mind — to  that  soul  He  was  tenderer  than  a  woman,  kinder  than  the  truest  friend, 
bringing  to  that  soul  the  bright  Ughts  of  hope  and  the  stars  of  eternity ;  no  trace  of 
scorn  then,  no  anger.  And  so  He  went  through  the  world;  dragging  out  the 
defects  of  the  unreal,  condemning  the  falsehood  of  His  friends,  and  this  at  the  risk 
of  all  His  popularity.  Christ  never  flattered,  never  bowed  down  to  human  opinion ; 
knowing  what  was  in  the  mind  He  was  ever  true  and  sincere.  I  want  you  to 
meditate  upon  that  example,  to  meditate  upon  His  force  of  sincerity  as  it  touches 
us.  Now  apply  that  truth  and  sincerity  to  the  judgment.  Christ  is  coming,  Christ 
shall  judge  us.  Apply  that  character  to  the  judgment.  The  last  judgment,  so 
Scripture  tells  us,  will  be  the  unfailing,  true,  righteous  judgment  of  God.  God's 
judgment — the  judgment  of  the  coming  Christ — is  discriminating  with  fine 
accuracy ;  it  deals  with  facts,  and  not  with  professions  of  heart,  as  we  shall  know 
in  that  last  hour.  Christ  shall  save  us  because  He  is  true.  "  His  eyes  are  as  a 
flame  of  fire."  And  then  remember  that  it  shall  be  a  judgment  when  He  shall 
show  whether  our  confession  was  true.  {Canon  Knox  Little.)  And  His  feet 
like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a  furnace.— T/ie  administration  of 
Christ : — By  our  feet  we  move  from  one  place  to  another,  that  we  may  execute  the 
purposes  which  we  have  formed.  The  feet  of  Christ,  then,  are  descriptive  of  His 
execution  of  His  designs  by  the  dispensations  of  His  grace  and  providence — more 
especially  of  the  signal  manifestations  of  His  glory  in  seasons  of  difficulty  and 
danger.  1.  This  symbol  exhibits  to  us  the  stability  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and 
the  energy  of  His  government.  The  great  cause  of  the  stability  of  Christ's  king- 
dom amidst  all  attempts  to  shake  and  subvert  it,  is  the  invincible  energy  of  His 
administration.  "  His  feet  are  Uke  fine  brass."  He  has  fixed  His  plan  of  govern- 
ment with  infinite  wisdom,  and  He  carries  it  into  full  effect.  No  circumstances 
can  occur  to  thwart  or  disappoint  Him,  2.  The  absolute  purity  of  the  administration 
of  Christ.  "His  feet  are  like  fine,"  or  polished,  "brass,  burning,"  purified,  "in 
a  furnace."  Men,  indeed,  have  attempted  to  defile  His  purity  and  to  sully  His 
spotless  character.  They  have  clothed  Him  with  the  most  detestable  attributes. 
They  have  accused  His  administration  of  folly  and  injustice.  They  have  invoked 
His  sacred  name  to  prosper  plans  of  iniquity,  and  to  sanction  the  most  unhallowed 
usurpations.  No  ;  stiU  "  His  feet "  are  pure  and  bright  "  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if 
they  burned  in  a  furnace."  3.  The  administration  of  Christ  abounds  with  splendid 
and  stupendous  displays  of  His  glory.  His  reign  suffers  no  interruption,  and  with 
perfect  wisdom  and  righteousness  He  invariably  administers  His  great  kingdom. 
His  enemies,  however,  sometimes  think  that  He  has  abandoned  the  reins  of 
government,  and  is  indifferent  how  things  are  conducted.  They  feel  and  act  as  if 
they  were  without  superintendence  and  control  (Psa.  xciv.  5-7).  The  ungodly 
rejoice.  The  neglected  and  suffering  saints  become  fearful  and  despondent.  But 
there  are  seasons  in  which  the  King  of  Zion  gloriously  appears,  fulfilling  promises 
and  executing  threatenings,  working  salvation  for  His  Church,  and  easing  Himself 
of  His  adversaries.  4.  Christ  is  continually  making  progress  in  accomplishing  His 
wise  and  holy  purposes.  He  is  ever  carrying  forward  His  great  plan  of  mercy  and 
of  judgment,  5,  Let  us  make  the  administration  of  Christ  the  subject  of  our 
devout  study.  The  knowledge  which  we  shall  thus  acquire  of  His  character,  the 
confirmation  which  we  shall  thus  receive  to  our  faith,  will  amply  reward  all  our 
pains.  {Jos.  Stark.)  His  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters. — The  voice  of 
Christ : — Many  have  supposed  that  there  is  here  an  allusion  to  the  sound  of  a 
cataract.  The  reference,  however,  appears  to  be,  not  to  the  roar  of  a  waterfall,  but 
to  the  motion  of  the  tides.  The  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  speaking  in  the  gospel 
may,  for  various  reasons,  be  compared  to  the  sound  of  many  waters.    I.  It  is 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

NEVER  ALTOGETHER  SILENT.  How  many  are  employed,  in  almost  every  quarter  of 
the  globe,  in  proclaiming  the  message  of  mercy!  As  the  noise  of  the  seas  is 
created  by  a  multitude  of  separate  waves,  so  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  are 
announced  by  a  multitude  of  individual  heralds.  II.  The  voice  of  Christ  is 
ADDRESSED  TO  ALL  THE  ENDS  OF  THE  EARTH.  As  we  Stand  upon  the  bcach,  wc  may 
have  something  like  a  community  of  feeling  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  most 
distant  climes ;  for  the  waters  of  the  same  great  deep  wash  the  shores  of  all  the 
continents  of  the  globe,  and  speak  in  the  same  tones  of  mystery  and  magnificence 
to  all  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Adam.  It  may  be  said  of  the  ebbing  and  flowing 
tides,  as  of  the  other  works  of  creation  and  of  Providence  (Psa.  xix.  3,  4).  And  the 
love  of  Christ  is  expansive  as  the  broad  ocean ;  for  He  sends  forth  His  invitations 
of  mercy  to  every  kindred  and  people  and  nation.  The  inhabitants  of  the  various 
countries  of  the  globe  cannot  understand  each  other's  speech,  as  every  province  has 
its  own  tongue  or  dialect ;  but  the  noise  of  the  seas  is  a  universal  language,  pro- 
claiming to  all  the  power  and  the  majesty  of  the  ever-living  Jehovah.  And  how 
delightful  to  anticipate  the  period  when  the  harmony  of  the  heralds  of  salvation 
will  be  as  the  sound  of  many  waters,  when  the  same  truths  will  be  echoed  from 
shore  to  shore,  and  when  the  uniform  reverberation  of  the  tides  will  be  emblematic 
of  the  one  gospel  preached  among  all  nations!  (Isa.  lii.  8).  III.  The  voice  of 
Christ  is  fitted  to  inspire  us  with  awe  and  reverence.  There  is  something  in 
the  very  aspect  of  the  ocean  which  expands  and  elevates  the  mind.  Almost  every 
one  is  constrained  to  be  serious  as  he  stands  solitary  on  the  strand,  and  looks 
abroad  upon  the  world  of  waters  before  him,  and  listens  to  the  ceaseless  agitation 
of  the  far-resounding  surge.  The  shoreless  sea  is  the  mirror  of  infinite  duration ; 
and  as  the  floods  lift  up  their  voice,  we  feel  as  if  they  were  repeating  their  com- 
mission from  the  High  and  the  Holy  One  who  inhabiteth  eternity  (Psa.  xxix.  3,  4). 
It  is  thus,  too,  with  the  gospel  (Psa.  cxix.  161).  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  has  a 
self-evidencing  power — it  commends  itself  to  the  conscience — it  carries  with  it  a 
conviction  that  it  is  a  communication  from  heaven.  IV.  The  voice  of  Christ  is 
BY  many  disregarded.  How  few,  as  they  pass  along  the  beach,  ever  think  of 
listening  to  the  dashing  of  the  waves !  Some  may  mark  their  various  murmurs, 
and  their  magnificent  echoes,  and,  ascending  in  thought  to  Him  who  formed  the 
seas,  and  who  sendeth  the  wind  out  of  His  treasuries,  may  contemplate  with  adoring 
wonder  the  glory  of  Jehovah ;  but  upon  the  mass  of  individuals  the  noise  of  the 
many  waters  makes  no  impression.  And  it  is  thus,  too,  with  the  gospel.  How 
many  make  light  of  the  great  salvation !  How  many  listen  to  the  joyful  sound 
as  to  a  matter  in  which  they  have  no  interest — even  as  to  the  noise  of  many 
waters !  {W.  D.  Killen,  D.D.)  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven  stars. — Lessons 
from  the  Christ  of  Patmos  : — I.  The  position  of  instrumentality  in  reference 
TO  OUR  Lord  Jesus.  "  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven  stars."  God  has  ordained 
that  there  shall  be  men  anointed  of  His  Spirit,  who  shall,  beyond  others,  be  the 
means  of  conversion  and  edification,  and  these  are  as  stars  in  the  sky  of  the 
Church.  1.  Note  well,  that  instrumentality  is  of  temporary  use,  and  is  intended 
for  the  time  of  darkness.  The  Lord  will  use  instruments  till  He  Himself  appears, 
but  even  those  whom  He  calls  "  stars "  are  only  the  transient  apparatus  of  a 
passing  night.  2.  This  should  make  us  think  very  humbly  of  ourselves  ;  for  this 
illustrates  our  weakness.  Were  we  lights  of  the  first  magnitude,  the  darkness 
would  no  longer  remain.  3.  Still,  instrumentality  is  honourably  spoken  of  by  Him 
whose  judgment  is  supremely  wise.  The  Lord  Jesus  does  not  despise  the  agency 
which  He  employs.  4.  Stars  are  guides,  and  so  are  the  Lord's  true  ministers. 
Some  stars  in  yonder  sky  have  done  measureless  service  to  wanderers  over  the 
trackless  deep,  and  to  those  who  have  lost  themselves  in  the  labyrinths  of  the 
forest.  5.  A  certain  star,  the  morning  star,  is  also  the  herald  of  the  day.  Happy 
messenger  of  God,  who  has  the  sound  of  his  Master's  feet  behind  him.  6.  It  is  an 
honourable  comparison  that  the  instruments  of  God's  good  pleasure  have  put 
upon  them  in  being  compared  to  stars ;  for  the  stars  are  the  comfort  and  solace 
of  the  night.  '*  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth 
glad  tidings ! "  7.  Instrumentality  is  honourably  placed ;  for  we  see  the  stars  in 
the  right  hand  of  Him  who  is  the  First  and  the  Last.  They  may  be  despised  by 
those  who  oppose  the  Word,  but  they  need  not  be  ashamed ;  for  while  the  right 
hand  of  God  is  their  position,  they  are  more  honourable  than  the  princes  and  kings 
of  the  earth.  8.  See,  also,  how  true  instrumentality  is  graciously  sustained.  The 
chosen  servants  of  the  Lord  are  under  special  protection ;  for  they  shine  in  Christ's 
right  hand.    11.  The  place  of  real  power.    "  Out  of  His  mouth  went  a  sharp 


CHAP.  1.]  REVELATION.  63 

two-edged  sword."  Not  out  of  the  stars,  but  out  of  our  Lord's  mouth  goes  the 
strength  which  wins  the  day.  1.  The  true  power  of  the  Church  lies  in  Christ 
personally.  The  power  of  a  Church  in  the  presence  of  her  Lord.  He  has  not 
deposited  power  in  men ;  He  retains  it  in  Himself,  and  from  Himself  we  must  seek  it. 
Behold  the  infinite  resources  of  the  Church ;  all  power  is  in  Jesus,  and  Jesus  is 
with  His  people.  2.  The  power  lies  in  Christ's  word  :  "  Out  of  His  mouth  went  a 
sharp  two-edged  sword."  The  power  is  not  in  the  stars,  but  in  the  word  which 
made  the  stars.  3.  It  is  not  only  His  word,  but  it  is  His  word  as  He  Himself 
speaks  it.  It  is  not  the  letter  of  the  word  which  Jesus  spake  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago  which  works  wonders ;  but  it  is  that  same  word  as  He  now  delivers  it 
into  our  ear  and  heart  by  His  own  living,  loving,  heart-subduing  voice.  4.  The 
word  is  in  itself  adapted  to  the  Divine  end,  for  it  is  sharp  and  two-edged;  and 
when  it  is  spoken  by  the  Lord,  its  adaptation  is  seen.  The  gospel  is  very  sharp 
when  the  Spirit  of  God  lays  it  home.  No  doctrine  of  men  has  such  piercing 
power,  in.  The  source  of  true  glory.  1.  To  the  saints  the  glory  of  Christ  lies 
in  Himself :  His  own  countenance  is  the  centre  of  glory.  2.  The  favour  of  Christ, 
if  it  be  enjoyed  by  a  Church,  is  effectual  for  all  purposes.  3.  The  brightness  of 
our  Lord  cannot  be  measured,  neither  could  His  glory  be  endured  of  mortal  men  if 
once  it  were  fully  revealed.  "His  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his 
strength."  John  therefore  could  not  gaze  upon  that  countenance,  but  feU  at  his 
Lord's  feet  as  dead.  And  if  the  Lord  Jesus  were  to  manifest  Himself  to  us  as  He 
really  is,  in  all  His  unveiled  majesty,  we  should  die  with  excess  of  joy.  4.  If 
Christ's  face  be  so  bright,  then  we  know  where  to  trace  all  the  light  and  all  the 
glory  that  we  have  ever  seen  or  known.  Is  there  any  beauty  in  the  landscape  ? 
It  is  the  sun  that  makes  it  beautiful.  Is  there  any  brightness  in  any  object  round 
about  us  ?  It  is  the  sun  that  makes  it  bright.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  His  coun- 
tenance was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength. — Christ's  countenance  compared 
to  the  sun: — 1.  Because  of  the  glorious  majesty  that  is  in  it  (Cant.  v.  15). 
There  is  an  excellency  and  beauty  in  it  that  dazzles  and  obscures  all  the  excellency 
and  beauty  of  the  world,  even  as  the  light  of  the  sun  obscures  the  stars.  2. 
Because  of  the  lightsomeness  of  it ;  for  Christ  is  to  believers  as  the  sun  is  to  the 
world  (John  i.  9).  3.  His  countenance  is  as  the  sun  shining  in  his  strengh,  for  the 
refreshingness  of  it  (Psa.  iv.  6,  7).  His  countenance  maketh  the  heart  more  glad 
than  corn  and  wine  and  worldly  comforts  whatsoever.  4.  His  countenance  is  so 
compared  from  the  effectual  influence  it  hath  on  believers'  growth  (Mai.  iv.). 
{James  Durham.) 

Vers.  17-20.  I  fell  at  His  feet  as  dead. — Reverence  : — ^I.  Every  age  has  its  moral 
as  well  as  its  social  and  political  tastes ;  and  reverence  is  not  one  of  the  most 
POPULAR  VIRTUES  OF  THE  PRESENT  DAY.  Many  a  man  who  would  be  anxious  to  be 
considered  brave,  or  truthful,  or  even  patient  and  benevolent,  would  not  be  altogether 
pleased  to  hear  himself  described  as  a  reverent  man.  Keverence  he  imagines  to  be 
the  temper  of  mind  which  readily  crouches  down  to  the  falsehood  which  it  dares  not 
confront ;  which  is  easy-going,  soft,  feeble,  passive.  Reverence,  he  thinks,  lives  in 
the  past,  lives  in  the  unreal,  lives  in  sentiment ;  lives  for  the  sake  of  existing  institu- 
tions, good  or  bad.  It  is  naturally  fostered  by  their  advocates,  while  it  is  the  foe  of 
active  virtue  in  all  its  forms.  This  idea  of  reverence  is  entertained  by  many  persons 
who  are  in  no  degree  responsible  for  the  shape  it  takes,  and  who  are  quite  sincere  in 
entertaining  it.  They  do  but  take  in  and  accept  and  act  on  judgments  which  are 
floating  in  the  mental  atmosphere  which  they  breathe.  But,  of  course,  originally, 
this  atmosphere  has  been  made  what  it  is  by  various  contributors  and  experimentalists. 
And  among  these  have  been  some  who  knew  quite  weU  that,  if  you  want  to  get  rid  of 
a  doctrine  or  a  virtue,  the  best  way  is  boldly  to  caricature  it.  You  ask  me.  What  is 
reverence  ?  If  we  must  attempt  a  definition,  it  is  not  easy  to  improve  upon  the  saying 
that  it  is  "  the  sincere,  the  practical  recognition  of  greatness."  And,  when  speaking 
thus,  let  us  take  greatness  in  its  widest  sense.  The  Highest  Greatness,  the  Greatness 
from  which  all  other  greatness  proceeds,  is  entitled  to  the  deepest  reverence.  If  the 
recognition  of  such  greatness  is  to  be  not  merely  adequate  but  sincere,  it  will  take 
unwonted  forms,  and  make  exacting  demands  upon  us.  Certainly,  reverence  is  not 
the  homage  which  weak  minds  pay  to  acceptable  fictions.  It  would  not  be  a  virtue 
if  it  were.  AU  virtue  is  based  on  truth.  Keverence  is  the  sense  of  truth  put  in 
practice.  Nor  is  reverence  the  foe  of  energy.  We  can  only  imitate  with  a  good 
conscience  that  which  we  revere ;  and  reverence  stimulates  the  energy  of  imitation. 
Accordingly,  on  this  very  account,  reverence  of  a  worthy  object,  the  sincere  recogni- 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

tion  of  real  greatness  is  not  an  excellence  which  may  be  dropped  or  taken  up  at 
pleasure.  It  is  a  necessary  virtue,  whether  for  a  man  or  for  a  society.  The  man 
without  reverence  is  the  man  who  can  see  in  God's  universe  no  greatness  which 
transcends  himself.  The  really  pitiable  thing  is  to  revere  nothing.  Thoughtful 
Americans  have  said  that,  amid  all  the  material  greatness  of  their  country — and  it 
is  sufficiently  astonishing — their  gravest  anxiety  for  her  future  is  caused  by  the 
absence  of  reverence  among  all  classes  of  her  people ;  the  absence  of  any  sincere 
recognition  of  a  greatness  which  may  ennoble  its  reverers.  11.  Eeverence,  then,  is 
by  no  means  only  or  chiefly  an  ecclesiastical  virtue  ;  it  is  necessary  to  the  perfec- 
tion of  man  as  man,  and  to  the  well-being  of  society.  But  reverence  is  peculiarly 
A  CREATION  OF  RELIGION.  And  if  we  ask  why  religion  is  thus  the  teacher  and  the 
Church  the  school  of  reverence,  the  answer  is,  Because  religion  unveils  before  the 
soul  of  man  a  Greatness  compared  with  which  all  human  greatness  is  insignificance 
itself.  To  the  eye  of  rehgious  faith,  over  every  life,  every  character,  every  institution, 
every  ideal,  there  is  inscribed,  "  God  alone  is  great."  If  the  Christian's  eye  rests 
reverently  upon  an  excellence,  whether  of  saint,  or  office,  or  institution,  beneath  His 
throne,  it  is  not  as  on  something  satisfying  or  final :  it  is  as  on  an  emanation  from 
the  Source  of  greatness.  When  reverence  is  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  it 
takes  a  new  form,  or  it  adopts  a  new  expression.  It  offers  that  which  it  offers  to 
none  other  or  less  than  God.  It  offers  adoration.  The  least  that  reverence  can  do 
in  the  presence  of  boundless  Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness,  is  to  prostrate  before 
Him  every  created  faculty.  For  close  contact  with  God  produces  on  the  soul  of  man, 
first  of  all,  an  impression  of  awe ;  and  this  impression  is  deep  in  exact  proportion  to 
the  closeness  of  the  contact.  When  reverence  for  God  is  rooted  in  the  soul,  the  soul 
sees  God  in  all  that  reflects  and  represents  Him  on  earth,  and  yields  it  for  His  sake 
appropriate  recognition.  The  father,  representing  His  parental  authority;  the 
mother,  reflecting  His  tender  love ;  the  powers  that  be  in  the  State,  ordained  by  God 
as  His  ministers ;  pastors  of  His  Church,  to  whom  He  has  said,  "  He  that  despiseth 
you  despiseth  Me" ;  great  and  good  men,  whether  in  past  ages  or  our  contemporaries; 
the  Bible,  which  embodies  for  all  time  His  revelation  of  Himself  and  His  will 
concerning  us  ;  the  laws  of  the  natural  world,  when  they  are  really  ascertained,  as 
being  His  modes  of  working ;  the  sacraments,  as  channels  of  His  grace,  or  veils  of 
His  presence ;  all  that  belongs  to  the  public  worship  of  Christ  in  His  temples  here  on 
earth — these  are  objects  of  Christian  reverence  because  they  are  inseparable  from 
Him  Who  is  the  Only  Great.  Conclusion :  1.  Eeverence  is  a  test,  a  measure  of 
faith.  We  do  not  see  God  with  our  bodily  eyes :  faith  is  a  second  sight  which  does 
see  Him.  If  men  see  God,  they  wiU  behave  accordingly.  Apply  this  to  behaviour 
in  a  church.  But  if  He  is  with  us,  if  His  presence  explains  and  justifies  aU  that  is 
said  and  sung,  must  it  not  follow  that  whatever  expresses  our  feeling  of  lowly  awe 
at  the  nearness  of  the  Most  Holy,  before  whom  His  angels  veil  their  faces,  is  but  the 
common  sense  of  the  occasion.  No  one  could  for  long  lounge  back  in  an  easy  chair 
if  moved  by  a  sense  of  burning  indignation ;  no  one  with  tender  affection  in  his 
heart  could  long  maintain  an  expression  of  countenance  which  implied  that  he  was 
entirely  out  of  temper.  He  would  be  conscious  that  the  contrast  was  ridiculous.  In 
the  same  way,  if  a  man  sees  God,  he  will  behave  as  it  is  natural  to  behave  in  the 
presence  of  the  Almighty.  He  will  be  too  absorbed  to  look  about  at  his  fellow- 
worshippers  ;  too  much  alive  to  the  greatness  and  awf  ulness  of  God  to  care  what 
others  think  about  himself :  he  will  yield  to  those  instinctive  expressions  of  reverence 
which  the  Creator  has  implanted  in  us  by  nature  and  refined  and  heightened 
by  grace ;  and  he  will  find  that  the  reverence  of  the  soul  is  best  secured 
when  the  body,  its  companion  and  instrument,  is  reverent  also.  2.  Eeverence 
begins  from  within.  It  cannot  be  learned  as  a  code  of  outward  conduct. 
To  act  and  speak  reverently,  a  man  must  feel  reverently;  and  if  he  is  to 
feel  reverently,  he  must  see  our  Lord.  If  he  feels  what  it  is  to  be  in  God's 
presence,  to  speak  to  Him,  to  ask  Him  to  do  this  or  that,  to  promise  Him  to  attempt 
this  or  that ;  if  he  has  any  idea  of  the  meaning  of  these  solemn  acts  of  the  soul,  the 
outward  proprieties  will  follow.  3.  Lastly,  reverence,  the  deepest,  the  truest,  is 
perfectly  compatible  with  love.  In  sober  earnest,  reverence  is  the  salt  which 
preserves  the  purity  of  affection,  without  impairing  its  intensity.  We  are  so  framed 
that  we  can  only  love  for  long  that  which  we  heartily  respect.  The  passion  which 
is  lavished  for  a  few  hours  upon  an  object  which  does  not  deserve  respect  is 
unworthy  of  the  sacred  name  of  love.  And  God,  when  He  asks  the  best  love  of  our 
hearts,  would  preserve  it  from  corruption  by  requiring  also  the  safeguard  of  reverence. 
(Canon  Liddon.)        The  fear  of  God  : — It  is  not  alone  the  first  beginnings  of  religion 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  65 

that  are  full  of  fear.  So  long  as  love  is  imperfect,  there  is  room  for  torment.  The 
thing  that  is  unknown,  yet  known  to  be,  will  always  be  more  or  less  formidable. 
When  it  is  known  as  immeasurably  greater  than  we,  and  as  having  claims  and 
making  demands  upon  us,  the  more  vaguely  these  are  apprehended,  the  more  room 
is  there  for  anxiety ;  and  when  the  conscience  is  not  clear,  this  anxiety  may  well 
mount  to  terror.  In  him  who  does  not  know  God,  and  must  be  anything  but 
satisfied  with  himself,  fear  towards  God  is  as  reasonable  as  it  is  natural,  and  serves 
powerfully  towards  the  development  of  his  true  humanity.  Until  love,  which  is  the 
truth  towards  God,  is  able  to  cast  out  fear,  it  is  well  that  fear  should  hold ;  it  is  a 
bond,  however  poor,  between  that  which  is  and  that  which  creates — a  bond  that  must 
be  broken,  but  a  bond  that  can  be  broken  only  by  the  tightening  of  an  infinitely 
closer  bond.  God  being  what  He  is,  a  God  who  loves  righteousness,  a  God  who,  that 
His  creature  might  not  die  of  ignorance,  died  as  much  as  a  God  could  die,  and  that 
is  Divinely  more  than  man  can  die,  to  give  him  Himself ;  such  a  God,  I  say,  may 
well  look  fearful  from  afar  to  the  creature  who  recognises  in  himself  no  imperative 
good,  who  fears  only  suffering,  and  has  no  aspiration,  only  wretched  ambition ! 
But  in  proportion  as  such  a  creature  comes  nearer,  grows  towards  Him  in  and  for 
whose  likeness  he  was  begun  ;  in  proportion,  that  is,  as  the  eternal  right  begins  to 
disclose  itself  to  him ;  in  proportion,  I  do  not  say  as  he  sees  these  things,  but  as  he 
nears  the  possibility  of  seeing  them,  will  his  terror  at  the  God  of  his  life  abate ; 
though  far  indeed  from  surmising  the  bliss  that  awaits  him,  he  is  drawing  more 
nigh  to  the  goal  of  his  nature,  the  central  secret  joy  of  sonship  to  a  God  who  loves 
righteousness  and  hates  iniquity,  does  nothing  He  would  not  permit  in  His  creature, 
demands  nothing  of  His  creature  He  would  not  do  Himself.  When  John  saw  the 
glory  of  the  Son  of  Man,  he  fell  at  His  feet  as  one  dead.  In  what  way  John  saw 
Him,  whether  in  what  we  vaguely  call  a  vision,  or  in  as  human  a  way  as  when  he 
leaned  back  on  His  bosom  and  looked  up  in  His  face,  I  do  not  now  care  to  ask :  it 
would  take  all  glorious  shapes  of  humanity  to  reveal  Jesus,  and  He  knew  the  right 
way  to  show  Himself  to  John.  Why,  then,  was  John  overcome  with  terror  ?  No 
glory  even  of  God  should  breed  terror ;  when  a  child  of  God  is  afraid,  it  is  a  sign 
that  the  word  "  Father  "  is  not  yet  freely  fashioned  by  the  child's  spiritual  mouth.  The 
glory  can  breed  terror  only  in  him  who  is  capable  of  being  terrified  by  it ;  while  he 
is  such  it  is  well  the  terror  should  be  bred  and  maintained,  until  the  man  seek  refuge 
from  it  in  the  only  place  where  it  is  not — in  the  bosom  of  the  glory.  Why,  then, 
was  John  afraid  ?  Why  did  the  servant  of  the  Lord  fall  at  His  feet  as  one  dead  ? 
Joy  to  us  that  he  did,  for  the  words  that  follow — surely  no  phantasmic  outcome  of 
uncertain  vision  or  blinding  terror !  They  bear  best  sign  of  their  source :  however 
given  to  his  ears,  they  must  be  from  the  heart  of  our  great  Brother,  the  one  Man, 
Christ  Jesus,  Divinely  human !  It  was  still  and  only  the  imperfection  of  the  disciple, 
unfinished  in  faith,  so  unfinished  in  everything  a  man  needs,  that  was  the  cause  of 
his  terror.  Endless  must  be  our  terror,  until  we  come  heart  to  heart  with  the  fire- 
core  of  the  universe,  the  first  and  the  last  and  the  Living  One !  But  oh,  the  joy  to  be 
told,  by  Power  Himself,  the  first  and  the  last,  the  Living  One — told  what  we  can  indeed 
then  see  must  be  true,  but  which  we  are  so  slow  to  believe — that  the  cure  for  trembling 
is  the  presence  of  Power ;  that  fear  cannot  stand  before  Strength ;  that  the  visible 
God  is  the  destruction  of  death ;  that  the  one  and  only  safety  in  the  universe  is  the  perfect 
nearness  of  the  Living  One !  God  is  being ;  death  is  nowhere !  What  a  thing  to  be 
taught  by  the  very  mouth  of  Him  who  knows !  Had  John  been  as  close  in  spirit  to 
the  Son  of  Man  as  he  had  been  in  bodily  presence,  he  would  have  indeed  fallen  at 
His  feet,  but  not  as  one  dead — as  one  too  full  of  joy  to  stand  before  the  life  that  was 
feeding  his  ;  he  would  have  fallen,  but  not  to  lie  there  senseless  with  awe  the  most 
holy ;  he  would  have  fallen  to  embrace  and  kiss  the  feet  of  Him  who  had  now  a 
second  time,  as  with  a  resurrection  from  above,  arisen  before  him,  in  yet  heavenlier 
plenitude  of  glory.  {G.  MacDonald.)  The  souVs  vision  of  Christ : — I.  The  times 
WHEN  THE  SOUL  GETS  ITS  BRIGHTEST  VISION  OF  Christ.  1.  In  times  of  persecution  and 
loneliness.  2.  In  the  communion  of  the  Lord's  day.  3.  Upon  the  threshold  of 
important  duty.  II.  Sometimes  these  visions  have  an  appalling  effect  upon  the 
60UL.  1.  There  is  in  this  terror  of  the  soul  an  element  of  deep  humility  and  reve- 
rence. 2.  This  terror  of  the  soul  is  not  overcome  by  the  most  intimate  friendship  with 
Christ.  III.  In  these  visions  the  good  are  consoled  and  strengthened  by  the 
merciful  condescension  of  Christ.  1.  There  was  the  strengthening  assurance  of 
a  kindly  action,  "  And  He  laid  His  right  hand  upon  me."  2.  There  was  the  encourag- 
ing utterance  of  a  compassionate  word,  "  Fear  not."  Lessons  :  1.  Soul-visions  are 
Divinely  given  to  the  good.    2.  Soul-visions  are  not  always  at  first  welcome  to  tlve 

5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap  i. 

good.  3.  That  the  compassion  of  Christ  renders  soul-visions  the  chief  joy  of  the 
Christian  life.  {Joseph  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  nature  and  design  of  the  vision: — 
I.  The  effect  produced  upon  the  apostle:  "When  I  saw  Him,"  he  says,  "I  fell 
at  His  feet  as  dead."  This  is  the  natural  effect  of  such  a  visitation  upon  the  senses 
and  sensibilities  of  the  human  frame.  If  an  imaginary  apparition  has  turned  many 
cold  and  motionless  with  fear,  no  wonder  that  it  should  have  been  done  by  the 
reality.  Our  feeble  natures  cannot  bear  the  lustre  of  heavenly  things.  How 
admirably  our  sight  and  all  our  sensations  and  powers  are  adapted  to  the  precise 
distance  of  the  world  of  our  habitation  from  the  sun !  Upon  the  same  principle, 
He  who  has  adapted  the  light  of  nature  to  our  senses  has,  by  a  still  more  elaborate 
process,  and  involving  far  higher  dependencies,  given  us  such  discoveries  of  the 
methods  of  His  grace  as  are  fitted  to  our  precise  condition  in  this  life,  and  will  adapt 
them,  with  equal  wisdom  and  grace,  to  our  more  exalted  position  hereafter.  II.  The 
MEANS  BY  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  WAS  REVIVED  :  "  He  laid  His  right  hand  upon  me,  saying 
unto  me.  Fear  not."  It  is  evident  from  this  circumstance  that  the  vision  was  now 
close  before  him.  The  same  hand  which  had  been  seen  upon  the  seven  lamps  was 
now  laid  upon  him.  Here  was  a  further  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  vision.  How 
easily  could  that  hand  have  crushed  him !  How  well  it  knew  the  weight  of  a  hand 
which  distinguishes  mercy  from  judgment !  How  familiar  with  the  motions  indicative 
of  tenderness  and  aid !  This  friendly  act  is  accompanied  with  the  encouraging  words, 
"  Fear  not!  "  It  dispels  at  once  aU  painful  apprehensions  from  the  mind  of  John, 
restores  the  vigour  of  his  frame,  and  enables  him  calmly  to  survey  the  unearthly  and 
irradiated  image  before  him,  and  to  receive  instructions  from  His  lips.  Sudden 
changes,  whether  of  a  beneficial  or  of  a  disastrous  kind,  have  their  effect,  first  upon 
the  old,  and  then  upon  the  renovated  part  of  our  natures.  The  more,  indeed,  we 
are  habituated  to  the  contemplation  and  indulgence  of  spiritual  motives,  the  more 
promptly  will  they  come  to  our  aid,  and  the  nearer  they  wlU  approach  to  the  instinct 
of  a  new  nature  ;  but  we  can  never  expect  to  arrive  at  such  a  degree  of  refinement  in 
the  present  state,  in  which  the  instinct  of  nature  shall  be  surpassed  by  the  promptitude 
of  grace,  for  that  would  be  to  suppose  their  characteristic  distinction  to  be  destroyed. 

III.    A  MORE  FAMILIAR  ANNOUNCEiVIENT   OF  HiS  PERSON  IS  NOW  GIVEN  :    "  I  am  the  first 

and  the  last,"  &g.  TV.  The  commission  is  renewed  :  "  Write  the  things,"  &c.  {G. 
Rogers.)  The  prostrate  apostle: — I.  The  prostration  of  the  apostle:  "I  fell  at 
His  feet  as  dead."  1.  This  was  the  prostration  of  guilt  and  unworthiness,  arising 
from  the  presence  of  a  sin-abhorring  God,  If  anything  can  humble  a  sinful  creature, 
it  is  to  stand  in  the  presence  of  infinite  purity,  greatness,  and  majesty.  2.  This  was 
the  prostration  of  weakness  and  mortality.  3.  This  was  the  prostration  of  terror  and 
alarm.  4.  This  was  the  prostration  of  holy  worship.  5.  This  was  the  prostration  of 
satisfied  delight.  6.  Here  we  may  see  the  overwhelming  power  of  the  majesty  of 
God.  7.  Here  we  may  see  the  boundless  love  and  compassion  of  Jesus.  He  deals 
with  His  people  in  infinite  kindness.  As  their  days  are,  their  strength  shall  be.  II. 
The  gracious  act  of  our  blessed  Lord:  "He  laid  His  right  hand  upon  me."  1.  This 
was  a  human  hand ;  so  it  seemed  to  be.  One  like  the  similitude  of  the  sons  of  men 
touched  the  pi'ophet's  lips,  and  one  who  was  the  Son  of  Man  laid  His  right  hand  on 
John.  2.  This  was  not  an  angel's  hand,  but  the  right  hand  of  Jesus.  Amidst  the 
splendours  of  the  vision,  John  might  forget  that  the  Son  of  Man  was  the  actor  on  the 
scene.  3.  This  was  the  act  of  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  who  gathers  the  lambs  with 
His  arm,  carries  them  in  His  bosom.  4.  This  was  the  act  of  our  great  High  Priest, 
who  is  possessed  of  infinite  tenderness,  who  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  all  our 
infirmities.  5.  This  touch  was  marvellous.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  did  wondrously, 
and  Manoah  and  his  wife  looked  on ;  everything  here  was  astonishing  and  wonderful. 
6.  This  touch  was  mysterious :  He  looks  to  the  earth,  and  it  trembles ;  He  touches 
the  mountains,  and  they  smoke.  7.  This  touch  was  omnipotent :  it  was  the  saving 
strength  of  His  right  hand  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  10-15).  8.  There  was  majesty  in  the  touch ; 
it  was  the  touch  of  that  hand  which  He  lifts  up  to  heaven  and  says,  I  live  for  ever. 
9.  There  was  mercy  in  the  touch.  The  eye  that  pities,  and  the  arm  that  brings 
salvation,  meet  together  here  in  marvellous  conjunction.  10.  There  was  comfort  in 
the  touch  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  11.  There  was  Divine  blessedness  conveyed  by  the  touch, 
12.  There  was  infinite  love  in  this  mysterious  act.  It  was  not  a  heavy  blow,  but  a 
kind  and  gentle  touch.  III.  The  comfort  and  encouragement  presented  to  John  : 
"  Saying  unto  me,  Fear  not."  Fear  not  the  wrath  of  God,  for  He  is  your  Father. 
Fear  not  the  law  of  God,  for  it  has  been  magnified,  honoured,  and  exalted.  Fear 
not  the  curse  of  God,  for  it  has  been  inflicted,  exhausted,  and  removed.  Fear  not 
death,  the  dark  king  of  terrors,  for  by  My  death  he  has  been  vanquished,  and  swallowed 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  67 

up  in  victory.  IV.  The  grounds  of  holy  comfort.  1.  His  essential  Deity :  "  He  is 
the  first  and  the  last,  and  the  Living  One."  The  essential  Deity  of  the  God  of  Israel 
is  often  assigned  as  a  ground  of  comfort  to  the  ancient  Church  (Gen.  xv,  1 ;  Isa.  xli. 
10,  14,  xliii.  1,  2).  The  Deity  of  Christ  affords  the  same  ground  of  comfort  to  His 
people  still.  From  His  power,  under  the  feeling  of  frailty  and  infirmity ;  from  His 
eternity,  under  the  fear  of  approaching  dissolution  (Psa.  xc.  1,  2) ;  from  His  covenant 
mercy,  under  the  conviction  of  sin  and  unworthiness  (Psa.  ciii.  13-18) ;  from  His 
covenant  faithfulness,  under  the  fear  that  the  Lord  will  cast  US' off.  2.  His  person  : 
•♦  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead."  3.  His  ofifice:  "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was 
dead."  This  ofl&ce  consisteth  of  three  great  parts — the  ofl&ce  of  a  Prophet,  of  a  Priest, 
and  of  a  King.  4.  His  redeeming  work.  (Jas.  Young.)  Sudden  revelations: — 
Philip  said,  "  Show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth  us."  He  committed  the  supreme 
mistake  of  mankind  in  supposing  that  man  could  endure  the  sudden  and  perfect 
revelation  of  God.  Moses  said,  "  Show  me  Thy  glory,"  but  the  Lord  answered, 
•*  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face :  for  there  shall  no  man  see  Me  and  live."  Isaiah 
caught  a  glimpse  of  the  King,  and  exclaimed,  "  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  undone."  Job 
said,  "  Now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee :  wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes."  When  in  the  transfiguration  the  disciples  saw  Christ's  face  shine  as  the  sun, 
and  His  raiment  became  white  and  glistening,  "  they  fell  on  their  face  and  were  sore 
afraid."  We  think  ourselves  ready  for  any  revelation,  whereas  the  fact  is  that  our 
capacity  for  receiving  revelation  is  distinctly  limited,  and  in  this  matter,  as  in  every 
other,  we  are  straitened  in  ourselves  and  not  in  God,  and  partial  revelation  is 
explained  by  the  fact  that  God  adapts  the  light  to  the  vision  which  has  to  receive  it. 

1.  This  is  open  to  illustration  from  the  common  events  of  human  life.  (1)  Doctor's 
report  of  child's  health.  (2)  A  view  of  the  next  seven  years'  trials,  <fec.  (3)  We 
value  a  friend  for  his  discretion  in  such  matters.  And  yet  you,  who  cannot  bear 
these  revelations,  ask  to  be  shown  the  Infinite  God !  A  child  who  cannot  bear  the 
twinkle  of  a  candle  demands  to  look  upon  the  noonday  sun !  2.  This  is  gracious  on 
the  part  of  God.  Child :  all  the  books  he  has  to  learn,  at  once !  See  how  many 
different  languages  he  has  to  learn  without  ever  going  beyond  English !  Every  new 
department  has  a  language  of  its  own.  If  he  could  hear  them  all  at  once,  he  would 
enter  Babel  at  a  step  !  Observe  :  If  we  could  see  the  last  from  the  first,  it  would 
make  us  impatient  of  all  that  lay  between.  Mark  the  unhappy  effect  of  such 
impatience:  (1)  Imperfect  knowledge.  (2)  Eestless  temper.  (3)  Immature  con- 
clusions. A  great  part  of  the  advantage  is  in  the  actual  growing.  We  want  breadth 
as  well  as  height.  The  day  dawns  ;  the  year  develops  ;  the  harvest  comes  little  by 
little.  We  are,  then,  in  the  line  of  the  Divine  movement  in  receiving  revelation  by 
degrees.  This  is  the  law.  This  is  God's  way.  3.  Any  unwillingness  to  submit  to 
this  method  of  revelation  is  proof  of  an  unsound  and  presumptuous  mind.  It  would 
be  accounted  so  in  the  family,  in  business,  in  statesmanship.  In  all  things  it  is  well 
to  serve  an  apprenticeship.  Let  us  know  that  life  is  a  continual  revelation.  We 
cannot  see  over  the  wall  that  separates  to-morrow  from  to-day.  But  Christ  says, 
*'  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  follow  thou  Me."  We  are  revealed  to  ourselves  little  by 
little.  Another  hint,  another  gleam,  and  so  let  knowledge  come  to  us  even 
as  the  sun  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  John  could  recline 
on  Christ's  breast,  yet  was  dazzled  and  overpowered  by  the  suddenly 
revealed  glory  of  his  Lord.  There  is  a  familiar  side  of  Christ,  and  a  side 
unfamiliar.  Some  mountains  are  accessible  on  one  side  only.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
He  laid  His  right  hand  upon  me,  saying  unto  me.  Fear  not. — The  glorious  Master 
and   the  swooning  disciple : — I.    The  disciple   overpowered.     1.    The  occasion. 

2.  The  reason.  It  was  partly  fear.  That  fear  originated  partly  in  a  sense  of  his 
own  weakness  and  insignificance  in  the  presence  of  the  Divine  strength  and 
greatness.  How  shall  an  insect  live  in  the  furnace  of  the  sun?  We  are  such 
infirmity,  folly,  and  nothingness,  that,  if  we  have  but  a  glimpse  of  omnipotence, 
awe  and  reverence  prostrate  us  to  the  earth.  The  most  spiritual  and  sanctified 
minds,  when  they  fully  perceive  the  majesty  and  holiness  of  God,  are  so  greatly 
conscious  of  the  great  disproportion  between  themselves  and  the  Lord  that  they 
are  humbled  and  filled  with  holy  awe,  and  even  with  dread  and  alarm.  The 
reverence  which  is  commendable  is  pushed  by  the  infirmity  of  our  nature  into  a 
tear  which  is  excessive.  There  is  no  doubt,  too,  that  a  part  of  the  fear  which 
caused  John  to  swoon  arose  from  a  partial  ignorance  or  forgetfulaess  of  his  Lord. 
Shall  we  charge  this  upon  one  who  wrote  one  of  the  gospels  and  three  choice 
epistles?  Yes,  it  was  doubtless  so,  because  the  Master  went  on  to  instruct  and 
teach  him  in  order  to  remove  his  fear.     He  needed  fresh  knowledge  or  old  truths 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

brought  home  with  renewed  power  in  order  to  cure  his  dread.  As  soon  as  he  knew 
his  Lord  he  recovered  his  strength.  Study,  then,  your  Lord.  Make  it  your  life's 
object  to  know  Him.  3.  The  extent.  "As  dead."  It  is  an  infinite  blessing  to  us 
to  be  utterly  emptied,  spoiled,  and  slain  before  the  Lord.  Our  strength  is  our 
weakness,  our  life  is  our  death,  and  when  both  are  entirely  gone  we  begin  to  be 
strong,  and  in  very  deed  to  Uve.  4.  The  place.  "  At  His  feet."  It  matters  not 
what  aileth  us  if  we  lie  at  Jesus's  feet.  Better  be  dead  there  than  live  anywhere 
else.  He  is  ever  gentle  and  tender,  never  breaking  the  bruised  reed  or  quenching 
the  smoking  flax.  In  proportion  as  He  perceives  that  our  weakness  is  manifest  to 
us,  in  that  degree  will  He  display  His  tenderness.  "  He  carrieth  the  lambs  in  His 
bosom."  II.  Thk  same  disciple  bestobed.  1.  By  a  condescending  approach. 
•'  He  laid  His  hand  upon  me."  No  other  hand  could  have  revived  the  apostle,  but 
the  hand  which  was  pierced  for  him  had  matchless  power.  2.  The  communication 
of  Divine  strength.  "  His  right  hand  " — the  hand  of  favour  and  of  power.  There 
must  be  actual  strength  and  energy  imparted  to  a  swooning  soul,  and,  glory  be  to 
God,  by  His  own  Holy  Spirit,  Jesus  can  and  does  communicate  energy  to  His 
people  in  time  of  weakness.  He  is  come  that  we  may  have  life,  and  that  we  may 
have  it  more  abundantly.  The  omnipotence  of  God  is  made  to  rest  upon  us,  so 
that  we  even  glory  in  infirmities.  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,  My  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness,"  is  a  blessed  promise,  which  has  been  fulfilled  to  the 
letter  to  many  of  us.  Our  own  strength  has  departed,  and  then  the  power  of  God 
has  flowed  in  to  fill  up  the  vacuum.  3.  A  word  from  the  Master's  own  mouth. 
Truly  there  are  many  voices  and  each  has  its  significance,  but  the  voice  of  Jesus 
has  a  heaven  of  bliss  in  its  every  accent.  Let  but  my  Beloved  speak  to  me,  and  I 
will  forego  the  angelic  symphonies.  Though  He  should  only  say,  "  Fear  not,"  and 
not  a  word  beyond,  it  were  worth  worlds  to  see  Him  open  His  mouth  unto  us.  But 
you  say,  can  we  still  hear  Jesus  speak  of  us  ?  Aye,  by  His  Spirit.  III.  The  same 
DISCIPLE  STILL  FUBTHER  iNSTBUCTED.  1.  As  to  the  Lord's  person — that  He  was 
most  truly  Divine.  Art  thou  afraid  of  Him,  thy  Brother,  thy  Saviour,  thy  Friend? 
Then  what  dost  thou  fear  ?  Anything  of  old  ?  He  is  the  first.  Anything  to  come  ? 
He  is  the  last.  Anything  in  aU  the  world  ?  He  is  all  in  all,  from  the  first  to 
the  last.  What  dost  thou  want  ?  If  thou  hast  Him  thou  hast  all.  2.  As  to  His 
seli-existence.  Creatures  are  not  living  in  themselves :  they  borrow  leave  to  be ;  to 
God  alone  it  belongs  to  exist  necessarily.  He  is  the  I  AM,  and  such  is  Christ. 
Why,  then,  dost  thou  fear  ?  If  the  existence  of  thy  Lord,  thy  Saviour,  were  pre- 
carious and  dependent  upon  some  extraneous  circumstances  thou  wouldst  have  cause 
for  fear,  for  thou  wouldst  be  in  constant  jeopardy.  3.  As  to  His  atoning  death.  4.  As 
to  His  endless  life.  5.  As  to  His  mediatorial  office.  Conclusion :  The  glory  and  exal- 
tation of  Christ  is — 1.  The  saint's  cordial.  2.  The  sinner's  terror.  3.  The  penitent's 
hope.  (C  ±L.  Spurgeon.)  Fear  not: — How  full  of  consolation  is  this  grand  passage ! 
It  breathes  a  most  majestic  sympathy.  I.  The  text  is  most  consolatory  in  the  peospect 
of  death.  Keys  are  symbols  of  authority  and  law,  and  these  keys  of  death  remind 
us  that  government  and  order  prevail  in  the  realm  of  mortality.  The  gate  of  the 
grave  is  not  blown  about  by  the  winds  of  chance  ;  it  has  keys,  it  is  opened  and 
shut  by  royal  authority.  The  engineer  who  constructs  a  locomotive  knows  what 
distance  it  will  cover  before  it  is  worn  out,  one  engine  being  calculated  to  accompUsh 
a  greater  mileage,  another  less.  Using  material  of  a  certain  weight  and  quaUty, 
the  engineer  knows  with  tolerable  accuracy  what  wear  and  tear  his  machine  will 
endure,  and,  barring  accidents,  how  long  it  will  run.  Thus  He  by  whose  hand  we 
are  fashioned  knows  the  possibilities  of  our  individual  constitution,  how  far  the 
throbbing  machinery  will  go  ere  the  weary  wheels  stand  still ;  our  appointed  days 
are  written  in  our  physiological  powers,  not  in  some  mystical  Book  of  Fate.  From 
this  point  of  view  it  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  one  organism  will  endure  for  a 
long  journey,  whilst  another  necessarily  breaks  down,  having  accomplished  a  few 
stages  only.  We  said,  "  barring  accidents,"  the  locomotive  will  cover  a  given 
distance ;  but  what  of  the  accidents  which  may  put  an  end  to  the  career  of  the 
locomotive  long  before  its  possibilities  are  exhausted  ?  and  what  of  the  thousand 
accidents  which  put  a  period  to  human  Uf e  in  its  very  prime  and  power  ?  The 
answer  is.  Under  the  personal  sovereign  government  of  heaven  no  real  accident  is 
possible  to  virtue.  The  woodman  knows  how  trees  of  different  species  require  to  be 
feUed  at  various  seasons ;  it  is  best  that  some  are  cut  down  with  the  fresh  leaves 
of  spring  upon  them,  that  the  axe  smites  others  whilst  they  are  robed  in  summer's 
pomp,  whilst  a  third  order  must  fall  when  the  sap  dies  down  in  autumn  and  the 
leaves  are  tinged  with  the  colours  of  decay.     The  forester  knows  when  to  smite  the 


CHAP.  I.  ]  RE  VELA  TION. 


forest  glories ;  and  there  is  One  who  knows  why  some  human  lives  cease  in  their 
sweet  spring,  why  others  perish  in  manhood's  pride,  and  why,  again,  others  are 
spared  to  patriarchal  years.  At  the  right  time,  at  the  right  place,  in  the  right 
way,  shall  we  suffer  the  stroke  of  mortality.  Death  to  some  may  be  a  blind  fury 
cutting  short  life's  thin  thread  ;  but  the  Christian  knows  that  the  capital  power  ia 
in  the  hands  of  One  whose  name  is  Love,  and  before  His  fingers  turn  the  key  His 
eyes  of  flame  see  the  necessity  and  dictate  the  moment.  II.  The  text  is  most 
consolatory  in  the  article  of  death.  We  have  here,  not  only  teaching  concerning 
the  law  of  death,  but  also  precious  doctrine  touching  its  Lord.  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  Lord  of  death.  The  law  of  death  is  the  active  will  of  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  the  glory  of  Christianity  that  it  consistently  exhibits  law,  not  as  some 
metaphysical  rule  or  impersonal  force,  but  as  the  action  of  a  personal,  intelli- 
gent, loving  Euler.  The  law  of  creation  is  the  will  of  a  wise  and  gracious 
Creator,  who  rejoices  in  all  that  His  hands  have  made ;  the  law  of  evolution  is  the 
will  of  an  Evolver,  who  with  wise  purpose  and  unfailing  intelligence  presses 
forward  all  things  to  some  «'  far-off  Divine  event";  the  law  of  dissolution  is  the 
will  of  a  just  and  infallible  Judge,  who  determines  all  crises.  When  Dr.  James 
Hamilton  was  dying  his  brother  spoke  to  him  of  "  death's  cold  embrace."  Said 
the  dying  saint,  "  There  is  no  cold  embrace,  William  ;  there  is  no  cold  embrace." 
If  our  dissolution  were  effected  simply  by  some  mysterious  abstract  law  working  in 
the  dark,  it  were  indeed  a  cold  embrace ;  but  it  is  no  longer  cold  when  it  is  the 
pressure  of  that  breast  on  which  John  leaned.  In  the  light  of  this  text  death 
becomes  transfigured ;  the  keys  are  in  the  pierced  hand  ;  the  keys  are  golden,  they 
open  the  door  into  heaven.  Whilst  we  think  of  these  things  even  now  strange 
music  steals  upon  our  senses,  the  rough  wilderness  smiles  with  flowers,  a  light 
above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  touches  pain  and  sickness  and  sepulchre  into  gold, 
and  in  the  hour  and  article  of  death  these  foretastes  shall  be  fulfilled  beyond  all 
imagination  ;  we  shall  not  taste  death ;  we  shall  not  see  it.  HI.  The  text  inspires 
deep  consolation  touching  the  issues  of  death.  "  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  "  I 
have  the  keys  of  the  invisible  universe."  1.  There  is  a  limit  to  the  power  of  death. 
It  does  not  destroy  the  personality ;  the  dead  may  live  again,  live  in  new  power  and 
splendour.  2.  There  is  a  limit  to  the  range  of  death.  •'  Alive  unto  the  ages  of  the 
ages."  In  the  face  of  those  oriental  systems  which  threatened  men  with  endless 
deaths,  transmigrations,  and  metamorphoses,  systems  which  modern  paganism 
seeks  to  revive,  Christianity  holds  that  the  faithful  pass  through  one  eclipse  only 
into  personal,  conscious,  immortal  life.  The  law  of  death  is  not  the  law  of  all 
worlds ;  there  are  spheres  where  it  has  no  place,  golden  ages  undimmed  by  its 
shadow.  Christ  alive  for  evermore  declares  that  immortality  is  the  prerogative  of 
the  highest  being  also.  The  monad  is  inaccessible  to  death  by  being  too  low  ;  man 
in  Christ  shall  be  inaccessible  to  death  by  being  too  high.  "  Fear  not."  True,  we 
can  never  be  wholly  reconciled  to  death.  Darwin  used  to  go  into  the  London 
Zoological  Gardens,  and,  standing  by  the  glass  case  containing  the  cobra  di  capello, 
put  his  forehead  against  the  glass  while  the  cobra  struck  out  at  him.  The  glass 
was  between  them  :  Darwin's  mind  was  perfectly  convinced  as  to  the  inability  of 
the  snake  to  harm  him,  yet  he  would  always  dodge.  Time  after  time  he  tried  it, 
his  will  and  reason  keeping  him  there,  his  instinct  making  him  shrink.  The 
instinct  was  stronger  than  both  will  and  reason.  And  it  is  much  like  this  with  the 
Christian's  attitude  toward  death :  he  knows  that  its  sting  cannot  harm  him,  but 
there  is  an  instinct  within  him  that  causes  him  to  shrink  whenever  he  comes  into 
contact  with  the  ghastly  thing,  and  this  instinct  will  not  be  altogether  denied 
whatever  the  Christian  reason  and  will  may  say.  But  in  this  shrinking  is  no 
terror  or  despair.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Christ  destroys  the  believer's  fears : — 
I.  Who  it  is  that  prescribes  the  remedy  for  tour  fears.  It  is  Jesus 
who  lays  His  right  hand  upon  you,  saying  unto  you,  "  Fear  not."  It  is  not  by 
arguments  devised  by  men  that  you  a:  -:  called  on  to  look  up  in  hope  and  confidence. 
It  is  by  an  entreaty  coming  to  your  uif  fresh  from  the  mouth  of  Him  before  whom 
you  tremble.  And  oh,  when  H  is  He  Himself  that  bids  you  not  fear,  does  not 
the  very  glory  with  which  Ho  is  encircled  bring  encouragement  to  your  heart  ? 
Do  you  not  feel  that  you  may  safely  lay  aside  your  fears,  when  all  the  terrors  of 
His  Majesty  are  arrayed,  not  against  you,  but  on  your  behalf  ?  II.  Examine  the 
REMEDY  IN  ITS  SEVERAL  PARTS.  Christ  not  Only  bids  His  people  fear  not,  but  He 
urges  reasons  why  they  should  not.  These  reasons  are  contained  in  the  several 
parts  of  the  remedy.  1.  «♦  I  am  the  first  and  the  last,  I  am  He  that  liveth,"  or,  as 
it  might  be  rendered,  ••lam  the  Living  One."     Several  ideas  are  comprehended 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

under  these  expressions  :  Christ  existing  from  everlasting  to  everlasting — Christ  the 
author  and  end  of  all  things — Christ  their  sum  and  substance.  The  epithets  are, 
you  perceive,  expressive  of  His  Godhead.  The  others  which  He  assumes  in  the 
text  have  respect  to  His  humanity.  How  beautifully  they  all  unite  to  dispel  the 
fears  of  His  people  !  Some  of  these  fears  are  to  be  chased  away  by  His  Godhead 
Bome  by  His  humanity  ;  to  chase  away  all  Christ  speaks  both  as  God  and  as  man. 
2.  •'  I  was  dead."  In  how  striking  a  contrast  this  part  stands  to  the  last !  The 
glory  of  the  Deity  is  now  shaded  by  the  darkness  of  a  human  grave.  But  what  an 
amount  of  comfort  this  part  is  calculated  to  afford ;  for,  if  Christ  was  dead,  why 
should  you  fear  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace  on  which  He  now  sits  ?  But,  again. 
If  Christ  was  dead,  why  should  you,  who  are  one  with  Him,  fear  the  punishment 
of  your  sins  ?  That  punishment  is  all  past  already.  And  still  farther.  If  Christ 
was  dead,  why  should  you  fear  to  die  ?  Perhaps  you  are  among  those  who,  through 
fear  of  death,  are  subject  to  bondage.  Then  Christ  died  to  deliver  you  from  this 
fear.  3.  "  Behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore.  Amen."  This  part  is  another  strange 
contrast  to  the  last,  another  brilliant  evolution  of  the  character  of  your  exalted 
Lord.  The  darkness  of  a  human  grave  is  now  dispelled  by  the  light  of  immortality. 
4.  "  And  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death."  At  death  there  is  a  separation  not 
only  from  friends  and  the  world,  but  even  from  your  very  self.  Clurist  has  the 
keys  of  all  these  doors.  He  has  the  key  of  the  door  by  which  the  body  and  soul  of 
His  people  separate.  You  cannot  die,  therefore,  till  Christ  with  His  own  hand  open 
the  door ;  the  last  breath  is  the  turning  of  the  lock.  What  serenity  this  should 
shed  around  the  death-bed  of  the  believer,  and  how  strong  consolation  it  should 
impart  to  those  who  are  left  behind !  Christ  has  also  the  keys  of  the  doors  by 
which  the  souls  and  bodies  of  believers  pass  to  each  other  for  an  eternal  union. 
If  saints  on  earth  "  groan  within  themselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the 
redemption  of  their  body" — if  their  souls,  even  when  inhabiting  their  earthly 
tabernacle,  "  do  groan,  earnestly  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with  their  house  which 
is  from  heaven  " — what  must  be  the  longings  of  these  souls  as  the  winter  of  death 
advances  to  its  close,  and  the  time  of  the  redemption  of  their  bodies  draws  nigh  1 
(G.  Philip.)  Infallible  antidotes  against  unbelieving  fears  : — From  this  subject 
we  may  observe  the  following :  that  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ, 
that  eternal  life  to  which  He  was  raised,  and  His  mediatory  sovereignty  are  the 
great  grounds  of  the  saints'  consolation  and  sufficient  to  dispel  all  their  unbelieving 
fears.    I.  To  speak  a  little  to  each  of  the  things  in  the  text,  to  unfold  them,  so  as 

THAT  THE  GROUND  OF  COMFORT  IN  THEM  MAY  APPEAR.      1.   As  tO  His  death.       On  this  I 

offer  these  few  remarks :  (1)  His  death  supposeth — His  incarnation  and  living  as  a 
man  in  the  world  (John  1.  14).  (2)  His  death  was  vicarious  :  He  died  in  the  room 
and  stead  of  sinners.  (3)  His  sufferings  and  death  were  most  exquisite :  "  God  spared 
not  His  own  Son."     (4)  His  sufferings  and  death  were  satisfactory,  and  that  fully. 

2.  As  to  His  resurrection  and  the  life  to  which  He  was  restored.  Here  consider — (1) 
That  God  raised  up  Christ.  (2)  Where  He  now  lives.  It  is  in  heaven,  which  we 
had  forfeited  by  sin,  but  where  we  still  would  fain  be.  (3)  For  what  He  lives. 
The  apostle  tells  us  that  it  is  to  make  intercession  for  us,  and  He  Himself  says  it  is 
to  prepare  a  place  for  us  in  His  Father's  house,  where  there  are  many  mansions. 

3.  The  eternity  of  this  life.  The  man  Christ  lives  for  evermore.  He  will  eternally 
represent  His  own  sacrifice  as  the  foundation  of  our  eternal  glory  :  and  as  for  His 
kingdom,  it  is  an  everlasting  kingdom  that  shall  not  be  destroyed  (Dan.  vii.  14). 
Let  us — 4.  Attend  to  His  mediatorial  sovereignty.  Hell  and  death  are  terrible  to 
the  believer,  but  Christ  holds  the  keys  of  both.  Now  these  things,  the  death, 
resurrection,  life,  and  power  of  Jesus,  may  be  considered  three  ways  in  order  to 
improve  them  for  consolation  to  the  saints.  (1)  As  patterns  and  examples.  (2)  As 
pledges,  assuring  the  saints  of  what  they  wish  for.  (3)  As  containing  in  tnem 
sufficient  salves  for  all  their  sores.  II.  To  point  out  the  nature  of  that  conso- 
lation WHICH  saints  MAY  DERIVE  FROM  THESE.  For  this  purposc  let  US  take  a  view 
of  the  fountains  of  their  fears  and  distrust.  1.  There  is  the  super- eminent  glory 
and  infinite  majesty  of  the  great  God.  This,  when  seen  and  considered  by  poor 
worm  man,  whose  habitation  is  in  the  dust,  is  a  great  source  of  fear.  Can  ye  not 
look  straight  forward  to  Divine  majesty,  then  fetch  a  compass  and  look  through 
the  veil  of  the  flesh  of  Christ  ?  and  so  ye  may  see  God  and  not  die.  "  Often  and 
willingly,"  said  Luther,  "  would  I  thus  look  at  God."  2.  Sin  is  another  fountain 
for  fear  :  sinfulness  considered  with  the  nature  of  God.  But  fear  not,  0  Christian ; 
Christ  was  dead  and  is  alive  for  evermore  ;  therefore  the  guilt  that  exposes  to  hell- 
fire  is  done  away.     Do  ye  doubt  the  completeness  of  the  satisfaction  ?    Behold 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  71 

Christ  in  heaven  with  the  complete  discharge  in  His  hand.  He  is  out  of  prison. 
He  brought  the  keys  with  Him  and  is  now  on  the  throne.  3.  The  sinner  sees 
pollution  in  himself  and  holiness  in  God.  When  they  behold  the  spotless  purity  of 
God,  and  themselves  as  an  unclean  thing,  they  are  ready  to  say.  Oh,  will  God  look 
on  vile  me  ?  will  these  pure  eyes  cast  a  favourable  glance  on  such  a  dunghfll- 
worm  ?  Fear  not,  Christ  was  dead  and  is  alive.  He  is  made  of  God  unto  you 
sanctification.  4.  Desertions  are  a  cause  of  fears.  The  deserted  soul  is  an 
affrighted  soul.  Good  news  to  you  in  your  low  state  Christ  died,  and  in  His  death 
He  was  forsaken  of  God  ;  and  yet  He  now  enjoys  the  bosom  of  the  Father  and  the 
light  of  His  countenance.  Who  would  not  be  content  to  follow  Christ,  even  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  ?  5.  Temptations  are  a  source  of  fears.  Some- 
times Satan  gets  leave  to  dog  saints  at  their  heels.  This  fills  them  with  fear  :  but 
to  such  I  say.  Fear  not.  Christ  died  and  is  alive  evermore.  He  that  thus  lives 
evermore  gave  a  deadly  wound  to  the  tempter.  We  have  no  more  to  do  but  to  cry 
to  our  Lord,  who,  from  His  own  temptations,  well  knows  how  to  succour  His 
tempted  people.  6.  Death  is  the  cause  of  much  fear.  But  fear  not :  He  that  was 
dead  is  alive ;  and  when  ye  are  carried  off  you  shall  be  with  Him  who  is  infinitely 
better  than  all  earthly  relations.  7.  Hell  is  a  fountain  of  fears.  But  fear  not :  for 
Christ  died ;  and  if  so.  He  suffered  the  torments  thou  shouldst  have  suffered  in 
hell  AS  to  the  essentials  of  them.  God  will  not  require  two  payments  for  one  debt. 
m.  Improvement.  1.  The  comfortless  state  of  them  that  are  out  of  Christ.  2.  The 
duty  of  Christians  to  improve  these  things  for  their  actual  comfort.  (1)  The 
grieving  of  the  Spirit  cuts  the  throats  of  our  comforts.  (2)  Good  men  sometimes 
build  their  comforts  on  outward  blessings;  hence  when  these  are  gone  their 
comfort  is  gone.  (3)  On  grace  within  them,  not  on  grace  without  them;  the 
comfort  of  some  streams  from  their  obedience  principally,  therefore  it  is  soon  dried 
up ;  whereas  the  death  and  life  of  Christ  are  liable  to  no  change,  as  is  our 
obedience.  (4)  Upon  the  coming  in  of  words  to  their  minds.  Hence,  when  a 
promise  comes  in  they  are  comforted ;  when  a  threatening,  all  is  gone.  I  do 
believe  that  the  Spirit  comforts  His  people  by  the  word,  and  that  He  makes  words 
come  in  with  an  impression  on  the  soul  (John  xiv.  26).  But  then  these  words  lead 
the  soul  direct  to  Christ  and  to  build  our  comfort  on  Him ;  but  it  is  not  of  God  to 
build  it  on  the  bare  impression  of  a  comfortable  word.  The  coming  in  of  a  word 
should  guide  us  to  Christ ;  and  though  the  impression,  the  guide  go,  yet  we  may 
keep  our  hold  of  Him.  A  word  to  other  two  sources  of  the  saint's  fears.  1.  Weak- 
ness and  spiritual  inability  for  the  duties  of  religion.  The  soul  taking  a  view  of 
the  great  work  it  has  to  do,  what  strong  lusts  are  to  be  mortified,  temptations 
resisted,  duties  performed ;  and  then,  considering  how  weak  and  unable  it  is  for 
any  of  these  things,  it  is  even  ready  to  sink.  But  fear  not :  Christ  died,  &c. 
(Heb.  xii.  12).  2.  The  danger  of  an  evil  time  is  another  source  of  fear  (Psa.  xlix.  5). 
An  evil  time  is  a  time  of  many  snares.  The  soul  is  afraid  that  he  will  never  stand 
out,  but  one  day  will  fall.  Fear  not :  Christ  died,  and  it  was  an  evil  time,  a  time 
of  many  snares,  yet  He  came  safe  off.  This  He  did  as  a  public  person,  and  so  it  is 
a  pledge  that  ye  shall  also  be  carried  through  (Heb.  iv.  14-16).  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Christ's  words  of  good  cheer  : — ^No  wonder  that  John  fell  senseless  at  His 
feet.  There  is  no  sign  that  he  was  prostrated  by  any  sudden  and  appalling 
sense  of  sin.  It  was  simply  the  rush  of  a  magnificence  too  intolerably  splendid. 
In  a  very  small  measure  we  can  understand  it,  by  the  effect  of  a  sudden 
glare  of  lightning  and  roll  of  thunder  at  midnight,  or  of  being  afloat  on  a 
fiercely  agitated  sea.  It  is  not  the  guiltiest  that  are  most  excited,  even  if  they  be 
most  alarmed  ;  innocent  children  are  overcome,  sensitive  and  gentle  women  are  pro- 
foundly moved  ;  delicate  nerves  have  more  to  do  with  the  effect  than  guilty 
consciences.  What  has  happened  is  a  powerful  impression  of  the  contrast  between 
these  tremendous  scenes  and  our  poor  faculties,  our  slight  resources  to  avert,  endure, 
or  overcome.  But  our  most  awful  impression  was  as  nothing  compared  with  his, 
upon  whose  mortal  vision  blazed  the  immortal  splendours  of  a  manhood  taken  into 
God,  Now  what  is  the  comfort  for  human  self-abasement  and  dread  in  the  presence 
of  supreme  power  ?  1.  It  is,  first,  the  nearer  approach  in  love  of  what  was  so 
terrible  in  grandeur.  He  laid  His  right  hand  upon  me  saying,  "  Fear  not."  So, 
then,  the  Highest  and  Most  Awful  can  be  gentle.  He  whose  feet  can  trample  like 
burning  brass  has  a  hand  whose  touch  is  soothing  ;  and  the  great  voice,  which 
crashed  like  a  trumpet  through  the  Sabbath  stillness,  can  be  so  modulated  as  to 
reassure  the  trembling  heart.  2.  That  John  may  not  fear,  his  Master  proceeds  to 
announce  who  and  what  He  is.    The  first  word  needs  to  be  strongly  emphasised : 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

"  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last,"  as  if  the  voice  had  said,  "  It  is  I,  and  not  another, 
who  am  thus  exalted."  Can  we  doubt  that  with  this  word  the  personality  of  Him 
who  spoke  came  in  full  force  upon  the  hearer's  soul  ?  Well  for  us,  in  danger  and 
dread,  if  our  past  life  has  tender  and  vivid  associations  with  Him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do,  if  we  have  known  Him  as  the  Hearer  of  our  prayer,  the  Helper  of  our 
weakness,  the  Cleanser  of  our  hearts.  •'  I,  then,  whom  thou  knowest,  and  lovest, 
and  canst  trust — I  am  the  First  and  the  Last,  and  the  Living  One,  and  I  became 
dead."  It  is  not  only  said  that  Jesus  is  first  and  last.  He  is  the  First  and  the  Last. 
No  assertion  of  Deity  could  be  more  explicit.  But  like  all  such  Scripture  state- 
ments, this  is  made  in  the  practical  form  best  suited  to  the  hearers'  need.  To  the 
heart  that  quails  and  faints  amid  new  revelations  of  dazzling  majesty  and  over- 
whelming force,  it  is  announced  that  His  Loved  One  is  behind  and  beyond  all  change, 
and  that  all  life  and  power  flow  out  from  Him,  the  Living  One.  It  is  added  that 
He  "  became  dead,"  to  remind  His  creature  of  expiation  for  all  sin,  and  of  the 
immutable  heart  which  once  broke,  rather  than  be  pitiless.  {G.  A.  Chadwick, 
D.D.)  Fear  not  : — TiU  rid  of  fear  we  are  not  fit  to  hear.  {J.  Trapp.) 
I  am  the  First  and  the  Last. — The  Christ  of  history  and  eternity : — This 
sublime  Apocalypse  is  the  climax  of  Kevelation.  It  carries  us  forward  from 
narrative  to  prophecy,  from  facts  to  truths,  from  present  conditions  to  permanent 
issues.  Without  such  a  revelation  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  would  have  lacked 
its  crowning  assurance,  and  the  dispensation  of  grace  its  adequate  interpretation. 
What  is  going  on  in  the  invisible  above  is  essential  to  the  understanding  of  what  is 
going  on  in  the  visible  around.  Only  as  we  get  glimpse  of  the  issue  can  we  appre- 
ciate the  purpose  and  strength  of  grace.  The  vision  of  Christ  in  His  glory  alone 
completes  and  justifies  the  history  of  Christ  in  His  humiliation.  The  way-book  of 
our  faith  could  not  stop  with  the  record  of  an  ascending  Christ.  For  deep  and  clear 
as  may  be  our  inward  fellowship  with  Christ,  we  cannot  always  escape  the  tyranny 
of  our  eyes.  We  see  too  much  and  too  little — too  much  because  too  little.  With 
awful  precision  we  see  the  ravages  of  sin,  the  desolating  frenzy  of  passion,  the 
hungry  eagerness  with  which  graves  close  over  hopes  unrealised  and  lives  whose 
record  is  vanity.  But  with  all  our  seeing  we  see  too  little.  Sin  and  strife 
and  death  are  assuredly  here.  But  with  our  unaided  vision  we  do  not 
see  the  large  arena  on  which  God  is  working  out  His  gracious  purpose : 
we  do  not  see  how  these  vast  and  appalling  forces  are  under  the  control  of  a 
triumphant  Kedeemer ;  we  do  not  see  where,  or  how,  or  to  what  degree  the  con- 
quering grace  of  Christ  cleaves  its  way  to  the  very  heart  of  the  conflict  and  robs  the 
enemy  of  his  spoil.  It  requires  an  Apocalypse  to  show  us  the  wide  empire  and 
masterhood  of  Christ.  Only  as  we  see  ahead  can  we  see  properly  around.  And  in 
the  goodness  of  His  grace  God  has  given  us  the  larger,  clearer  sight.  He  has  torn 
aside  the  veil.  I.  Our  text  is  Christ's  new  introduction  of  Himself  to  the  Church 
MILITANT.  It  is  the  revelation  of  Himself  in  His  Lordship,  clothed  with  the  authority 
and  resource  of  spiritual  empire.  In  His  hands  are  the  keys  of  mastery.  To  His 
service  bend  all  heaven's  powers.  But  what  I  want  just  now  to  emphasise  is,  that 
right  in  the  centre  of  this  vision  of  glory  the  old  familiar  Christ  of  the  gospels  is 
made  clearly  discernible.  Not  only  is  He  the  Living  One  with  the  keys  ;  He  is  the 
One  who  became  dead ;  the  One,  therefore,  who  lived  and  moved  within  range  of 
historic  observation.  This  is  a  point  of  present  and  pressing  importance.  It 
indicates  and  guards  us  against  two  opposite  tendencies  which  threaten  the  vitality 
of  Christian  faith.  On  one  hand  there  is  a  too  evident  readiness  to  minimise  the 
importance  of  our  evangelic  narratives  ;  to  pass  lightly  over  the  great  historical 
facts  on  which  our  gospel  is  based,  and  even  to  acquiesce  in  an  account  of  those 
events  which  rob  them  of  all  special,  not  to  say  trustworthy,  significance.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  is  a  not  less  evident  and  equally  disastrous  tendency  in  the 
opposite  direction.  Some  men  never  seem  to  get  beyond  history.  The  Christ  they 
know  is  the  Child  at  Nazareth,  the  homeless  Wanderer  in  Judeea,  the  sympathetic 
Teacher  and  Worker  in  town  and  village,  the  willing  Sufferer  on  Calvary.  All  this 
is  good.  It  is  a  gain  for  which  we  ought  to  be  devoutly  thankful  to  have  recovered 
from  superstition  and  conventionalism  the  simple  grandeur  of  Christ's  actual  human 
life.  But  this  revived  interest  in  the  Christ  of  history  is  accompanied  with  some 
peril  to  the  adequate  conception  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  The  absorbing  study  of 
His  example.  His  principles.  His  revelation  of  God,  His  interpretation  of 
man,  His  work  and  sacrifice  for  the  redemption  of  the  race,  may  very  effectually 
obscure  the  grandeur  of  His  eternal  supremacy,  and  rob  us  of  the  strength  and 
comfort  derivable  from  fellowship  with  the  living  Lord.    Christ  is  not  dead ;  He  la 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  73 

risen.  His  life  to-day  is  more  than  the  influence  of  an  unquenchable  memory  and 
of  a  love  which  the  world  cannot  let  die.  The  Christ  of  history  is  the  living  Christ 
upon  the  throne.  He  who  was  on  earth  is  in  heaven.  He  who  is  in  heaven  has 
come  down  again  and  fills  the  earth.  His  real  presence  has  entered  into  every 
epoch  of  history.  His  personality  is  the  most  potent  contemporary  presence  in  life 
to-day.  Our  text  sets  us  in  right  relation  alike  to  the  historic  and  the  risen  Christ. 
It  saves  us  from  the  indefiniteness  of  that  dreamy  faith  which  declines  to  seek  foot- 
hold on  the  solid  earth,  which  claims  self-sufficiency  of  intuitive  knowledge  and 
spiritual  certainty.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  it  leads  us  on  from  that  mere  back- 
looking  and  wingless  faith  which  never  escapes  from  earth  and  time,  which 
never  realises  and  rejoices  in  the  personal  presence  of  the  living  Lord. 
n.  An  intelligent  faith  in  Christ  must  begin  with  the  study  of  His 
EARTHLY  LIFE.  It  must  look  to  what  He  was  in  order  to  know  what 
He  is.  It  must  understand  His  work  below  before  it  can  appreciate  the 
character  of  His  reign  above.  It  must  master  the  facts  as  a  means  towards 
possessing  the  truths  of  God's  dispensation  of  grace.  The  reasons  for  this  are 
obvious.  Our  earliest  knowledge  of  Christ  must  come  to  us  as  our  knowledge  of 
any  other  historical  person  comes,  through  the  portraiture  of  competent  witnesses 
and  biographers.  But  not  only  for  the  outline  of  Christ's  personality  and  purpose 
are  we  dependent  upon  New  Testament  history.  We  must  betake  ourselves  to  the 
same  quarter  for  an  explanation  of  Christ's  living  power,  for  an  interpretation  of  the 
mission  He  lives  to  complete,  for  an  understanding  of  how  we  are  to  come  into 
relation  with  His  grace.  The  evangelical  records  set  forth  no  mere  passing 
events,  no  mere  transitory  phase  in  the  evolution  of  Divine  unfolding,  which  may  be 
left  behind  and  forgotten  as  if  superseded  by  clearer  and  loftier  revelations.  The 
Cross  of  Calvary  fills  every  page  of  history  and  overflows  into  eternity,  stretching 
back  and  on  in  perpetual  enactment.  The  Apocalyptic  Seer,  standing  on  his  high 
mountain,  looked  back  and  saw  the  Lamb  slain  before  the  foundation  of  the  world ; 
he  turned  his  gaze  towards  the  future,  and  saw  the  endless  ages  gathering  around 
the  Lamb  that  had  been  slain,  singing  the  song  of  victory  through  sacrifice.  And 
to  the  Cross  we  must  go  to  find  God,  to  know  Christ,  to  learn  penitence,  to  reap 
forgiveness,  to  discover  life  and  liberty.  Yea,  it  is  by  beginning  at  Jerusalem  that 
faith  discovers  where  and  how  to  find  the  living  Christ,  in  what  way  and  with  what 
joy  to  attain  fellowship  with  the  risen  Lord.  But  there  is  yet  another  reason  why 
faith  has  need  to  master  and  to  appropriate  the  facts  of  historical  revelation.  The 
historic  Christ  who  lived,  spake,  worked,  died,  and  rose  again  in  our  midst,  supplies 
the  ultimate  ground  of  verification  on  which  faith  rests  for  its  spiritual  beliefs  and 
hopes.  A  religion  which  is  to  take  adequate  grip  of  man  must  satisfy  the  eye  and 
the  brain  not  less  than  the  heart  and  the  spirit.  It  must  approve  itself  by  facts  as 
well  as  by  reasons  and  sentiments.  You  tell  me,  for  instance, 'that  God  is  love. 
How  do  you  know  that  ?  It  is  not  a  natural  idea.  It  is,  as  men  phrase  it,  too  good 
to  be  true.  So  says  my  natural  and  hesitating  heart.  Do  you  refer  me  to  your 
experience  ?  Do  you  affirm  that  the  faith  has  been  kindled  in  you  by  direct  opera- 
tion of  the  Divine  Spirit  ?  But  are  there  no  possibilities  of  misinterpretation  and 
mistake  ?  Has  God  ever  spoken  or  wrought  in  other  ways  to  warrant  your  belief 
that  He  is  now  speaking  and  working  in  you  ?  I  cannot  believe  it  until  God  proves 
it  by  an  appeal  to  all  the  considerations  and  all  the  instincts  and  all  the  lines  of 
evidence  which  can  reach  me  down  here  in  the  darkness.  And  that  is  what  God 
has  done.  He  has  come  down  and  embodied  His  message  in  a  life  which  appeals 
to  all  the  faculties,  and  responds  to  all  the  demands,  of  my  nature.  The  historic 
Christ  proves  the  trustworthiness  of  my  spiritual  conviction,  and  from  the  con- 
templation of  that  gracious  life  I  go  forward  to  the  confident  enjoyment  of  the 
elevating  and  constraining  truth.  So,  too,  in  reference  to  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  that  great  gospel  of  glad  tidings  to  a  world  filled  with  the  dead  and  the  dying. 
It  is  only  when  I  can  see  and  say,  "  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become 
the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept,"  that  I  regain  the  balance  of  hope  and  faith.  The 
intimations  of  immortality  in  me  immediately  radiate  with  fresh  light.  AH  the 
arguments  grounded  in  nature,  in  reason,  in  justice,  in  spiritual  experience,  gather 
a  clearer  probative  force.  The  accomplished  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  interprets 
and  verifies  the  instincts  and  promptings  of  my  spirit  within  me,  and  beholding  the 
risen  Christ  I  can  ask  with  exultant  confidence,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  O 
grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  and  can  sing  with  grand  assurance  the  apostoUo 
song,  '•  Thanks  be  unto  God,"  &c.  Here,  then,  must  Christian  knowledge  and 
spiritual  faith  find  their  foundation — in  a  devout  mastery  of  the  Uf e  and  work  ol 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  incarnate  Christ.  III.  But  beginnings  abe  only  beginnings,  and  must  not  be 
MISTAKEN  roR  COMPLETIONS.  To  have  mastered  the  alphabet  and  the  grammar  of  a 
language  is  to  have  come  into  possession  of  the  key  to  its  wealth  of  literature  and 
ideas,  but  not  into  possession  of  the  literature  and  ideas  themselves.  It  is  possible 
to  know  much  about  Christ  and  nothing  of  Him.  For  Christ  is  not  contained  in  any 
or  all  the  facts  and  doctrines  concerning  Himself.  They  interpret  and  point  the 
way  to  Him.  But  He,  the  living  Lord,  whom  they  interpret,  who  gives  significance 
and  animation  to  them,  is  a  Person,  not  an  idea,  and  sits  upon  the  throne  of  life, 
to  be  found  of  aU  who  seek  Him,  waiting  to  bestow  the  blessings  which  His  incarnate 
life  wrought  and  revealed.  Our  study,  therefore,  of  the  great  history,  and  of  the 
doctrines  of  grace,  is  barren  and  futile  unless  we  are  guided  thereby  to  seek  and 
find  the  personal,  living  Saviour;  to  take  from  His  own  hands  the  gift  which 
Christian  history  and  doctrine  explain,  and  to  find  in  Him  the  actual  enjoyment  of 
promises  made  and  truths  revealed.  There  are  two  senses  in  the  New  Testament 
in  which  men  are  said  to  know  Christ.  Nicodemus  said,  "  Master,  we  know  that 
Thou  art  a  teacher  Vome  from  God,  because  .  .  ."  Here  we  have  an  instance  of 
close  observation,  of  thoughtful  appreciation,  of  faultless  logic  leading  to  an 
irresistable  conclusion.  '♦  We  know,  because  .  .  ."  This  was,  for  the  moment,  all 
he  knew  of  Christ :  an  external  understanding — logical,  convincing,  veracious,  but 
ineffective.  How  different  was  Paul's  declaration,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  "  I 
Not,  mark  you,  ♦*  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed  " ;  still  less,  "  I  know  in  what  I 
have  believed."  "  I  know,"  said  he,  "  whom  I  have  believed."  The  knowledgewas 
personal,  inward,  constraining — a  knowledge  arising  out  of  living  fellowship  with 
Christ,  and  which  conferred  upon  him  the  power  of  a  new  and  radiant  heart.  In 
this  same  sense  Paul  had  once  prayed  that  he  might  know  Christ.  At  the  time  he 
uttered  that  prayer  he  knew  all  the  facts  of  the  great  biography,  and  had  expounded 
in  his  principal  letters  the  profound  significance  of  the  Lord's  death  and  resurrection. 
Not  in  that  sense,  nor  in  those  relations,  are  we  to  interpret  his  prayer  for  more 
knowledge  of  Christ.  It  was  for  fuller,  deeper,  personal  possession  of  the  Christ 
who  unfolds  Himself  within  the  sacredness  of  Christian  experience,  whose  gracious 
personality  fills  heaven  with  ceaseless  wonder  and  adoration,  whose  presence  in  the 
heart  expands  into  fresh  discoveries  of  significance  and  charm.  (C.A.  Berry.)  An 
apocalyptic  vision  of  Christ  : — Sixty  years  ago  that  old  man  wandered,  glad  and 
radiant,  round  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  The  Word  of  Christ  took  possession 
of  him,  and  he,  led  by  it,  followed  after  it  till  that  blessed  moment  when,  in  the 
upper  chaij^ber,  he  lay  upon  the  Master's  breast.  All  through  the  life  that  followed 
lie  looked  back  that  he  might  look  before ;  his  eyes  turned  to  what  had  been,  that 
his  hope  might  reach  up  unto  what  was  to  be ;  and  lo  1  he  found  that  the  issue  was 
greater  than  his  utmost  expectation.  The  old  man  found  a  meaning  in  Christ  the 
young  man  never  discerned.  Age  is  greater  than  youth.  The  glory  of  youth  is  the 
promise  that  is  in  it ;  the  glory  of  age  is  the  performance  it  represents.  See  how 
youth  now  ripened  into  perfect  fruition  in  age.  In  that  ancient  John  there  lay  the 
apocalyptic  visions  ;  visions  of  the  world,  the  wonders  that  were  to  be.  Whether 
would  you  have  God  dealing  with  you  in  a  way  that  became  God,  or  in  a  way  that 
became  man  ?  Whether  would  you  have  God  dealing  with  you  in  a  God-like  fashion, 
by  standards  that  suit  the  Divine,  or  entirely  in  the  measure  of  your  own  merit,  and 
according  to  your  own  poor  deserts  ?  Whether  would  you  have  Divine  pity,  Divine 
grace.  Divine  long-suffering  determine  the  great  law  of  the  Divine  action,  or  would 
you  regulate  that  action  by  standards  of  man's  making  and  man's  following?  *'  I 
am  the  First  and  the  Last  and  the  Living."  He  is  the  great  energy  that  works  from 
first  to  last.  "Indeed,"  saith  our  modern  wise  man,  "He  the  energy  1  Energy, 
what  is  it  but  force  ?  what  is  force  but  the  power  of  doing  work  ?  what  is  force  but 
a  form  of  matter?  Matter  we  know,  God  we  do  not  know,  all  things  that  men 
discover  and  interpret  they  interpret  in  the  terms  of  matter  and  motion  and  force. 
Matter  doth  make  and  matter  doth  rule ;  it  is  the  one  providence  we  know."  Well, 
you  know,  and  how  do  you  know  ?  Matter  you  know,  ay,  but  "  you  "  and  "  know." 
Subtract  "  you  "  and  where  is  the  matter  ?  Take  away  thought  and  where  is  force? 
Has  matter  any  being  save  to  thought,  save  for  thought  ?  Matter  without  thought 
as  not  handled,  discerned,  spoken  of,  described,  it  is  real  only  as  thought  is  real. 
But  if  there  can,  even  to  man,  be  no  reality  or  knowledge  of  matter  without  thought, 
mor  matter,  as  object,  save  to  intellect,  then  below  all,  underneath  all,  lies  thought 
which  is  spirit,  lies  energy  which  is  intellect,  lies  the  great  directive  will  that  is  but 
ithe  abstract  name  for  concrete  God.  **  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last  and  the  Living," 
And  there  is  no  life  but  the  life  God  i»j,  and  makes.    "  And  I  became  dead."   There 


1 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  75 

enters  here  another  and  entirely  new  order  of  ideas.  The  great  first,  last,  Living 
One  became  dead.  To  die  He  had  become  flesh,  to  make  visible  His  glory,  to  veil 
the  glory  that  He  had  made  visible.  There  is  the  great  order  of  thought  that  speaks 
of  redemption,  redemption  by  Him  who  became  incarnate,  who  died — died  I  but  "  I 
am  alive  for  ever  more  " — died  to  live,  yet  not  as  of  old.  Logos,  Word  in  God ;  but 
the  great  incarnate,  the  living  human  heart  in  the  potent  Divine  breast.  It  is  here 
now  where  the  matter  comes  in  mainly  in  need  of  discussion.  Here  is  this  great 
enthroned  Christ  alive  for  ever  more.  What  is  the  function  that  He  exercises  ?  He 
has  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death.  Well,  then,  if  He  has  the  keys  of  hell  and  death, 
what  does  hell  mean  ?  It  does  not  mean  the  place  of  torment  or  penalty,  but  the 
invisible,  the  home  of  all  the  dead,  the  great  unseen  land.  The  heaven  above,  the 
hell  beneath ;  these  it  comprehends  ;  it  denotes  all  the  vast,  boundless,  invisible 
world.  What  we  know  is  but  a  speck,  the  unseen  constitutes  the  real  universe. 
And  this  invisible,  the  great,  vast,  invisible  world  in  which  our  minute  and  hardly- 
discernible  visible  world  swims,  is  this  Hades,  this  world  unseen,  yet  most  real. 
Then  death,  if  hell  has  so  great  a  meaning,  death  cannot  have  a  shallower.  What 
is  death  but  crossing  the  ocean,  leaving  the  land  that  is  known  and  turning  one's 
face  to  the  great  unknown  to  be  unknown  no  more  ?  Several  hundred  years  ago 
some  men  and  women  gathered  round  a  Southern  harbour  and  they  saw  three  small 
ships  weigh  anchor  and  spread  sail  and  stand  out  to  sea.  They  watched  them  as 
the  hull  disappeared,  as  the  sail  dipped,  and  as  all  faded  from  sight,  but  whether 
into  the  blue  heaven  above  or  whether  still  saihng  on  the  sea  below,  who  behind 
could  tell  ?  Months  after  in  distant  Western  islands,  men  sat  and  wondered  whether 
they  were  missed  at  home.  In  Itahan  and  Spanish  homes,  longing  wives  and  wist- 
ful sisters  asked :  "  Where  are  they  ?  our  husbands,  our  brothers,  float  they  still  on 
the  blue  sea  ?  faded  they  into  the  great  blue  heaven  ?  "  So  our  fathers,  they  that 
have  been,  have  passed  from  sight  and  floated  into  the  great  blue  heaven,  but  they 
are  a  mightier  host  than  their  sons.  They  think  of  the  sons  behind,  we  think  of 
the  fathers  before ;  and  thought  and  faith  and  hope  reach  o'er  that  mighty  ocean, 
and  grasp  the  vision  of  the  mighty  dead  still  living  because  Christ  lives.  "  The  keys 
of  death  and  hell."  Keys  are  symbolical,  emblems  that  speak  of  judgment,  the  right 
to  judge  and  the  might  to  execute.  As  the  throne,  the  sceptre,  the  crown  speak  of 
regal  dignity  and  regal  rights,  so  the  keys  speak  of  judicial  function.  A  great 
Sovereign  sits  in  judgment,  and  these  keys,  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  capacity  as 
Mediator,  holds.  He  hath  the  keys  of  all  the  visible  and  invisible — death  and 
hell.  Men  die,  but  they  die  not  by  chance.  Accidents  concern  men,  they  do  not 
concern  God.  Sudden  events  surprise  us,  there  is  no  suddenness  and  no  surprise  to 
Him.  Death  is  in  the  hands  of  Christ.  The  dying  in  Christ's  hands  die  unto  life. 
In  olden  days  when  our  fathers  roamed  the  woods  that  stood  where  now  busy  cities 
are,  they  hewed  from  out  the  fallen  oak  trunk  the  frail  canoe,  they  launched  it  on 
the  ocean,  then  they  skirted  along  the  shore  looking  fearfully  out  for  the  coming 
storm,  seeking  safety  by  hugging  the  rock  that  was  their  very  death.  Now  a 
mighty  steamship  which  is  a  floating  palace  is  launched  upon  the  sea,  and  hundreds 
of  men  and  women  live  there,  and  there,  through  night  and  day,  in  storm  and  calm, 
across  the  ocean  the  stately  ship  doth  speed.  So  man  without  Christ  is  man  facing 
the  great  ocean  of  death,  the  vast  unknown  land,  in  a  frail  canoe  that  the  waters 
will  surely  utterly  destroy.  Man  in  Christ  is  man  safe,  wrapped  in  glorious  security, 
resting  in  perfect  peace,  making  painful  yet  peaceful  and  glad  voyage  out  of  time 
into  a  great  eternity.  And  He  who  has  these  keys  exercises  the  great  function  they 
give.  He  judges  men.  He  who  saves  is  He  who  judges,  and  who  so  good  a  judge 
as  the  gracious  Saviour?  {A.  M.  Fairbairn,  D.D.)  Through  death  to  life  : — I. 
The  designation  which  our  Lord  assumed.  "  I  am  the  first  and  the  last."  Say 
that  these  words  speak  of  Jesus  Christ  as  my  Lord  and  my  God,  and  yet  as  my 
Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother ;  say  that  they  teach  the  human  and  the 
Divine  nature  in  the  one  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  I  can  under- 
stand how  they  would  comfort  the  heart  of  the  tremulous  apostle.  II.  The  transi- 
tion THROUGH  WHICH  OUR  LoRD  PASSED.  Johu  would  be  HO  Stranger  to  Him 
by  and  by.  Was  that  eye,  like  a  flame  of  fire,  to  tell  of  corruption  ?  Do  those 
feet,  burning  as  with  fine  brass,  tell  of  corruption  ?  Does  that  voice,  like  the  sound 
of  many  waters,  tell  of  corruption  ?  Nay ;  He  had  been  dead,  but  now  was  alive 
again,  and  the  promises  He  hath  given  were  assured  by  His  resurrection.  No 
matter  what  there  should  be  on  the  part  of  John  in  regard  to  Hades  or  to  death, 
no  matter  what  he  might  dread,  let  him  renounce  his  dread,  let  him  stand  on  his 
feet,  let  him  look  his  Saviour  in  the  face  and  recognise  the  old  smile  as  well  as 


76  •  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

that  voice,  and  lay  down  upon  His  breast  as  he  was  wont  to  do  before  our  Lord 
was  a  sufferer  on  the  Cross.    Death  had  no  more  dominion  over  Him  now.    "  He  was 
alive  for  evermore."     Come  what  might,  there  would  be  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin ; 
no  other  sacrifice  wanted.     "  I  am  aUve  for  evermore  " ;  and  the  liabilities  of  His 
humanity  were  exhausted ;  all  the  sacrificial  responsibilities  of  His  mediatorship 
were  exhausted,  there  was  not  a  fragment  of  those  responsibilities  left.     It  was 
finished.     He  had  made  an  end  of  sin  ;  He  had  abolished  death,  and  swallowed  it 
up  in  victory  ;  He  had  become  the  resurrection  and  the  life  in  perpetuity,  through- 
out all  the  ages  world  without  end.     HI.  The  sovereignty  which  He  claimed.    All 
harmonised ;  all  was  coherent  in  the  three  several  great  departments  of  this  text. 
Look  at  the  supremacy  of  the  sovereignty  He  assumed,  and  take  care  to  use  that 
connecting  particle  there,  "  and  I  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death."    Now,  the 
relations  of  Hades  to  you  and  to  me  are  momentous  in  the  extreme.    But  press 
questions  as  we  may,  to  a  very  great  extent  they  can  obtain  no  satisfactory  reply. 
I  may,  however,  tell  you  one  thing  about  Hades,  and  that  is  it  is  very  effectually 
controlled.     Supposing  all  the  principalities  and  powers  amidst  the  evil  spirits  of 
Hades  were  to  come  in  all  their  force  and  in  all  their  malignity  against  the  Church 
of  Christ  which  He  had  purchased  with  His  own  blood,  what  then  ?    It  was  a  fore- 
gone  conclusion  ;  and  the  principalities   and   powers  in  perdition  would   just 
ingloriously  succumb.     They  might  boast,  as  the  poet  says,  "  Better  to  reign  in 
hell  than  serve  in  heaven,"  but  they  are  in  servitude  after  all  their  vaunting,  and 
He  whom  they  serve  is  no  other  than  He  whom  they  crucified.     (W.  Brock,  D.D.) 
A  funeral  sermon  : — I.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  dee.     The  Son  of  God,  the  Kedeemer 
of  men,  presides  over  death.    He  has  the  key  of  death.    And  is  death  a  trifle,  if  He 
is  magnified  by  presiding  over  it  ?    A  reasonable  soul  has  changed  states.    A  never 
dying  soul  has  gone  to  bliss  or  woe.     How  important  is  life  !    And  how  careful  a 
guard  has  God  set  over  it !    H.  Death  never  comes  at  random.     The  key  is  in 
the  hand  of  the  Saviour,  and  it  is  used  with  determination  and  judgment.     He 
employs  various  means  and  instruments,  but  they  are  all  under  His  control,  and 
work  His  will.    III.  Our  life  on  earth  is  under  the  constant  notice  op  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.    He  takes  constant  notice  of  what  we  do,  and  of  what  we 
neglect.    For  as  His  turning  the  key  at  last  is  a  judicial  act,  it  supposes  a  close  and 
accurate  inspection,  and  proceeds  upon  it.     Of  Him  who  had  the  key  it  is  said, 
also,  that  "  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."    With  these  eyes  he  sees  all  that  is 
done — they  pierce  through  every  disguise — the  darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike 
to  them.    If  those  who  trust  in  Him  are  left  to  suffer,  it  is  not  from  inadvertency,  or 
indifference,  or  impotence,  but  from  design  for  their  profit.      IV.  His  power  in 
death  cannot  be  resisted.     V.  Souls  upon  whom  this  key  is  turned,  though 
SEPARATED  FROM  THIS  WORLD,  DO  NOT  CEASE  TO  BE.    Their  mode  of  Bxistcnce  and 
sphere  of  operation  are  changed,  but  the  vital  power  remains.     They  see  with  these 
eyes  no  more,  and  no  more  hear  with  these  ears ;  but  still  see  and  hear  and  under- 
stand.    The  key  that  opens  the  door  for  their  departure  from  earth,  opens  the  door  of 
admission  to  another  world.    VI.  The  invisible  world  is  under  the  control  of 
THE  Saviour.     (D.  Merrill.)        The  Living  One  who  became  dead  : — I.  The  royal 
Christ  proclaims  His  absolute  life.     There  is  a  much  closer  connection  between 
the  words  of  our  text  and  those  of  the  preceding  verse  than  our  Authorized  Version 
gives.    We  must  strike  out  that  intrusive  and  wholly  needless  supplement  "  I  am," 
and  read  the  sentence  unbrokenly.     "  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last  and  the  Living 
One."    Now  that  close  connection  of  clauses  in  itself  suggests  that  this  expression 
"  the  Living  One  "  means  something  more  than  the  mere  declaration  that  He  was 
alive.     It  means,  as  I  believe,  exactly  what  Christ  meant  when,  in  the  hearing  of 
this  same  apostle.  He  said  upon  earth,  "  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself  so  hath 
He  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  Himself."    A  life  which,  considered  in  contrast 
with  aU  the  life  of  creatures  is  underived,  independent,  and,  considered  in  contrast 
with  the  life  of  the  Father  with  whom  that  Son  stands  in  ineffable  and  unbroken 
union,  is  bestowed.     It  is  a  paradox,  I  know,  but  until  we  have  gone  round  the 
boundless  boundaries  of  that  Divine  nature,  we  have  no  business  to  say  that  it  is 
impossible.    U.  The  royal  Christ  proclaims  His  submission  to  death.     Such  a 
statement  implies  our  Lord's  assumption  of  flesh.     The  only  possibility  of  death, 
for  "  the  Living  One,"  lies  in  His  enwrapping  Himself  with  that  which  can  die.    As 
you  might  put  a  piece  of  asbestos  into  a  twist  of  cotton  wool,  over  which  the  flame 
could  have  power,  or  as  a  sun  might  plunge  into  thick  envelopes  of  darkness,  so 
this  eternal,  absolute  Life  gathered  to  itself  by  voluntary  accretion  the  surrounding 
which  was  capable  of  mortality.    Let  us  bow  before  that  mystery  of  Divine  love, 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  77 

the  death  of  the  Lord  of  Life.  The  motive  which  impelled  Him,  the  consequences 
which  followed,  are  not  in  view  here.  But  there  is  another  consideration  that  I  may 
suggest.  The  eternal  Life  became  dead.  Then  the  awful  solitude  is  solitary  no  longer. 
As  travellers  are  cheered  on  a  solitary  road  when  they  see  the  footprints  that  they 
know  belonged  to  loved  and  trusted  ones  who  have  trodden  it  before,  that  desolate 
loneliness  is  less  lonely  when  we  think  that  He  became  dead.  111.  The  royal 
Christ  proclaims  His  eternal  life  in  glory.  "  Behold !  " — as  if  calhng  atten- 
tion to  a  wonder — "  I  am  alive  for  evennore."  Again  I  say  we  have  here  a  distinctly 
Divine  prerogative  claimed  by  the  exalted  Christ.  For  that  eternal  life  of  which 
He  speaks  is  by  no  means  the  communicated  immortality  which  He  imparts  to 
them  that  in  His  love  go  down  to  death,  but  it  is  the  inherent  eternal  life  of  the 
Divine  nature.  The  "  I "  of  my  text  is  the  Divine-human  Jesus.  The  manhood  is  so 
intertwined  with  the  Deity  that  the  absolute  life  of  the  latter  has,  as  it  wei*e,  flowed 
over  and  glorified  the  former  ;  and  it  is  a  Man  who  lays  His  hand  upon  the  Divine 
prerogative,  and  says,  "  I  live  for  evermore."  And  so,  "  because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also."  We  cannot  die  as  long  as  Christ  is  alive.  Christ's  resurrection  is  the 
pledge  and  the  source  of  eternal  life  for  us.  IV.  The  royal  Christ  proclaims  His 
AUTHORITY  OVER  THE  DIM  REGIONS  OF  THE  DEAD.  The  Original  docs  not  read  "hell 
and  death,"  but  "  death  and  "  Hades,  the  dim  unseen  regions  in  which  all  the  dead, 
whatsoever  their  condition  may  be,  are  gathered.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Jesus 
Christ  and  the  nineteenth  century  : — The  thoughtful  traveller  in  Europe,  visiting 
the  churches  and  cathedrals  which  are  monuments  at  once  to  the  munificence, 
religiousness,  and  superstition  of  past  centuries,  cannot  fail  to  notice  the  many 
representations  of  a  dead  Christ  which  these  buildings  enshrine.  There  are  those 
who  insist  that  this  dead  Jesus  is  the  symbol  of  the  Christian  faith.  From  that 
grave  in  the  garden  He  did  not  come  forth,  and  all  the  declarations  of  His  disciples 
concerning  His  resurrection,  His  appearances  to  them  were  but  dreams  and  fancies, 

or  at  most  only  mythical  and  poetic  expressions  of  a  continuity  of  His  influence 

an  influence  emanating  from  the  moral  beauty  of  His  life  and  teaching  upon  the 
earth.  It  is  against  this  denial  of  the  actual  resurrection  of  Jesus  and  the  con- 
tinuance of  His  personal  life  that  I  would  speak.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  not  dead, 
but  is  alive  for  evermore.  We  are  not  unfamiliar  with  the  substitute  for  this 
personal  immortality,  both  of  our  Lord  and  of  ourselves,  which  is  proffered  us 
to-day,  namely,  •'  a  continuity  of  spiritual  and  mental  energy  and  influence,  passing 
from  us  unto  others,  and  thus  on  through  succeeding  generations."  The  measure 
of  truth  in  this  we  do  not  deny.  It  is  true  that  all  thought,  all  emotion,  all 
aspiration  of  past  generations  enters  into  the  present.  It  is  true  that  in  this  sense 
Jesus  Christ  is  alive,  and  lives  for  evermore.  Beyond  all  others  His  influence  is 
felt  in  the  throbbing  life  of  our  own  age.  But  was  this  posthumous  influence  all 
Christ  meant  in  the  predictions  He  made  of  His  conquest  over  death  and  His  rising 
again  from  the  grave  ?  He— not  simply  the  memory  of  His  words,  not  simply  the 
influence  His  life  has  exerted  upon  His  disciples — but  He  Himself  will  be  with  them 
to  the  end  of  the  world.  True,  the  visible  form  vanished  from  their  eyes.  That 
must  be  so.  Limited  fellowship  must  give  way  to  universal  communion.  But  did 
those  followers  of  the  Galilean  ever,  after  that  memorable  scene  on  Olivet,  doubt 
that  their  Master  was  with  them  ?  Never  !  John  may  be  banished  by  pagan  Kome 
from  all  the  endearing  associations  of  Christian  brotherhood  ;  yet  no  power  could 
bereave  him  of  the  Saviour.  Christ  living  in  His  followers  is  the  secret  of  the 
continued  life  of  the  Christian  Church.  Empires  have  fallen,  philosophies  have 
been  exploded.  But  this  body  of  Christ,  animated  by  His  Spirit,  has  lived  and 
grown,  sustained  by  the  life  of  Him  who  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  died  and  rose 
again.  But  I  want  to  set  before  you  the  living  Christ  in  relation  to  the  larger  life  of 
our  age,  its  theologies,  its  sociology,  its  literature,  and  its  art.  Jesus  Christ  is 
Himself  the  centre  of  all  theology  The  supreme  evidence  of  Christianity  is  Christ. 
Never  was  there  such  activity  in  Christian  thought  as  now.  Never  was  the  person 
or  the  character  of  Jesus  more  scrutinised  than  in  this  age.  The  marked  feature 
of  present  theological  discussion  is  that  it  centres  around  the  Christ  Himself  rather 
than  any  of  the  doctrines  or  theories  men  have  deduced  from  His  words.  Again : 
This  living  Christ  is  felt  in  the  political  movements  of  the  present  century.  The 
nations  of  the  earth  are  to-day  moving  in  the  direction  of  democracy.  Many  see 
and  note  this ;  but  all  do  not  perceive  the  character  of  the  democracy  which  is  thus 
developing.  It  is  not  the  democracy  of  Greece  or  Kome  in  the  days  of  their 
republics,  but  a  new  democracy  which  is  coming  up  the  steep  of  time.  They  were 
a  republic  of  the  few.     This  is  a  democracy  of  the  whole.    The  new  democracy  will 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  i. 

know  nothing  in  race,  clime,  creed,  or  colour  to  bar  a  man  out  of  citizenship.  The 
seeds  of  this  democracy  were  sown  when  Christ  proclaimed  the  brotherhood  of  man 
and  sent  forth  His  disciples  to  found  a  religion  which  aimed  at  the  enfranchisement 
of  all  men.  Legislation  feels  His  influence.  Law  is  more  and  more  seeking  to 
embody  impartial,  universal  justice.  Government  seeks  to  hold  its  shield  over  all 
alike — the  feeble,  the  poor,  the  unfortunate,  as  well  as  the  rich,  the  strong,  and  the 
successful.  The  element  of  mercy  was  never  so  potent  in  the  administration  of  law 
as  to-day.  The  hand  of  Jesus  has  wiped  hundreds  of  cruel  and  unjust  penalties 
from  the  statute-books.  The  end  now  sought  by  punishment  is  not  revenge,  or 
restraint  even,  alone,  but  the  reformation  of  the  criminal.  Some  one  has  said 
culture  and  Christianity  walk  arm  in  arm.  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  Go,  teach."  To 
whom  are  we  indebted  for  the  greatest  educational  institutions  of  the  present  time  ? 
Men  in  whom  Christ  lived  and  who  would  have  culture  lay  its  crown  at  His  feet. 
The  children  of  the  poor  and  toiling  masses  are  gathered  into  schools,  and  the  gates 
of  knowledge  flung  open  to  them.  The  blind  are  made  to  see  with  the  sensitive 
finger-tips,  and  the  deaf  seem  almost  to  hear  under  the  teaching  of  those  who  thus 
seek  to  do  in  the  world  the  work  of  Him  who  is  their  Master  and  Lord.  Note  the 
influence  of  the  Christ  in  the  literature  and  art  of  this  century.  A  few  words  musj; 
suffice.  Never  had  literature  so  many  men  and  women  of  commanding  genius, 
whose  work  vibrates  with  the  spirit  of  the  Saviour.  The  essayists,  poets,  novelists, 
who  have  most  deeply  stirred  the  pulses  of  the  present  generation  are  those  who  ia 
a  greater  or  lesser  degree  write  along  the  lines  of  religious  thought,  emotion,  and 
human  sympathy.  Art  is  every  year  becoming  purer.  The  most  immortal  work  of 
the  painter,  ancient  or  modern,  is  that  which  seeks  to  bring  before  men  something 
in  the  life  and  work  of  this  Christ.  Music  rises  to  its  highest  development  and 
takes  its  grandest  forms  of  expression  when  it  weds  itself  to  sacred  themes.  The 
life  of  the  world — social,  moral,  intellectual,  artistic — the  world's  nobler  life  is  fed 
by  the  unfailing  life  of  Jesus  the  Christ.  Each  passing  year  His  presence  will  be 
more  vividly  recalled.  His  influence  more  potently  felt.  "  Hallelujah,  for  the  Lord 
God  omnipotent  reignethi  "     {W.  Lloyd,  D.D.)        Jesus  living  for  ever : — I.  Some 

EVIDENCES   OF   THE   GLORIOUS   TRUTH,    THAT   ChRIST   IS   He   WHO   LIVES   FOR  EVERMORE. 

I  cannot  refer  you  to  the  light  of  nature  for  a  proof  of  this  point.  Eeason,  indeed, 
teaches  us  that  as  God  was  the  maker  of  all  things,  He  must  be  from  everlasting  to 
everlasting,  but  with  respect  to  Christ's  eternal  continuance  as  man,  or  even  with 
respect  to  His  becoming  man  at  first,  it  affords  us  no  light.  This  is  a  mystery  of 
godliness,  made  known  by  revelation  only.  1.  Scriptural  representations  of  Christ 
show  plainly  that  He  liveth  for  evermore.  When  we  would  prove  that  man  is  a 
frail  creature,  we  ask  the  question.  What  is  flesh  ?  And  for  an  answer,  we  repeat 
Isaiah's  representation,  "  All  flesh  is  grass,"  <fec.  Now,  compare  these  representa- 
tions of  men  in  general  with  the  designations  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  and  you 
will  see  a  striking  contrast.  What  creature  more  durable  than  the  sun  ?  What  is 
more  immovable  than  a  rock  ?  And  was  not  this  the  very  metaphor  which  Christ 
used  when  speaking  of  Himself  as  God-man  ?  2.  The  types  of  Scripture  import 
that  He  lives  for  evermore.  I  will  mention  only  two,  Moses'  burning  bush,  and 
Melchisedec.  3.  The  testimony  of  God,  recorded  in  Scripture,  shows  that  Jesus 
lives  for  ever.  First,  hear  the  testimony  of  the  Father,  '*  The  Lord  said  unto  my 
Lord,"  &o.  Hear  next  the  testimony  of  the  Son.  "  Thou  wilt  show  Me  the  path  of 
life,"  &c.  Hear  also  the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  was  He  who  dwelt  in 
the  prophets,  "  testifying  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should 
follow."  And  what  do  these  prophets,  as  directed  by  Him,  say  ?  One,  speaking  of 
Christ,  expresses  himself,  "  He  asked  life  of  Thee,  and  Thou  gavest  it  Him,  even 
length  of  days  for  ever  and  ever  "  ;  and  another  tells  us,  that  *'  of  the  increase  of 
His  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end."  4.  Scripture  doctrines  evince 
the  glorious  truth  that  Christ  lives  for  evermore.  There  is  what  is  called  the 
analogy  of  faith  ;  now,  the  truth  of  which  we  speak  is  not  only  agreeable  to  this 
analogy  but  essential  to  it.  For  instance,  according  to  Scripture,  our  Lord  Jesus 
is  the  trustee  of  the  new  covenant.  Yes,  "  He  hath  received  gifts  for  men,  yea,  for 
the  rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."  If  so,  must  He 
not  live  that  He  may  distribute  these  gifts  ?  Another  doctrine  of  Scripture  is,  that 
Christ  shall  be  the  judge  of  the  world.  But  how  could  Christ  judge  the  world  if 
it  were  not  that  He  shall  live  to  the  end  of  days  ?  And,  then,  how  could  He  say, 
"come "to  the  righteous,  and  "depart"  to  the  wicked,  unless  He  were  to  live 
thereafter,  even  through  a  glorious  eternity  ?  II.  The  import  of  Christ's  livino 
FOB  evermore.    1.  It  denotes  that  Christ  shall  eternally  exist.    This  is  the  lowest 


CJHAP.  I.]  REVELATION,  79 

sense  of  the  words.  What  is  death  but  a  dissolution  of  the  human  frame  ?  but 
Christ's  humanity  shall  never  cease  to  be.  The  body  which  was  crucified  He  still 
retains,  and  shall  do  so  for  ever.  2.  Christ  shall  be  everlastingly  happy.  In  the 
days  of  Christ's  flesh,  His  afflictions  were  singular.  If  His  trials  were  singular  on 
earth,  His  pleasures  in  heaven  are  surpassing.  3.  Jesus  shall  be  eternally  honoured. 
4.  Christ  shall  be  everlastingly  active.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea  conveyed  by  the 
term  life.  Do  you  inquire  wherein  is  Christ  active  ?  In  reply,  shaU  I  direct  your 
attention  to  His  constant  preservation  of  millions  of  beings,  for  "  by  Him  all  things 
consist  ?  "  I  choose  rather  to  point  you  to  His  deeds  of  grace.  Behold  Him  in 
heaven — there  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  But  His  exertions 
are  not  confined  to  the  abodes  of  bUss.  It  is  Jesus  "  who  executeth  judgment  for 
the  oppressed,"  &c.  But  how  long  shall  Jesus  thus  live  and  be  active  ?  In  His 
humbled  state,  not  above  thirty-three  years  had  elapsed,  when  He  said  of  His  work, 
"  It  is  finished  "  ;  but  rejoice,  0  Christians,  His  heavenly  business  shall  never  cease. 
•'The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever,  even  thy  God,  0  Zion,  unto  all  generations." 
in.  In  what  different  characters  Christ  shall  live  for  ever.  1.  He  shall 
live  for  ever  as  the  glorious  representative  of  God.  2.  He  shall  live  for  ever  as  our 
gracious  intercessor.  3.  He  shall  live  for  ever  as  our  spiritual  King.  IV.  The 
ENDS  OF  Christ's  living  for  evermore.  1.  Hereby  glory  is  brought  to  God.  Ask 
you  for  a  proof  of  God's  justice  in  punishing  ?  I  point  you  to  the  Cross,  and  say, 
"Behold,  the  Surety  of  sinners  died."  But  do  you  seek  an  evidence  of  retributive 
justice  in  rewarding?  I  direct  your  attention  to  the  throne,  and  cry,  "Behold,  He 
lives  for  evermore."  2.  Hereby  a  reward  is  given  to  Christ.  He  still  remembers 
Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  but  He  sees  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  is  satisfied. 
Oh,  what  must  that  satisfaction  be,  in  the  mind  of  the  glorified  Jesus !  3.  Hereby 
believers  are  comforted.  Does  Christ  live  for  evermore  ?  Our  justification  must  be 
permanent.  Our  sanctification  is  made  certain.  Does  Jesus  live  for  evermore  ? 
It  secures  support  in  the  performance  of  every  duty.  Though  we  are  feeble.  He  is 
strong ;  though  we  are  depressed,  it  is  He  that  raiseth  up.  4.  Hereby  the  inhabitants 
of  heaven  are  transported.  A  gracious  visit  from  Christ  made  a  desert  lightsome  to 
Moses ;  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  comfortable  to  David ;  a  fiery  furnace  easy  to 
the  three  children.  Oh,  then,  what  will  it  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord  in  heaven !  {E.Brown.) 
ChrisVs  life  in  heaven : — I.  His  life  in  heaven  is  a  life  that  succeeds  an  extra- 
ordinary death.  1.  Absolute  spotaneity.  No  being  ever  died  but  Christ  who  had 
the  feeling  that  he  need  never  die — that  death  could  be  for  ever  escaped.  2.  Entire 
relativeness.  He  died  for  others.  "He  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities,"  &c.  3. 
Universal  influence.  U.  His  life  in  heaven  is  a  life  op  endless  duration.  1. 
His  endless  duration  is  a  necessity  of  His  nature.  2.  His  endless  duration  is  the 
glory  of  the  good.  III.  His  life  in  heaven  is  a  life  of  absolute  dominion  over 
the  destinies  of  men.  1.  There  is  nothing  accidental  in  human  history.  2. 
Departed  men  are  still  in  existence.  3.  Death  is  not  the  introduction  to  a  new 
moral  kingdom.  The  same  Lord  is  here  as  there.  4.  We  may  anticipate  the  day 
when  death  shall  be  swallowed  up  in  victory.  {Homilist.)  An  Easter  sermon : — 
I  have  taken  for  my  Easter  text  the  account  which  Christ  gives  of  Himself  after 
His  resurrection  and  ascension.  See  what  Christ  says  of  Himself  then.  First,  "  I 
am  He  that  liveth."  That  word,  "  liveth,"  is  a  word  of  continuous,  perpetual  life. 
It  describes  the  external  existence  which  has  no  beginning  and  no  end ;  which, 
considered  in  its  purity  and  perfectness,  has  no  present  and  no  past,  but  one  eternal 
and  unbroken  present — one  eternal  now.  If  anything  has  come  to  us  to  make  ua 
feel  what  a  fragmentary  thing  our  human  life  is,  I  think  there  is  no  greater  know- 
ledge for  us  to  win  than  that  the  life  of  one  who  loves  us  as  Christ  loves  us  is  an 
eternal  life,  with  the  continuance  and  the  unchangeableness  of  eternity.  See  how 
we  alter ;  how  we  make  plans  and  finish  them,  or  give  them  up  ;  how  we  slip  on 
from  one  stage  of  our  career  into  another ;  how  past,  present,  and  future  are  for  ever 
confusing  our  existence  ;  how  we  die,  and  others  come  on  in  our  places.  How  our 
heads  ache  and  our  hearts  ache  with  it  all  sometimes.  **  Is  this  living  ?  "  wa 
exclaim.  "This  is  merely  touching  upon  life.  Is  it  living?  Is  it  not  Uke  the 
touching  of  an  insect  on  the  surface  of  a  river  that  is  hundreds  of  miles  long  ?  His 
wing  just  brushes  it  at  one  point  in  its  long  course,  and  ruffles  it  for  a  second,  and 
then  is  gone  again,  and  that  is  all  he  has  to  do  with  it.  And  that  is  all  we  have  to 
do  with  life.  Is  this  living  ?  "  And  then  there  comes  this  voice  from  Christ ;  "  I 
am  He  that  liveth,"  He  declares — continuous,  eternal  life.  See  what  a  wonderful 
thing  comes  next.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead."  We  do  not  begin  tc 
know  how  wonderful  that  is.    Eemember  the  eternally  living,  the  very  life  of  all 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

lives.  And  yet  into  that  life  of  lives  death  has  come — as  an  episode,  an  incident. 
That  spiritual  existence  which  had  been  going  on  for  ever,  on  which  the  short 
existences  of  men  had  been  strung  into  consistency,  now  came  and  submitted  itself 
to  that  which  men  had  always  been  submitting  to.  And  lo  !  instead  of  being  what 
men  had  feared  it  was,  what  men  had  hardly  dared  to  hope  that  it  was  not,  the 
putting  out  of  life,  it  was  seen  to  be  only  the  changing  of  the  circumstances  of  life, 
without  any  real  power  over  the  real  principle  of  life ;  any  more  power  than  the 
cloud  has  over  the  sun  that  it  obscures.  That  was  the  wonder  of  Christ's  death. 
*'  It  is  an  experience  of  life,  not  an  end  of  life.  Life  goes  on  through  it  and  comes 
out  unharmed.  Look  at  Me.  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead  !  "  But  this  is 
not  all.  Still  the  description  goes  on  and  unfolds  itself.  "  He  that  liveth,  and  was 
dead,"  Christ  says,  "  and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  This  existence  after 
death  is  special,  and  different.  It  is  not  a  mere  reassertion  of  what  had  been  already 
lincluded  in  His  great  Word,  "  I  am  He  that  liveth."  It  is  something  added.  It  is 
I  an  assurance  that  in  the  continued  life  which  has  once  passed  through  the 
experience  of  death  there  is  something  new,  another  sympathy,  the  only  one 
which  before  could  have  been  lacking,  with  his  brethren  whose  lot  it  is  to  die, 
and  so  a  helpfulness  to  them  which  could  not  otherwise  have  been,  even  in 
His  perfect  love.  And  now  think  what  that  great  self-description  of  the  Saviour 
means,  and  what  it  is  to  us.  "  He  that  liveth  !  "  And  at  once  your  fragment  of 
life  falls  into  its  place  in  the  eternity  of  life  that  is  bridged  by  His  being.  "  He  that 
was  dead !  "  And  at  once  death  changes  from  the  terrible  end  of  life  into  a  most 
mysterious  but  no  longer  terrible  experience  of  life.  "  He  that  is  alive  for  ever- 
more !  "  And  not  merely  there  is  a  future  beyond  the  grave,  but  it  is  inhabited  by 
One  who  speaks  to  us,  who  went  there  by  the  way  that  we  must  go,  who  sees  us 
and  can  help  us  as  we  make  our  way  along,  and  will  receive  us  when  we  come  there. 
Is  not  all  changed  ?  The  devils  of  discontent,  despair,  selfishness,  sensuality,  how 
they  are  scattered  before  that  voice,  really  heard,  of  the  risen  and  everlasting  Christ. 
But  see  how  He  goes  on :  "I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead  ;  and  behold  I  am 
alive  for  evermore.  And  I  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death."  It  is  because  He 
died  that  He  holds  the  keys  of  death.  Can  we  not  understand  that  ?  Do  we  not 
know  how  any  soul  that  has  passed  through  a  great  experience  holds  the  keys  of 
that  experience,  so  that  as  he  sees  another  coming  up  to  it  just  as  ignorantly  and 
fearfully  as  he  came,  he  can  run  up  to  this  new-comer  and  open  the  door  for  him, 
show  him  on  what  side  this  experience  is  best  entered,  lead  him  through  the  dark 
passages  of  it  where  he  could  not  easily  find  his  way  alone,  and  at  last  bring  him 
out  into  the  splendour  of  the  light  beyond  ?  There  are  no  nobler  lives  on  earth  than 
those  of  men  and  women  who  have  passed  through  many  experiences  of  many 
sorts,  and  who  now  go  about  with  calm  and  happy  and  sober  faces,  holding  their 
keys,  some  golden  and  some  iron,  and  finding  their  joy  in  opening  the  gates  of  these 
experiences  to  younger  souls,  and  sending  them  into  them  full  of  intelligence  and 
hope  and  trust.  Such  lives,  I  think,  we  may  all  pray  to  grow  into  as  we  grow  older, 
and  pass  through  more  and  more  of  the  experiences  of  life.  And  now  this  is  just 
exactly  what  Jesus  does  for  us  by  His  resurrection.  Having  the  keys  of  death  and 
hell.  He  comes  to  us  as  we  are  drawing  near  to  death,  and  He  opens  the  door  on 
both  sides  of  it,  and  lets  us  look  through  it,  and  shows  us  immortality.  Now  you 
see  we  have  passed  over  from  Himself  to  us.  Not  merely  He  lives  for  ever,  but  so 
shall  we  ;  for  us,  too,  death  shall  be  not  an  end,  but  an  experience ;  and  beyond  it 
for  us,  just  as  for  Him,  stretches  immortality.  Because  He  Uves,  we  shall  live  also. 
And  now  shaU  we  try  to  teU  to  one  another  what  it  is  to  be  immortal,  and  to  know 
it ;  v/hat  it  is  to  have  death  broken  down  so  that  life  stretches  out  beyond  it,  the 
same  life  as  this,  opening,  expanding,  but  for  ever  the  same  essentially  ;  just  as  tO' 
Him  that  always  liveth  the  life  that  He  liveth  evermore  is  the  same  after  the  death 
on  Calvary,  though  with  some  entrance  of  something — some  new  knowledge,  and 
the  sympathy  of  a  new  experience — that  was  not  there  before  ?  First  of  all  I  think 
of  the  immense  and  noble  freedom  from  many  of  the  most  trying  and  vexatious  of 
our  temptations  which  come  to  a  man  to  whom  the  curtain  has  been  lifted  and  the 
veU  rent  in  twain.  Sometimes  when  one  is  travelling  through  a  foreign  country  it 
happens  that  he  stops  a  day  or  two,  a  week  or  two,  in  some  small  village,  where 
everything  is  local,  which  has  little  communication  with  the  outside  world  ;  where 
the  people  are  born  and  grow  up,  and  grow  old  and  die  without  thinking  of  leaving 
their  little  nest  among  the  mountains.  The  traveller  shares  for  a  little  while  their 
local  life,  shuts  himself  in  to  their  limitations.  But  all  the  while  he  is  freer  than 
they  are ;  he  is  not  tyrannised  over  by  tae  small  prescriptions  and  petty  standards 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  81 

that  are  despots  to  them.  He  knows  of,  and  belongs  to,  a  larger  world.  He  is  kept 
free  by  the  sense  of  the  world  beyond  the  mountains,  from  which  he  came  and  to 
which  he  is  going  back  again.  And  so  when  a  man,  strong  in  the  conviction  of 
immortality,  really  counts  himself  a  stranger  and  a  pilgrim  among  the  multitudes 
who  know  no  home,  no  world  but  this,  then  he  is  free  among  them  ;  free  from  the 
worldly  tyrannies  that  bind  them ;  free  from  their  temptations  to  be  cowardly  and 
mean.  The  wall  of  death,  beyond  which  they  never  look,  is  to  him  only  a  mountain 
that  can  be  crossed,  from  whose  top  he  shall  see  eternity,  where  he  belongs.  This 
is  the  freedom  of  the  best  childhood  and  the  best  old  age,  these  two  ends  of  life  in 
which  the  sense  of  immortahty  is  most  real  and  most  true.  And  so,  again,  the 
whole  position  of  duty  is  elevated  by  the  thought,  the  knowledge  of  immortality. 
It  seems  to  me  that  this  day  is  a  day  for  strong  and  cheerful  resolutions,  because  it 
is  a  day  when,  with  the  spiritual  world  open  before  us,  we  can  all  catch  sight  of  the 
destiny  of  duty — of  how,  some  time  or  other,  every  good  habit  is  to  conquer  and 
every  good  deed  wear  its  crown.  Duty  is  the  one  thing  on  earth  that  is  so  vital  that 
it  can  go  through  death  and  come  to  glory.  Duty  is  the  one  seed  that  has  such  life 
in  it  that  it  can  he  as  long  as  God  will  in  the  mummy  hand  of  death,  and  yet  be 
ready  any  moment  to  start  into  new  growth  in  the  new  soil  where  He  shall  set  it. 
So  let  us  all  consecrate  our  Easter  Day  by  resolutely  taking  up  some  new  duty 
which  we  know  we  ought  to  do.  We  bind  ourselves  so  by  a  new  chain  to  eternity, 
to  the  eternity  of  Him  who,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him,  endured  the  Cross, 
despising  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  God's  right  hand.  {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.) 
A  living  Christ  explains  Christian  history : — A  Christ  upon  paper,  though  it  were 
the  sacred  pages  of  the  gospel,  would  have  been  as  powerless  to  save  Christendom 
as  a  Christ  in  fresco.  A  living  Christ  is  the  key  to  the  phenomenon  of  Christian 
history.      {Canon  Liddon.)  The   living    Christ: — Christian  faith  is  a    mass 

of  contradictions  and  a  glorious  tissue  of  harmony.  It  is  easy  to  make  it 
seem  ridiculous  to  common  sense.  But  it  is  fatal  for  religion  to  appeal  to 
common  sense.  Our  faith  is  faith  in  a  Christ  who  is  and  who  is  not,  in  a 
dead  man  who  is  our  living  God,  in  one  who  was  humiliated  into  eternal 
exaltation,  who  in  extremest  weakness  realised  and  revealed  the  supreme  power 
of  heaven  and  earth.  What  is  this  faith  in  this  Christ?  It  is  faith — 1.  In 
a  historic  Christ.  2.  In  a  living  Christ.  3.  In  a  Christ  personal  to  each  of 
us.  1.  In  a  historic  Christ.  There  was  such  a  man.  The  story  of  Him  is  not 
an  invention.  Even  if  it  were  conceded  that  everything  told  of  Him  is  not  literally 
true,  He  was  a  reality.  His  figure  is  real  and  palpable  in  history.  Moreover,  this 
man  is  prolonged  into  posterity.  He  has  had  a  vast  influence  in  history.  But  no 
serious  mind  or  conscience  either  denies  or  deplores  that  influence.  To  deplore 
Christ  is  to  renounce  the  right  to  moral  consideration.  Even  if  He  is  not  the 
Redeemer,  He  has  been  a  vast  blessing.  He  deserves  more  attention  and  gratitude 
than  Plato,  Aristotle,  Dante,  Shakespeare,  Newton,  or  any  of  the  heroes  of  culture 
and  civilisation.  He  has  done  more  for  the  race,  for  humanity  as  humanity. 
None  of  the  most  precious  boons  of  civilisation  would  have  been  here  to-day 
without  Christianity,  without  Christ.  He  came  in  and  raised  a  new  civiHsation 
out  of  the  wreck  of  the  old.  Especially  is  this  so  with  the  achievements  of  love 
and  their  growth.  Nobody  has  ever  exerted  such  an  influence,  whether  you  like  it 
or  whether  you  do  not.  And  it  is  an  effect  produced  by  one  who  went  in  the 
face  of  human  nature.  He  gave  effect,  it  is  true,  to  certain  vast,  deep  human 
tendencies,  but  so  far  as  human  prejudices  and  tastes  go.  He  went  in  their 
teeth.  What  a  personality !  You  cannot  get  more  out  than  was  in.  If 
so  much  has  been  got  out,  how  much  must  there  have  been  in  that  miraculous 
soul !  And  how  much  remains.  All  this  may  be  recognised  by  a  dead  faith,  a 
poor  but  honest  faith,  a  faith  merely  historic  and  intelligent,  as  a  mere  matter  of 
observation.  But  this  is  hardly  faith.  It  is  not  living  faith.  It  is  not  the  kind  of 
response  Christ  died  to  evoke.  On  some  who  study  Christ  as  a  mere  figure  in 
history  there  dawns  another  kind  of  influence  from  Him.  They  begin  as  his- 
torians, as  critics ;  they  end  as  sympathisers,  advocates,  enthusiasts.  They  came 
to  embalm  Him  with  their  spices,  and  they  stay  to  worship  and  return  to  confess. 
They  can  no  more  be  impartial,  as  if  it  were  Napoleon,  Socrates.  The  ordinary 
able  man  may  merely  discuss  Him.  But  no  human-hearted  man,  no  man  of  soul, 
can  really  be  impartial  in  dealing  with  Christ.  Our  sympathies  are  engaged, 
captured,  preoccupied.  The  historic  Christ  stirs  in  humane  minds  a  faith,  a 
response,  which  makes  mere  criticism  difficult  or  impossible.  His  beauty,  terror, 
dignity,   and  invincibility  tell.     His   love,   mercy,   faithfulness   master   us.     His 

6 


si  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

indomitable  grace  survives  death  and  rises  in  us.  He  becomes  an  imaginative 
ideal,  and  then  a  moral  imperative.  His  principle  of  Divine  Sonship  becomes  the 
base  of  a  new  religion.  But  this  is  a  principle  which  is  inseparable  from  His 
Person.  But  many  separate  the  two,  and  are  at  a  stage  at  which  they  answer  to 
His  principle  more  than  to  His  Person.  They  think  more  of  His  present  legacy 
than  of  His  present  life.  Now  these  have  no  dead  faith.  Yet  they  have  not  a 
living  faith.  "  They  are  between  two  worlds  :  one  dead,  the  other  powerless  to  be 
born."  They  are  much  more  than  critics  and  historians.  But  they  are  not  yet 
the  property  of  Christ,  slaves  like  Paul,  devotees  like  John.  They  believe  in  the 
Christ  tiiat  lived  and  was  dead.  But  they  do  not  believe  in  the  absolute  Victor, 
Redeemer,  and  King,  in  the  Christ  that  liveth  for  evermore,  with  the  keys  of  hell 
and  death.  A  living  faith  is  not  mere  sympathy  with  a  historic  Christ.  2. 
When  we  speak  of  the  difference  between  a  dead  faith  and  a  living,  what  we  really 
mean  is  a  difference  in  the  object  of  our  faith  more  than  the  kind.  The  object 
determines  the  kind.  Living  faith  is  faith  in  a  living  Christ.  It  is  only  a  living 
Christ  that  calls  out  a  living  faith.  Do  not  fret  yourself  examining  your  faith, 
trying  its  limbs,  feeling  its  pulse,  watching  its  colour,  measuring  its  work.  See 
rather  that  it  is  set  on  a  living  Christ.  Care  for  that  Christ,  and  He  will  care  for 
your  faith.  Realise  a  living  Christ,  and  He  will  produce  in  you  a  living  faith. 
He  acts  in  many  ways.  He  acts  by  His  historic  character,  and  He  acts  by  His 
historic  Church.  But  still  more  He  acts  by  His  Eternal  Person  and  Holy  Ghost. 
This  living  Lord  is  invisible,  invincible,  and  immortal ;  and  at  the  last  irresistible ; 
He  acts  not  only  on  the  large  course  of  human  events,  but  directly  on  living  souls 
and  wills,  whether  humble  or  refractory  ;  and  He  rejoices  alike  in  the  love  of  His 
Father  and  the  love  of  His  redeemed,  and  in  the  communion  of  both.  To  realise 
this  is  more  than  faith  in  a  historic  Christ.  Because  living  faith  is  faith  in  a 
living  Christ.  If  He  is  not  living,  faith  must  dwindle  and  die.  Do  you  think  you 
can  feed  living  faith  on  a  dead  Christ  ?  What !  could  living  faith  go  on  in  a  God 
who  could  let  such  an  one  as  Christ  die,  who  could  disappoint  the  confident  faith 
of  Christ  Himself  that  God  would  raise  Him  up  to  glorious  life  ?  If  He  is  not  the 
living,  reigning  Christ,  He  is  a  Christ  growing  weaker  as  the  ages  move  on,  and 
He  recedes  into  the  past.  If  He  be  not  a  living  Christ,  then  every  generation 
makes  His  influence  more  indirect.  More  souls  are  interposed  between  our  souls 
and  Him,  and  absorb  His  limited  light.  The  world  moves  on  and  forgets  Him, 
moves  on  and  leaves  Him  behind,  moves  on  and  outgrows  Him.  He  becomes 
chiefly  a  scholar's  Christ.  Well,  this  is  a  frame  of  mind  fatal  at  least  to  Christ's 
place  as  Redeemer.  It  may  esteem  Him  as  a  Benefactor,  but  it  displaces  Him  as 
Redeemer.  It  clears  the  ground  for  a  totally  new  religion.  It  is  not  simply  a 
redemption  we  need.  If  Christ  had  come  to  perform  a  certain  work  of  redemp- 
tion, and  then  had  ceased  to  be,  then  we  should  have  had  in  Him  neither  the 
redemption  nor  salvation  that  we  need.  We  need  a  living  Redeemer  to  take  each 
one  of  us  to  God,  to  be  for  every  one  to-day  all  that  He  could  have  been  upon 
earth  to  any  one  in  that  great  yesterday,  and  to  be  for  ever  what  He  is  to-day. 
We  need  Him  as  the  human  conscience  of  God  to  come  to  our  rescue  against  our 
conscience.  If  we  were  left  alone  with  our  conscience  it  would  do  more,  on  the 
whole,  to  overwhelm  us  than  to  redeem  us  or  support  us.  We  need  some  surety 
more  sure  and  merciful  and  universal  than  our  conscience.  We  need  something 
more  worthy  than  our  natural  moral  manhood.  That  is  our  need  of  a  Redeemer, 
of  a  living,  human  Redeemer,  a  moral  owner  and  King,  a  living  Christ,  a  Lord 
and  Master  more  immortal  than  ourselves,  and  the  root  of  all  that  makes  our 
immortality  other  than  a  burden.  Yes,  to  lose  the  living  Christ  is  to  lose  the 
living  God.  Whatever  enfeebles  the  hold  of  Christ  on  the  world  relaxes  its  sense 
of  God.  It  is  faith  in  Christ  that  has  kept  belief  in  a  God  from  dying  out  in  the 
world.  It  is  never  the  arguments  of  the  thinkers  or  the  intuitions  of  the  saints 
that  have  done  that.  If  Christ  grow  distant  and  dim,  the  sense  of  God  fades 
from  the  soul  and  the  power  of  God  decays  from  life.  And  what  happens  then  ? 
We  lose  faith  in  man — in  each  other,  and  in  ourselves.  The  soul  that  in  its  own 
strength  defies  God  or  dismisses  Him  from  life,  has  taken  the  greatest  step  to 
losing  faith  in  itself.  How  is  that  ?  It  is  thus.  What  I  say  is,  lose  the  living 
God  and  you  lose  your  own  soul,  your  very  self-confidence.  And  it  is  thus.  Make 
your  God  not  a  living  God,  but  a  force,  a  blind,  heartless  power,  or  even  an 
irresponsive  idea,  and  you  make  Him  something  your  heart  and  will  can  have 
no  intercourse  with.  Mediator  and  Redeemer !  must  we  not  go  farther  even  than 
that  with  an  everlasting  Christ?    Yes,  one  step  farther.    Intercessor  1    Steward 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION. 


and  Key-bearer  of  the  spiritual  world  I  "He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
us."  It  is  an  everlasting  redemption,  and  therefore  it  is  a  ceaseless  intercession. 
The  intercession  of  Christ  is  simply  the  prolonged  energy  of  His  redeeming  work. 
The  soul  of  atonement  is  prayer.  The  standing  relation  of  Christ  to  God  is 
prayer.  The  perpetual  energy  of  His  spirit  is  prayer.  It  is  the  risen  Redeemer 
that  has  the  keys  of  the  world  unseen — the  keys  which  admit  it  to  history  as 
well  as  open  it  to  a  man.  The  key  of  the  unseen  is  prayer.  That  is  the  energy 
of  the  will  which  opens  both  the  soul  to  the  kingdom  and  the  kingdom  to  his  soul. 
But  never  our  prayer.  It  is  a  prayer  for  us,  not  by  us.  It  is  Christ  the  Inter- 
cessor that  has  the  key  of  the  unseen — to  deliver  from  death,  to  deliver  into 
fulness  of  spiritual  life.  The  Redeemer  would  be  less  than  Eternal  if  He  were 
not  Intercessor.  The  living  Christ  could  not  live  and  not  redeem,  not  intercede. 
Redemption  would  be  a  mere  act  in  time  if  it  were  not  prolonged  as  the  native  and 
congenial  energy  of  the  Redeemer's  soul  in  the  intercession  of  eternity.  The 
priestly  atonement  of  Christ  was  final,  but  it  was  final  in  the  sense  of  working 
incessantly  on,  not  only  in  its  echoes  and  results  with  us,  but  in  the  self-sustained 
energies  of  His  own  Almighty  and  Immortal  Spirit.  This  is  the  priesthood  which 
is  the  end  of  priesthood,  and  its  consummation  the  satisfaction  of  the  priestly 
idea.  3.  Faith  in  Christ  is  faith  in  Christ  personal  to  us.  We  must  have  the 
historic  Christ  and  more.  We  must  have  the  living  Christ.  But  a  living  Christ 
who  only  ruled  His  kingdom  in  the  unseen  by  general  laws  would  be  no  sufficient 
Saviour.  He  must  be  personal  to  us.  He  must  be  our  Saviour,  in  our  situation, 
our  needs,  loves,  shames,  sins.  He  must  not  only  live,  but  mingle  with  our  lives. 
He  must  charge  Himself  with  our  souls.  We  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  We 
have  in  Christ  as  the  Spirit,  the  Sacrificer  of  our  single  lives,  the  Reader  of 
our  hearts,  the  Helper  of  our  most  private  straits,  the  Inspirer  of  our  most 
deep  and  sacred  confessions.  That  is  the  Christ  we  need,  and,  thank  God  for 
His  unspeakable  gift,  that  is  the  Christ  we  have.  (P.  T,  Forsyth,  D.D.) 
The  living  Lord : — I.  His  Divine  nature.  He  is  "  the  Living  One."  H.  His 
MEBCiruL  MISSION.  He  came  to  earth  to  die.  HI.  His  relation  to  us  now  as  our 
Living  Lord.  1.  Our  present  Lord.  He  is  with  us  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the 
world.  He  is  "our  very  present  help,"  compassing  our  path  and  our  lying  down  ; 
with  us  in  the  church  and  in  the  chamber,  in  the  study  and  in  the  market,  in  the 
broad  field  of  daily  labour  and  in  the  sacred  sphere  of  holy  service.  2.  Our  obser- 
vant Lord.  Reading  our  every  thought  and  feeling.  3.  Our  sympathetic  Lord. 
Who  can  estimate  the  extent  to  which  the  burdens  of  this  world  have  been  lightened, 
its  sorrows  mitigated,  its  loneliness  relieved,  its  apprehensions  calmed,  its  whole  life 
blessed  by  the  felt  presence  of  that  sympathetic  Lord  who  is  "  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  our  infirmities  "  ?  4.  Our  appreciative  Lord.  He  values  every  offering, 
however  small,  that  is  made  in  purity  of  heart.  5.  Our  energising  and  recompensing 
Lord.  We  are  not  sufficient  of  ourselves  to  prevail  against  the  strong  spiritual  forces 
opposed  to  us.  6.  Our  abiding  Lord.  {W.  Clarkson,  B.A.)  The  Living  One  : — 
I.  Jesus  Christ  claims  to  be  the  Proprietor  of  Life.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth." 
The  language  is  emphatic  and  suggestive.  It  is  not  "  I  live."  Every  animated 
existence  in  the  universe  might  with  truthfulness  say,  "  I  live."  It  is,  however,  one 
thing  to  possess  life,  but  quite  another  thing  to  have  it  at  our  disposal.  Amid  the 
teeming  myriads  of  existences  which  people  the  universe,  there  is  not  a  creature  in 
the  heaven  above,  or  on  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the  far-off  districts  of  immensity, 
that  can  say,  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,"  or  "  I  am  the  Living  One."  The  title  belongs 
exclusively  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Lord  and  sole  Proprietor  of  life.  The 
plenitude  of  life  is  in  Him,  and  from  Him  it  emanates  to  all  animate  existences. 
This  significant  title  suggests  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Proprietor  of  His  own  life  as 
well  as  ours.  It  was  His  love  for  you  and  me  that  fastened  Him  to  that  awful 
cross.  Had  there  been  no  love,  the  nails  could  not  have  detained  Him.  Even 
when  entombed  in  the  grave  He  was  still  the  Proprietor  of  His  life,  and  had  perfect 
power  over  it.  The  grave  had  no  power  to  detain  His  body  a  moment  longer  than 
He  chose  to  submit  to  -its  detention.  H.  The  life  of  which  Christ  claims  to  be  the 
Proprietor  is  a  life  subsequent  to  death — a  resurrection  life  :  "  Was  dead."  The 
death  of  Christ  constitutes  the  foundation  of  our  hope,  the  ground  of  our  confidence, 
and  the  burden  of  the  heavenly  song.  There  could,  however,  be  little  or  no  joy  in 
the  hearts  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven  if  Jesus  Christ  had  not  lived  again  after  having 
died.  To  feel,  while  sharing  the  bliss  of  heaven,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  away, 
would  shed  a  dash  of  bitterness  into  your  cup,  otherwise  so  full  of  joy,  and  dim  the 
radiance  of  your  immortality.    What  pleasure  could  there  be  in  the  feast  if  He 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

whose  beneficence  provided  it  were  absent  ?  What  joy  could  there  be  in  your 
Father's  house  if  the  Master  of  the  house  were  away  ?  If  on  Calvary  the  King's 
Son  had  been  lost,  if  He  had  then  fallen  to  rise  no  more,  yet  the  victory  of  that 
day  would  have  been  turned  into  mourning,  the  loss  to  God's  moral  empire  would 
have  been  greater  than  the  gain — for  it  would  have  been  greater  to  lose  a  Christ 
than  to  win  a  world.  But,  thanks  be  to  God,  costly  as  was  our  redemption,  it  was 
not  at  this  cost ;  for  He  that  was  dead  Uveth  again ;  and,  behold,  He  is  alive  for 
evermore.  HI.  The  life  of  which  Christ  is  the  Proprietor  is  ETERNAii — it  is  to 
experience  no  interruption,  no  cessation :  "I  am  alive  for  evermore."  His  glorified 
body  is  beyond  the  reach  of  corruption.  Immortality  flows  through  every  vein, 
animates  every  limb,  nerves  every  sinew.  The  announcement  that  Christ  would 
live  on  for  ever  was  peculiarly  fitted  to  encourage  the  Church  in  her  sorrow  and 
persecution.  Her  position  at  this  time  was  most  painful  and  critical.  A  dark, 
portentous  cloud  brooded  over  her,  and  threatened  to  discharge  a  tempest  of  endless 
destruction  upon  her.  But,  in  the  midst  of  aU  her  gloom  and  alarm,  the  Lord 
Jesus  appears  as  her  living  and  life-giving  Head,  and  announces  the  cheering  fact, 
"  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  Men,  by  hatred  and  opposition,  may  bring  the  Church 
low,  but  they  can  never  destroy ;  they  may  scatter,  but  they  can  never  annihilate. 
IV.  Jesus  Chbist  claims  supremacy  over  death  and  hell — "  I  have  the  keys  of 
hell  and  of  death."  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  supreme  over  death.  Look  at  that  poor 
Christian  pauper  languishing  on  his  pallet  of  straw  in  his  unfurnished  room.  His 
death  excites  no  interest,  and  is  treated  as  unimportant  and  insignificant.  But 
there  stands  One  by  his  bed  of  death.  It  is  no  mortal,  no  creature  whatsoever,  it 
is  not  Michael  or  Gabriel ;  it  is  the  Lord  of  Life,  whose  mandate  must  go  forth  ere 
the  soul  struggles  loose  from  flesh.  Disease  cannot  destroy  him,  the  fever  cannot 
consume  him,  and  want  cannot  waste  away  the  life,  until  Jesus  gives  the  word  of 
command  for  the  spirit's  departure.  A  man  walking  the  scaffold  trips  his  foot 
against  a  stone,  the  stone  rolls  over,  and  falls  upon  the  casual  passer-by,  and  the 
result  is  fatal.  The  case  is  brought  before  a  coroner's  jury,  and  as  no  malice,  no 
intention,  can  be  proved  against  the  man  who  tripped  against  the  stone,  the  verdict 
is  given,  "  Accidental  death."  In  the  vocabulary  of  heaven  no  such  word  is  found. 
Men  do  not  die  at  random.  Whether  a  man  dies  with  the  suddenness  of  a  thunder- 
bolt or  by  lingering  consumption,  by  the  hand  of  the  assassin  or  by  an  agonising 
disease,  it  is  by  no  means  fortuitous,  for  it  takes  place  by  the  permission  and  under 
the  immediate  presidency  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  The  Living  One  asserts  that  He 
has  the  key  of  hell,  of  Hades,  the  invisible  world.  This  term  applies  to  heaven, 
hell,  and  the  grave.  (1)  Jesus  Christ  has  the  key  of  heaven.  At  the  close  of  this 
earthly  life  every  human  being  will  undergo  the  severest  scrutiny.  It  will  be  for 
Jesus  to  decide  whether  that  spirit  is  fitted  for  the  world  of  light  and  blessedness, 
or  whether  justice  requires  it  to  be  doomed  to  regions  of  woe  and  despair  for  ever. 
(2)  The  expression  "Hades  "  applies  with  equal  force  to  hell  literally.  Jesus  Christ 
has  "  the  key  of  hell."  What  a  solemn  view  does  this  give  of  the  death  of  the 
wicked  I  They  have  rejected  Christ,  banished  Him  from  their  thoughts  ;  but  it  is 
His  hand,  the  hand  that  was  pierced  for  them,  that  held  out  to  them  the  overtures 
of  pardon  and  peace,  that  opens  for  them  the  outer  gate  of  death  and  the  inner 
gate  of  hell.  A  few  years  since,  a  French  scientist  discovered  that  the  retina  of  the 
eye  retains  for  twenty-four  hours  after  death  a  faithful  image  of  the  last  object  on 
which  that  eye  fell  during  lifetime.  He  suggested  that  murderers  might  be  detected 
by  this  process.  Suppose  a  man  murdered  on  the  high  road,  if  the  victim's  eye 
were  fastened  on  the  murderer  the  last  lingering  moment  of  his  existence,  there 
would  be  found  on  the  retina  a  correct  image  of  the  murderer.  I  do  not  know  what 
amount  of  truth  there  may  be  in  this  theory,  or  what  practical  results  may  spring 
from  it;  but  this  I  believe,  that  the  last  object  on  which  the  sinner's  eye  shaU  fall 
before  he  enters  the  world  of  retribution  will  not  be  the  form  of  weeping  friends,  or  • 
mourning  wife,  or  sorrowing  children ;  it  will  be  something  more  awful,  it  will  be 
the  form  of  a  rejected  and  therefore  a  grieved  Saviour.  (3)  The  term  "  Hades  " 
may  signify  the  grave.  Infidelity  impiously  assigns  the  key  of  the  grave  to  Anni- 
hilation, who  is  represented  like  a  goddess  presiding  over  the  empire  of  the  dead, 
and  announcing  that  the  opening  of  the  graves  of  this  lower  world  and  the 
quickening  into  life  of  the  dust  of  humanity  is  a  thing  incredible  and  impossible. 
But  Jesus  Christ  holds  the  key.  If  I  am  doomed  to  be  the  prisoner  of  the  grave, 
this  I  know,  that  both  the  prison  and  the  prisoner  will  be  in  the  custody  of  the 
Lord  of  Life.  He  will  watch  my  dust.  Not  an  atom  shall  perish.  He  will  know 
where  to  find  it  all,  and  how  to  quicken  it  all.     {R.  Roberts.)        The  life  of  Christ 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  85 

in  heaven : — I.  The  whole  strength  of  this  comforting  assurance  to  John  lay  in  the 

IDENTITY  BETWEEN   JeSUS   THAT   HE   HAD   KNOWN,    AND   THE    ChRIST   THAT   HE   BEHELD. 

"  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead."  It  is  an  appeal 
to  the  memory  of  John,  therefore  the  consolation  to  us  lies  in  this,  that  it  is  the 
very  same  Jesus — however  glorified  and  altered  externally — that  liveth  and  was 
dead.  It  is  the  transference  of  the  humanity  of  Christ  to  heaven — it  is  the  eternity 
of  the  Incarnation — that  is  to  be  our  comfort,  and  the  great  truth  upon  which  we 
are  to  lean.  What  is  the  practical  truth  the  Christian  draws  from  this  fact  ?  The 
Apostle  to  the  Hebrews  commences  with  a  description  of  Christ  in  His  glory.  In 
the  first  chapter,  at  the  third  verse,  he  says,  "  Who  being  the  brightness  of  His 
(God's)  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,  and  upholding  all  things  by  the 
word  of  His  power,  when  He  had  by  Himself  purged  our  sins,  sat  down  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  Here  the  Son  of  God  is  revealed  to  us  as  John 
Baw  Him — enthroned  in  His  glory.  But  after  the  apostle  had  so  described  the 
enthroned  Son  of  God,  he  requests  us,  in  the  third  chapter,  because  he  had  so 
described  Him,  to  consider  Him — that  is,  Christ  Jesus — "  the  Apostle  and  High 
Priest  of  our  profession."  The  Son  of  God  is  still  in  heaven  as  the  Son  of  Man, 
acting  as  our  High  Priest.  In  the  seventh  chapter  the  apostle  proceeds  to  draw  a 
further  inference  from  this  fact.  He  tells  us  that  He  is  an  eternal  Priest — "  a  priest 
for  ever  after  the  order  of  the  Melchisedec."  Christ  Jesus  is,  then,  eternally  in  the 
heavens  a  Priest  for  us.  U.  What  practical  conclusions  the  apostle  draws  from 
it.  1.  In  the  first  place,  he  draws  the  conclusion  that  we  have  a  certain  and  a 
better  covenant.  2.  In  the  next  place,  we  read  another  practical  inference,  that 
Christ  Jesus,  as  our  High  Priest,  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  3.  But 
Christ  our  High  Priest  not  only  pleads  for  the  pardon  and  forgiveness  of  our  sins  ; 
He,  as  our  High  Priest,  also  sanctifies  us.  For  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  "  cleansing  of  the  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God." 
It  is  the  dedication  of  the  whole  man — body,  soul,  and  spirit — to  the  service  of  his 
Maker,  making  him  fit  to  appear  in  His  temple.  {Abp.  Magee.)  Christ  a  living 
Saviour : — What  good  would  it  do  to  you  if  your  "child  were  suffering  torture  from 
some  peculiar  accident  to  a  limb,  and  I  came  and  told  you  of  a  surgeon  who  lived 
a  hundred  years  ago,  and  who  had  been  wonderfully  clever  in  re-setting  the  same 
bone  after  that  precise  kind  of  fracture  ?  I  might  explain  to  you  how  it  was  he 
acquired  his  skill ;  I  might  give  you  fifty  cases  in  which  he  was  successful ;  you 
might  be  astonished  at  the  proofs  of  his  dexterity ;  you  might  feel  that  he  would 
have  been  able  and  willing  to  relieve  your  child  from  pain,  and  to  prevent  all 
subsequent  deformity.  But  if  I  came  and  told  you  of  some  living  man  who  had 
shown  the  same  skill ;  if  I  explained  how  it  was  that  he  had  acquired  his  special 
experience  ;  if  I  told  you  of  one  case  after  another  in  which  he  had  succeeded  when 
every  other  surgeon  was  helpless,  you  would  say,  "  Now  I  have  heard  all  this,  I  wUl 
send  for  him  at  once,  and  put  my  child  in  his  hands."  And  this  is  just  what  men 
have  to  be  persuaded  to  do  in  relation  to  Christ  ...  to  realise  that  He  is  living 
still,  and  that  He  is  not  only  willing,  but  able,  to  give  every  man  who  asks  of  Him 
forgiveness  of  all  past  evil,  and  strength  to  do  better  in  time  to  come.  {R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.) 
And  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death. — Christ  wielding  the  keys  of  death,  and 
of  the  world  unseen  : — It  is  hard  to  disenchant  our  minds  of  the  speU  which  is  laid 
upon  them  by  words — hard  to  divest  ourselves  of  the  associations  which  words  call 
up.  That  solemn  and  awful  word  "  hell,"  which  occurs  in  my  text,  how  inevitably 
does  its  very  sound  bring  up  into  the  thoughts  the  idea  of  everlasting  torments. 
And  yet,  as  is  well  known,  by  the  "  hell  "  of  the  Apostles'  Creed,  into  which  our 
Lord  is  said  to  have  descended,  is  not  meant  the  place  of  torments,  but  the  place  of 
departed  spirits — the  very  sense  attaching  to  the  word  in  the  passage  now  under 
examination.  "  The  unseen  realm  "  is,  upon  the  whole,  a  just  representation  of  its 
meaning  in  our  language.  All  that  is  invisible — aU  that  we  cannot  see,  or  the  senses 
(represented  by  the  eye,  as  the  chief  or  ruling  sense)  cannot  reach — it  is  a  wonder- 
fully comprehensive  term.  Think  how  much  wider,  how  infinitely  wider,  is  the 
range  of  the  unseen  than  of  the  seen.  This  little  ball  of  earth  is  a  very  insignificant 
district  of  God's  domain.  Midnight  reveals  to  us,  twinkling  through  all  the  realms 
of  space,  thousands  of  other  suns,  each  perhaps  the  centre  of  its  own  planetary 
system,  having  worlds  revolving  round  them,  which  from  their  immense  distances 
coupled  with  their  opaqueness,  are  to  us  unseen.  Think  how  many  substances, 
there  are,  so  minute,  or  of  so  subtle  an  organisation,  that  we  cannot  see  them — 
substances  like  the  air,  or  Uke  the  life-blood  of  the  tiniest  insect  which  floats  as 
gossamer  upon  the  bosom  of  the  air,  and  drinks  in  through  imperceptible  vessels 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  genial  warmth  of  the  golden  summer  day.  But  m  addition  to  the  most  subtle 
organisations  of  matter,  there  are  in  the  world  spiritual  essences.  God  is  a  spirit. 
We  are  taught  to  conceive  of  the  holy  angels  as  pure  spirits,  although  we  are  quite 
unable  to  say  for  certain,  that  there  may  not  be,  attaching  to  the  nature  of  angels, 
a  certain  very  subtle  organisation  of  matter.  But,  speculation  apart,  of  this  we  are 
quite  sure,  that  there  are  multitudes  of  angels.  But  this  Hades  has  human,  no  less 
than  heavenly,  inhabitants.  Think  of  the  countless  souls  which,  from  the  first 
formation  of  man  upon  the  earth,  have  forsaken  the  tenement  of  the  human  body, 
and  fluted  forth  into  the  receptacle  appointed  for  their  safe  keeping,  until  the  day 
of  the  resurrection.  Endowed,  all  of  them,  with  an  immortal  being — where  do 
their  spirits,  their  proper  selves,  now  reside  ?  We  do  not  know,  nor  can  we  know. 
All  we  know  is  that  we  see  them  not ;  of  their  existence  our  senses  take  no  cognis- 
ance ;  for  us  they  are  as  if  they  were  not ;  they  are  inhabitants  of  the  Hades,  the 
great  unseen  realm,  which  the  veil  of  gross  matter  shrouds  from  our  view.  Aye,  as 
I  said,  a  great  realm — exceeding  vast — and,  in  some  of  its  districts,  exceeding 
glorious.  The  unseen  bears  to  the  seen  world  the  same  relation  which  the  vast 
universe  bears  to  a  house  or  mansion.  Every  house,  however  sumptuous,  is  more 
or  less  dark,  more  or  less  confined,  limits  more  or  less  the  view  of  the  surrounding 
country,  defiles  more  or  less,  through  its  enclosures,  the  purity  of  the  atmosphere. 
But  go  abroad  from  the  midnight  festival,  where  lamps  shed  an  artificial  glare,  and 
the  house  reeks  with  the  odours  of  the  banquet — go  abroad  into  the  still,  solemn 
starlight,  and  catch  the  fresh  breeze  on  thy  brow,  and  look  upwards  into  the  vast 
expanse,  ht  up  with  the  lamps  of  heaven.  Or  go  forth  from  the  close  and  darkened 
chamber  of  sleep,  into  the  light  and  stir  of  the  fair  summer  morning,  when  the 
woods  and  streams  are  vocal  with  melody,  and  every  little  insect  is  on  the  wing, 
and  all  nature  teems  with  life  and  animation.  Such  is  the  passage  from  the  sphere 
which  is  seen  with  the  eye  of  flesh,  to  that  which  is  not  seen;  from  the  false 
artificial  lights  of  time,  to  the  solemn  stillness  of  eternity;  from  the  noxious 
vapours  of  the  world,  to  the  pure  breath  of  heaven's  atmosphere;  from  scenes 
where  man's  art  and  man's  handicraft  have  on  aU  sides  set  up  their  memorials,  to 
scenes  which  man  has  never  trodden.  The  division  of  God's  universe,  which  has 
been  thus  suggested,  into  a  seen  and  an  unseen  sphere — a  sphere  which  is,  and  a 
sphere  which  is  not,  under  the  cognisance  of  sense — is  probably  as  satisfactory,  and 
certainly  as  simple,  as  any  which  could  be  devised.  But  there  is  another  word  in 
our  text  which,  although  common  in  every  mouth,  will  yet  be  illustrated  by  a 
definition.  That  word  is  death.  Hades  is  the  world  unseen,  which  has  its  door 
or  portal,  by  which  men  enter  into  it.  Death  is  the  departure  from  the  seen  world, 
which  seen  world  has  its  door  of  exit,  by  which  men  pass  out  of  it.  Hence  death 
is  called,  in  two  or  three  passages  of  Scripture,  exodus,  or  going  out.  There  are 
many  doors  or  avenues  by  which  men  pass  out  of  this  life,  none  of  which  can  be 
opened  except  by  the  key  which  the  risen  Son  of  God  holds  in  His  hand.  There 
is  the  door  of  disease,  sometimes  sharp  and  rapid,  sometimes  chronic  and  gradual. 
And  the  forms  of  disease,  how  various  are  they.  There  is  the  lingering  decline, 
which  keeps  the  patient  waiting  upon  the  threshold  of  the  door,  and  mocks  him, 
on  bright  days,  with  the  hope  (how  soon  to  be  blighted)  of  ultimate  recovery. 
There  is  the  burning  fever,  which  hurries  him,  aU  hot,  from  the  earth  in  a  fit  of 
frenzy  or  delirium.  There  is  apoplexy,  with  its  stroke  of  insensibility  shattering 
the  consciousness — paralysis,  which  ties  up  the  utterances  of  the  fluent  tongue — 
nay,  defects  incidental  to  each  vital  organ,  the  due  development  of  which  may  at 
any  time  issue  in  a  departure  from  the  world  which  is  seen.  There  is  the  door  of 
violence — the  assassin's  dagger  and  the  foeman's  lance.  There  is  the  door  of 
animal  decay,  when  the  vital  system  is  worn  out,  and  the  heart,  wearied  as  it  were 
with  long  toil,  at  first  languidly  discharges  its  functions,  and  then  ceases  altogether 
to  beat.  The  only  remaining  word  of  the  text  which  requires  exposition  is  that 
of  "keys" — "I  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  death."  The  simple  notion  of  a  key 
is  that  which  gives  the  power  of  opening  a  closed,  or  closing  up  an  opened,  door. 
But  something  more  than  a  mere  power  of  opening  and  shutting  is,  I  believe, 
expressed  by  this  imagery.  General  administrative  power  over  a  kingdom,  or  over 
a  household  (which  is  a  kingdom  in  miniature),  is  expressed  by  the  bearing  of  the 
key.  Nothing  more  is  necessary  here,  but  that  I  should  just  advert  to  the  plural 
form  of  the  word  "  keys,"  which,  of  course,  has  reference  to  the  two  things 
specified — hell  and  death.  The  key  of  death  is  the  key  which  unlocks  the  passage 
out  of  this  world.  The  key  of  hell  is  that  which  unlocks  the  passage  into  the 
unseen  and  unknown.    It  is,  I  think,  just  worth  observing  that  the  notions  are  kept 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  87 

distinct  by  the  phraseology  employed — the  notion,  I  mean,  of  a  passage  out  of  the 
seen,  and  an  entrance  into  the  unseen  world — as  if  it  did  not  foUow  that  because 
the  spirit  has  passed  out  by  the  door  of  death  it  has  therefore  received  its  admission 
into  the  unseen  realm.  This  remark  may  throw  some  light  upon  the  case  of  those 
who,  after  life  had  seemed  to  be  extinct,  have  undergone  resuscitation,  and  who  can 
record  nothing  after  the  mortal  agony  beyond  their  having  fallen  into  a  deep  swoon, 
a  swoon  in  which  they  were  perfectly  unconscious.  It  is  perhaps  possible  (at  least 
the  phraseology  of  this  passage  would  incline  us  to  think  so)  to  have  the  door  of 
death  opened  to  us  and  closed  upon  us,  and  yet  (so  far  as  the  experience  of  the  soul 
is  concerned)  not  to  have  the  door  of  the  unseen  world  opened.  And  now  to  pass 
from  the  consideration  of  the  words  employed  in  this  sublime  passage,  to  that  of 
the  statement  made  in  it.  The  risen  Saviour  is  the  speaker — One  who,  by  becoming 
partaker  of  flesh  and  blood  for  our  sakes,  subjected  Himself  to  the  experience  of  a  cruel 
and  bitter  death,  and  yet  One  who  is  now  triumphant  over  death  in  all  the  incorrupti- 
bility of  a  glorified  body.  From  which  we  learn,  first,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in 
His  character  of  God-man — not  in  that  of  God — wields  at  present  the  administration 
of  the  entire  universe,  comprising  both  the  Httle  puny  span  of  which  man's  senses 
and  understanding  can  take  cognisance,  and  also  that  vast  and  glorious  domain 
which  lies  beyond  the  ken  of  flesh  and  lalood — and  of  which  it  is  our  wisdom  to 
confess,  that  we  have  neither  seen  it  nor  known  it.  We  talk  freely  of  God'a 
administration  in  the  reahns  of  Nature  and  Providence,  forgetting  that  it  is  the 
mediatorial  kingdom,  not  the  kingdom  of  mere  Deity,  under  which  we  live  at 
present.  All  power  is  committed  unto  Jesus  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Upon  His 
shoulder  are  laid  the  keys  of  all  the  vast  Household,  embracing  thrones,  and 
principalities,  and  powers  among  the  heavenly  hierarchy — men,  with  their  unruly 
wills  and  fluctuating  fortunes — together  with  the  inferior  creation,  animate  and 
inanimate,  organised  and  inorganic,  down  to  the  meanest  insect,  and  the  plainest 
stone,  and  the  hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall.  Let  the  feeble  and  desponding 
Christian  but  duly  weigh  the  truth  that  One  who  sympathises  from  personal 
experience  with  all  his  trials — One  who  was  cradled  in  the  manger,  and  inured  to 
poverty  from  His  youth — One  who  knew  all  the  bitterness  of  persecution,  and 
ridicule  and  abandonment  of  friends,  and  drained  at  last  the  dregs  of  the  cup  of 
death — is  Vicegerent  of  the  universe,  and  comfort  shall  soon  dawn  in  the  benighted 
heart,  and  light  up  in  it  the  rainbow  of  a  heavenly  hope.  But  this  general 
administration  of  Christ  over  the  universe  of  God  includes  a  particular  dispensation 
towards  every  human  individual,  whereby  He  gives  to  each  one  of  us,  at  the  time 
of  His  appointment,  our  dismissal  from  the  world  which  is  seen,  and  our  passport 
of  entrance  into  that  which  is  invisible.  It  is  He  who  calls  for  the  slow  or  rapid 
disease — He  whose  hand  contrives  the  unforeseen  disaster,  so  often  attributed  to 
chance — He  who  withdraws  gradually  the  vital  energy  from  some  essential  organ, 
BO  that,  while  the  mechanism  is  complete,  the  function  can  no  longer  be  discharged 
— and  who  thus  opens  to  each  separate  individual  the  door  of  exodus  out  of  this 
life.  When  the  spirit  has  passed  through  this  door,  it  waits  awhile  in  the  dark 
corridor  which  separates  the  seen  from  tiie  unseen.  Then,  when  life's  last  spark 
has  really  fled  beyond  the  possibiUty  of  recall — then,  then  comes  that  Great  Janitor, 
and  sweeps  past  it  down  the  dusky  avenue,  and  takes  the  second  key,  and  throws 
open  to  it  a  world  of  new  experiencts,  and  causes  it  to  be  thronged  with  new  images 
from  every  district  of  the  realm  unseen.  Thenceforth  the  spirit  enters  into  Hades, 
there  either  to  walk  in  Paradise  and  lie  in  Abraham's  bosom,  or  to  be  tormented  with 
a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  be 
consummated  upon  it  at  the  sound  of  the  resurrection  trump.  {Dean  Goulburn.) 
Christ  the  King  of  death  and  Hades : — I.  "  I  am  the  first  and  the  last."  In 
these  words  Christ  claims  one  of  the  incommunicable  attributes  of  Deity — existence 
which  had  no  beginning  and  can  know  no  end.  He  is  the  first.  Are  there  not 
before  the  throne  of  God  beings  who  beheld  the  first  star  gleam  out  in  the  ethereal 
vault — beings  who  existed  before  all  worlds,  and  who  relate  to  younger  spirits  the 
wonderful  history  of  God's  creation  ?  But  this  foremost  of  created  things  trembles 
before  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  His  eyes  gaze  out  upon  the  celestial  host — rank 
behind  rank — thrones,  dominations,  virtues,  powers — He  surveys  all  the  solemn 
troops  and  sweet  societies,  glowing  with  eternal  love,  flaming  with  immortal  beauty, 
excelling  in  strength,  glorious  in  holiness,  and  having  surveyed  them.  He  cries,  "  I 
am  the  first."  They  shine,  but  with  a  glory  borrowed  from  Him ;  they  live,  but 
with  an  immortality  derived  from  the  eternal  throbbing  of  His  infinite  heart.  "  I 
am  the  first,  and  I  am  the  last."  He  lives  through  two  eternities — the  eternity  past, 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  eternity  future — eternities  which,  like  two  infinite  oceans,  are  joined  together  by 
the  narrow  strait  of  time.  In  the  first  eternity  "  He  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,"  and  made  the  world  by  the  word  of  His  power.  In  time  He  took  upon 
Himself  our  nature,  was  formed  in  fashion  as  a  man,  and  "  His  own  self  bare  our 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  And  when  time  shall  be  no  more,  through  the 
eternal  future,  He  shall  be  the  centre  of  heaven's  glory,  the  object  of  its  ceaseless 
worship,  the  fountain  of  its  ineffable  happiness.  "  I  am  the  first  and  the  last." 
When  heaven  and  earth  have  passed  away  He  shall  still  abide.    H.  "  I  am  He  that 

LIVETH,  AND  WAS  DEAD  ;   AND  BEHOLD  I  AM  ALIVE  FOR  EVERMORE."      We  do  not  WOrship 

a  dead  Saviour.  In  Him  is  life  ;  with  Him  is  the  fountain  of  life.  "  Christ  being 
raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him." 
With  joy  He  announces,  "  I  am  He  that  was  dead."  He  remembers  with  satis- 
faction, with  exultation,  the  shame  and  the  pain,  the  conflict  and  the  agony,  by 
which  He  accomplished  our  redemption.  He  looks  back,  and  with  joy,  upon  the 
scenes  of  Bethlehem,  Gethsemane,  and  Calvary.  Never  wiU  He  forget  that  day 
when  the  quivering  flesh  and  fainting  heart  staggered  beneath  the  awful  burden  of 
human  sin  and  Divine  wrath.  The  Cross  and  the  sepulchre  were  His  way  to  the 
throne.  HI.  "  And  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death."  The  key  was  part  of  the 
regalia  in  eastern  courts.  Like  the  sceptre,  diadem,  and  orb,  it  was  a  symbol  of 
power,  one  of  the  insignia  of  high  office.  Our  Lord  here  claims  supreme  control, 
unlimited  authority  over  death  and  the  invisible  world.  Christ  has  the  keys  of 
death.  The  grave  is  part  of  Emanuel's  empire.  The  king  of  terrors  is  the  vassal 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  doors  of  death  cannot  open  to  receive  us  until 
Christ  has  turned  the  key.  We  are  a  fallen  race.  Sin,  being  finished,  hath  brought 
forth  death.  Death  hath  dominion  over  us.  But  there  is  a  consolation  for  us  here 
— a  voice  like  the  sound  of  many  waters  cries  :  '*  I  have  the  key  of  death."  We 
do  not  die  by  chance  or  haphazard ;  the  time  and  circumstance  of  our  death  are 
appointed  by  Christ  our  Saviour ;  everything  connected  with  our  departure  from 
this  world  is  under  His  control.  Those  doors  wiU  not  be  unlocked  till  you  are 
ready  to  pass  through  them.  At  the  right  moment  He  will  turn  the  key  of  death, 
and  you  will  have  gone  through  the  most  terrible  crisis  of  your  history  as  an 
immortal  being.  Through  the  whole  of  the  time  of  His  waiting  He  is  busy 
preparing  you  for  that  crisis.  This  life  is  for  you  a  season  of  discipline,  of 
education,  of  culture.  Not  till  the  preparation  process  is  completed  will  you  be 
transplanted  from  the  thorny  wilderness  to  bloom  in  the  paradise  of  God.  But 
while  the  true  Christian  may  rejoice  in  this  thought,  the  heart  of  the  sinner  may 
well  meditate  with  terror.  When  your  measure  of  Iniquity  is  completed  ;  when  by 
persistent  sin  and  frivohty  you  have  made  yourself  a  vessel  of  wrath  fitted  for 
destruction,  then  the  key  will  be  turned,  the  doors  of  death  will  shut  upon  you,  and 
in  that  sad  hour  shall  all  your  joys  perish.  The  door  is  shut ;  the  key  is  turned  ; 
you  have  chosen  your  lot,  and  it  must  be  yours  for  ever.  Christ  has  the  keys  of 
death — of  the  grave.  Our  dust  is  in  His  charge.  Over  the  tomb  of  every  saint  He 
writes,  **  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  He  is  the  Redeemer  of  the  body.  He 
has  set  His  seal  upon  it ;  it  is  His.  Our  dust  is  precious  in  His  sight.  His  eye 
foUows  it  through  aU  its  changes,  and  keeps  it  safely.  Our  mortal  frames  contain 
the  germ  of  an  immortal  body,  and  out  of  the  dust  of  death  His  power  shall  raise 
us  up  beautiful  in  His  own  likeness.  As  the  rough  bulb  buried  underground  springs 
up  into  green  leaf  and  gorgeous  bloom — as  the  grain,  perishing  in  darkness,  unfolds 
into  tender  blade  and  ripened  ear ;  so  this  mortal  shall  put  on  immortality,  and 
this  corruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption  when  the  last  trumpet  blows.  He  who 
has  the  keys  shaU  loose  the  bands  of  death.  He  turns  us  now  to  destruction,  but 
will  at  last  say,  "Eeturn,  ye  children  of  men."  Christ  has  also  the  keys  of  Hades 
— that  is,  He  is  Lord  of  the  invisible  world  of  the  dead.  Death  does  not  free  us 
from  His  sceptre,  but  only  brings  us  more  sensibly  under  His  authority.  This 
mouldering  frame  (exquisitely  made  though  it  be)  is  but  the  least  part  of  ns ;  in 
the  tombs  of  the  saints  we  have  only  the  "shells  of  fledged  souls  left  behind" — 
the  cumbersome  garment  of  the  spirit  which  it  has  thrown  aside,  in  order  to  flee 
away  to  its  rest  in  the  arms  of  God.  The  notion  that  the  soul  passes  the  interval 
between  death  and  the  resurrection  in  a  dreamless  sleep,  has  been  stoutly  defended 
by  many  theologians.  The  most  cursory  examination  will  suffice  to  show  that  this 
doctrine  has  no  foundation  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  there  plainly  taught  that 
disembodied  spirits  are  in  a  state  of  conscious  enjoyment  or  misery  directly  after 
their  exodus  from  this  world.  Over  the  world  of  disembodied  spirits — where  the 
souls  of  the  good  have  their  perfect  consummation  and  bhss :  while  the  souls  of  the 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION. 


wicked  are  reserved  in  a  prison  of  horror  and  chains  of  darkness,  until  at  the  last 
day  they  shall  receive  their  unavoidable  sentence — over  this  world  Christ  is  King. 
From  His  golden  girdle  hang  the  keys  of  both  the  upper  and  lower  Hades.  When 
He  turns  the  key  to  let  us  out  of  this  world,  He  turns  that  other  key  which  admits 
us  to  our  own  place  in  the  world  beyond  the  grave.  His  saints  who  die  in  humble 
and  joyful  faith,  relying  on  His  death,  and  resting  on  His  promises,  are  borne  by 
the  angels  to  the  gates  of  the  upper  Paradise.  He  who  has  the  key  graciously 
admits  them,  and  bids  them  welcome  from  the  toils  and  sorrows  of  earth  to  those 
scenes  of  quiet  rest  and  calm  enjoyment.  Christ's  enemies,  who  die  rejecting  His 
mercies  and  blaspheming  His  name,  shall  find  His  dreadful  face  frowning  upon 
them  as  they  enter  the  other  world.  That  hand  which  was  so  long  stretched  out . 
to  them  in  mercy  shall  thrust  them  into  the  dolorous  prison-house ;  and,  turning 
the  key  upon  them.  He  will  leave  them  to  anticipate  the  overwhelming  shame  and 
anguish  of  that  dread  day.  In  His  Book  of  Life  He  inserts  the  names  of  His 
friends.  As  many  as  are  not  written  in  that  book  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of 
fire,  which  is  the  second  death.  Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly.  Kiss  the 
Son!  Accept  at  His  hand  deliverance  for  thy  soul.  (T.  J.  Choate.)  The  kingdom 
and  the  keys  : — I.  A  vast  kingdom  claimed.  To  have  "  the  keys  "  is  to  possess 
authority.  To  possess  the  key  of  a  house,  palace,  or  region,  is  to  have  the  supreme 
power  therein — the  disposal  of  the  things  and  persons  located  there.  Among  the 
Jews,  a  key  borne  on  the  shoulder,  hung  by  a  belt,  or  inwrought  in  the  robe,  was  the 
well-known  badge  of  office.  Now,  in  the  text,  our  Lord  claims  this  supreme  regal 
power  for  Himself.  "  I  have  the  keys,  and  the  houses,  the  palaces,  the  realms, 
whatever  they  are,  to  which  these  keys  give  admission,  aU  are  Mine.  I  possess 
them,  I  rule  them,  and  from  My  decisions  there  is  no  appeal."  Yes,  this  is  the 
sovereign  authority.  A  protest  could  be  lodged,  by  the  conscience  at  least,  against 
the  abuse  of  any  kingly  power  on  earth,  and  an  appeal  carried  up  to  the  court  of 
heaven.  But  who  shall  dare  protest  against  the  decisions  of  the  Son  of  Man  ?  and 
to  what  court  shall  any  cause  be  taken  when  solemn  judgment  has  been  pronounced 
at  His  bar?  He  has  the  keys — of  what?  Of  earthly  prisons?  or  of  earthly 
palaces  ?  of  kingdoms  ?  or  continents  ?  or  seas  ?  He  does  indeed  possess  even 
those  keys;  for  all  earthly  kingdoms,  with  all  their  inhabitants  and  all  their 
affairs,  are  comprehended  within  His  royalty  and  realm  ;  but  the  empire  here  is  a 
far  larger  one.  He  has  the  keys  "  of  Hades  and  of  death."  The  keys  of  Hades 
and  of  death,  i.e.,  of  the  passage  which  leads  from  this  world  into  that.  All  who 
leave  this  world,  with  some  rare  exceptions,  to  enter  into  that,  go  along  the  passage 
of  death.  Whether  they  go  to  glory  or  to  gloom,  they  go  by  death,  and  the 
Kedeemer  has  the  keys  of  death.  His  dominion  does  not  begin  beyond  the  last 
barriers  and  confines  of  mortality ;  it  is  a  power  which  commands  those  barriers, 
which  claims  death  and  holds  its  keys.  Death  and  life,  things  present  and  things 
to  come,  height  and  depth,  all  are  His.  There  is  no  realm  of  the  universe  for 
which  He  has  not  a  key  ;  there  is  no  being  whom  He  does  not  command ;  no  event 
that  He  does  not  control.  He  has  the  key  of  birth,  by  the  turning  of  which  each 
is  ushered  into  being ;  the  key  of  childhood,  which  admits  the  little  pilgrim  to  the 
first  steps  of  the  journey;  the  key  of  youth,  which  opens  the  gates  into  hfe's 
greenest  and  most  radiant  fields ;  the  key  of  manhood,  which  sets  the  pilgrim  on 
life's  hill-top  ;  the  key  of  old  age,  which  lets  him  gently  down  among  the  shadows ; 
and  the  key  of  death,  which  ends  all  toil  and  sorrow.  And  of  those  great  realms 
too,  as  we  have  seen,  He  has  the  keys  :  opens  and  no  man  shuts,  shuts  and  no  man 
opens.  And  of  all  which  chequers  life  and  gives  character  to  it  in  its  progress.  He 
possesses  the  power.  Majestic  kingdom !  whose  lengths  and  breadths,  and  depths 
and  heights  far  surpass  our  knowledge  1  over  the  vastness  of  which  we  can  only 
look,  but  never  travel  1  The  interests  of  which  we  can  think  of,  but  never  com- 
prehend 1  The  glories  of  which  come  only  within  the  scope  of  one  eye — the  eye  of 
omniscience.  The  powers  of  which  rest  only  in  the  hands  of  one  Being,  and  He 
the  everlasting  King  I  II.  A  royal  title  exhibited.  As  creation  supposes  creator, 
and  law  supposes  lawgiver,  so  kingdom  supposes  king ;  and  the  king  of  such  a 
kingdom  must  have  a  royal  title  which  cannot  be  impugned.  "  I  am  He  that 
liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore.  Amen."  This  title, 
observe,  does  not  rest  on  His  Divinity  alone ;  that  He  had  from  aU  eternity :  nor  on 
His  humanity  alone ;  for  no  mere  man  could  hold  space  and  time  in  His  grasp ; 
and  rule  life  and  death  ;  and  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead.  It  is  a  title  wrought 
out  by  His  incarnation,  and  inseparably  connected  with  His  mediatorial  character. 
The  substance  of  it  is  the  life  of  the  God-man  with  its  sorrows,  virtues,  obedience. 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

It  is  written  as  with  the  blood  of  His  Cross.  The  light  by  which  we  read  it  is  the 
light  of  His  resurrection.  He  was  born  that  mothers  might  forget  their  sorrow, 
and  rejoice  when  a  man-child  is  born  into  the  world.  He  prayed  that  He  might  be 
the  hearer  of  prayer.  He  died  that  we  might  not  fear  to  die,  hoping  to  find  Ufe  in 
Him.  And  now  He  has  gone  to  claim  His  kingdom  ;  He  has  received  it  from  the 
Father,  and  through  all  its  wide  realms  He  exhibits  His  royal  title — a  title  which  all 
the  good  accept,  and  which  the  very  devil  dare  not  impugn.  His  title  to  this 
universal  kingdom  is  our  title  to  the  blessings  of  grace  and  salvation.  And  so  He 
tells  us  not  to  be  afraid,  for  our  enemies  are  vanquished ;  not  to  be  ashamed,  for 
our  redemption  draweth  nigh.  He  teaches  us  to  defy  all  antagonisms ;  to  claim 
all  needful  helps ;  to  put  our  proprietary  seal  upon  every  visible  thing ;  to  say, 
"  All  things  are  ours,  for  we  are  Christ's  '* ;  to  open  our  hearts  every  day  for  grace ; 
to  hasten  on  every  day  to  glory ;  to  endow  ourselves  with  His  unsearchable  riches, 
and  to  fill  our  soids  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God.  HI.  The  gracious  proclamation 
MADE.  "  Fear  not."  It  is  very  brief.  It  is  a  dissuasion  from  all  fear  that  "  hath 
torment,"  from  all  undue  anxiety  and  apprehension,  from  all  excitement,  fore- 
boding, solicitude,  which  would  bring  pain.  It  affects  all  personal,  all  relative,  and 
all  religious  and  public  interests.  "Fear  not"  for  thyself.  I  will  wash  hee 
thoroughly  from  thine  iniquities,  and  cleanse  thee  from  thy  sins,  create  in  thee  a 
clean  heart,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  thee,  give  thee  the  joys  of  My  salvation, 
and  uphold  thee  with  My  free  spirit.  "  Fear  not "  for  any  among  thy  kindred  and 
acquaintance  of  the  same  family  of  God.  There  is  a  shield  over  the  head  of  each, 
a  Providence  as  watchful  of  every  one  as  if  that  one  alone  were  a  dweller  on  the 
earth.  "  Fear  not,"  amid  changes  however  startling,  circumstances  however  un- 
expected ;  for  I  am  not  a  mere  watcher  over  a  broken  and  lawless  world,  mending, 
and  checking,  and  trying  to  save  something  from  the  wreck !  I  am  the  perfect  ruler 
of  a  perfect  providence,  setting  kings  on  their  thrones  and  watching  sparrows  in 
their  fall ;  preserving  your  mightiest  interests,  and  numbering  the  hairs  of  your 
head  I  Brethren,  it  is  this  "  fear  not  "  which  often  we  most  need  to  hear ;  we  do 
not  exercise  ourselves  in  great  matters — we  can  trust  these  to  Him,  for  we  feel  they 
are  too  high  for  us ;  but  we  do  painfully  exercise  ourselves  in  lesser  things  as  if  we 
had  the  sole  charge  of  them.  Not  now,  or  not  there,  or  not  thus,  we  are  always 
saying.  Not  now,  we  say,  when  the  father  is  called  to  leave  the  family  of  which  he 
is  the  sole  stay.  *'  Let  him  live,  let  a  few  years  elapse,  let  his  family  be  provided 
for,  let  his  work  be  done  !  "  It  is  done,  is  the  answer.  His  fatherless  children  are 
provided  for;  I  have  taught  him  to  leave  them  with  Me.  "The  Father  of  the 
fatherless,  the  Husband  of  the  widow,  is  God  in  His  holy  habitation."  Or,  we  say, 
•'  Not  there,"  oh,  not  there  I  Away  on  the  sea — a  thousand  miles  from  land — ^let 
him  not  die  there,  and  be  dropped  into  the  unfathomed  grave.  Or  not  in  some 
distant  city  or  far-off  land — strangers  around  his  bed,  strangers  closing  his  eyes, 
and  then  carrying  him  to  a  stranger's  grave.  Let  him  come  home  and  die  amid 
the  whisperings  and  breathings  of  the  old  unquenchable  love.  "He  is  going 
home,"  is  the  answer,  and  going  by  the  best  and  only  way.  "  I  can  open  the  gate 
beautiful  in  any  part  of  the  earth  or  sea."  Or,  we  say,  "  Not  thus,"  not  through 
such  agonies  of  body,  or  faintings  of  spirit,  or  tremblings  of  faith — ^not  in 
unconsciousness — not  without  dying  testimonies.  Oh,  shed  down  the  light,  the 
fragrancy  of  heaven,  upon  the  dying  bed !  The  answer  is,  "  They  are  there,  and 
you  are  so  dull  of  sense  that  you  perceive  them  not.  Your  friend  is  filled  with 
the  *  peace  that  passeth  understanding,'  and  safe  in  the  everlasting  arms.' 
{A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  royal  prerogatives  of  the  living  Redeemer : — I.  He  has 
ABSOLUTE  POWER.  1.  Christ's  power  is  co-extensive  with  creation.  Inorganic  as 
well  as  organic  substances  are  the  Eedeemer's  servants,  and  He  is  "  able  to  subdue 
aU  things  unto  Himself."  2.  This  power  extends  over  the  invisible  world.  II.  He 
POSSESSES  THE  HIGHEST  LITE.  1.  This  is  life  attained  subsequently  to  dying.  He 
poured  out  that  last  drop  of  life-blood  to  atone  for  sin,  but  He  rose  a  Conqueror, 
and  the  King  of  glory.  2.  This  life  is  enjoyed  in  the  most  glorious  destiny.  He 
is  above  the  tumult  of  sinners,  and  is  the  object  of  angelic  rapture.  3.  This  life 
is  endless.  "I  am  alive  for  evermore,"  is  the  utterance  of  a  Sublime  Conqueror. 
The  immortality  of  Christ's  life,  is  the  pledge  of  ours.    Ill,  His  prerogatives  as 

THE    LIVING  EeDEEMER  ARE   EXERCISED   FOR   GLORIOUS  PURPOSES.      1.    They  COnstitute 

Him  a  magnificent  character.  He  is  the  most  glorious  Eepresentative  of  power, 
life,  and  mercy  to  the  universe.  2.  This  character  He  achieved  by  His  work  on 
earth.  Enthroned  in  pomp  and  power,  He  does  not  forget  Calvary ;  He  connects 
His  crown  of  life  with  His  execution — "  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead."  3.  This 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION,  91 

character  so  achieved  is  a  mighty  power  for  good.  As  the  life  of  Titian,  or  Michael 
Angelo  enters  the  soul  of  the  student,  so  does  the  exalted  life  of  Christ  enter  man's 
heart,  and  elevates  him  from  the  dust  of  sin  to  the  fellowship  of  God ;  for  "  truly 
our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  the  righteous." 
4.  The  influence  of  this  character  is  felt  in  every  event  that  takes  place.  Our  hves 
are  in  Christ's  hands.  There  is  no  chance  work  about  life  or  death :  we  are  dependent 
for  either  upon  the  will  of  our  exalted  Redeemer,  who  has  "  the  keys  of  death  and 
Hades."  6.  This  character  attracts  to  the  highest  distinctions.  The  exalted  Saviour 
has  not  only  "  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers,"  but  Hs  attracts 
them  to  it  by  the  beauties  of  His  life.  "  To  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better"  than 
dwelling  on  earth  for  ever,  is  the  experience  of  all  genuine  Christians.  (cT".  H.  Hill.) 
Christ's  sovereignty  over  the  invisible  world : — I.  There  is  no  such  thing  as 
ANNIHILATION '  OP  BODY  AND  SOUL  HEREAFTER.  Then  I  ask  you,  are  you  living  in 
this  belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  ?  Are  you  educating  your  families  for 
God  ?  Are  you  founding  a  family  in  heaven  ?  Are  you  working  in  the  fear  of  Him 
who  "  has  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death  ?  "    II.  If  Christ  holds  the  keys  of  hell 

AND   op  death,  we  KNOW  NOT  THE  DURATION  OF  OUR  LIFE.      LeT  US,  THEN,  WORK  WHILE 

WE  MAT,  AND  NOT  BE  SLOTHFUL.  Why  docs  Christ  hold  the  keys  ?  In  mercy  to  us,  to 
keep  us  from  agitation  and  despair.  If  the  time  of  our  death  were  not  a  secret,  we 
should  have  no  comfort,  and  we  should  be  ill  fitted  for  the  discharge  of  our  duties. 
What  did  God  send  you  into  the  world  for  ?  Not  merely  to  eat,  and  drink,  and 
sleep  and  transact  worldly  business :  a  beast  or  bird  could  live  almost  as  useful,  as 
noble  a  life.  This  little  span  is  the  threshold  of  Hades,  the  prelude  of  millions  of 
ages  in  a  sphere  fitted  to  your  nature,  where  the  soul's  aspirations  shall  not  be 
clogged  and  fettered,  and  often  brought  to  nought,  by  the  grossness  of  this  present 
body  ;  where  the  thirst  for  knowledge  shall  be  fully  and  eternally  gratified  ;  where 
the  heart  shall  drink  ever  most  deeply  into  the  felt  love  of  God ;  where  we  shall,  with 
the  noble  assembly  of  ransomed  saints  and  preserved  angels,  find  in  the  presence  of 
God  and  of  the  Lamb  employment  for  those  vast  powers  of  the  soul,  of  the  existence 
of  which  powers  we  are  sometimes  permitted  to  get  faint  ideas.  Oh  I  live  for  this. 
III.  Christ,  the  Head  op  the  Church,  holds  dominion  over  Hades  and  death  ; 

THEREFORE  THE  CHURCH  NEED  NOT   FEAR  DEATH.      GlorioUS   Captain  of  OUT  Salvation  I 

who  could  withstand  Thee  ?  Thou  hast  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and  im- 
mortality to  light  by  the  Gospel.  Death  was  a  curse ;  Thou  has  turned  it  into  a 
blessing.  What  amazing  power  1  Death  was  an  enemy ;  Thou  hast  converted  it 
into  a  friend.  What  admirable  wisdom !  So  to  baffle  and  disappoint  the  plotting 
spirit  of  evil.     IV.  If  Christ  holds  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death,  men  do  not 

DIE  BY  CHANCE,  BUT  BY  APPOINTMENT  ;  THEREFORE  WE  SHOULD  BE  MODERATE  IN  OUB 

SORROW  FOR  DEPARTED  FRIENDS.  {W.  J.  Chapman,  M.A.)  Christ  with  the  keys  of 
death  and  hell : — Then  hell  and  death,  terrible  powers  as  they  are,  are  not  left  to 
riot  without  government.  Let  us  rejoice  that  nothing  in  heaven,  or  earth,  or  in 
places  under  the  earth,  is  left  to  itself  to  engender  anarchy.  Everywhere,  serene 
above  the  floods,  the  Lord  sitteth  King  for  ever  and  ever.  I.  What  is  intended  by 
THE  POWER  OF  THESE  KEYS  here  mentioned  ?  1.  A  key  is  first  of  all  used  for  opening, 
and  hence  our  Lord  can  open  the  gates  of  death  and  hell.  2.  But  a  key  is  also  used 
to  shut  the  door,  and  even  so  Jesus  will  both  shut  in  and  shut  out.  His  golden  key 
will  shut  his  people  in  heaven,  as  Noah  was  shut  in  the  ark.  Heaven  is  the  place 
of  eternal  safety.  There  the  gates  shall  be  fast  shut  by  which  their  foes  could 
enter,  or  by  which  their  joys  could  leave  them.  But,  alas  !  there  is  the  dark  side  to 
this  shutting  of  the  gate.  It  is  Christ  who  with  His  key  shall  shut  the  gates  of 
heaven  against  unbelievers.  3.  By  the  keys  we  must  further  understand  here  that 
our  Lord  rules,  for  the  key  is  the  Oriental  metaphor  for  government.  He  shall  have 
the  key  of  David :  "  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder."  4.  One  more 
remark  is  wanted  to  complete  the  explanation  of  the  power  of  the  keys.  Our  Lord 
is  said  to  have  the  keys  of  death,  from  which  we  gather  that  aU  the  issues  of  death 
are  at  His  alone  disposal.  U.  What  is  the  key  of  this  power?  Whence  did 
Christ  obtain  this  right  to  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  death?  1.  Doth  He  not  derive  it 
first  of  all  from  His  Godhead  ?  In  the  eighteenth  verse,  He  saith,  "  I  am  He  that 
liveth,"  language  which  only  God  can  use,  for  while  we  live,  yet  it  is  only  with  a 
borrowed  life.  God  saith,  "  I  am,  and  there  is  none  beside  Me,"  and  Jesus  being 
God,  claimeth  the  same  self-existence.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth."  Now,  since  Christ 
is  God,  He  certainly  hath  power  over  heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell.  2.  But  the  key 
to  this  power  lies  also  in  our  Saviour's  conquests.  He  hath  the  keys  of  death  and 
hell  because  He  hath  actually  conquered  both  these  powers.    You  know  how  He  met 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

hell  in  the  dreadful  onset  in  the  garden  ;  how  all  the  powers  of  darkness  there  com- 
bined against  Him.  Grim  was  the  contest,  but  glorious  was  the  victory,  worthy  to  be 
Bung  by  angels  in  eternal  chorus.  3.  We  have  one  more  truth  to  remember,  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  installed  in  this  high  place  of  power  and  dignity  by  the  Father  Him- 
Belf,  as  a  reward  for  what  He  has  done.  He  was  Himself  to  "  divide  the  spoil  with 
the  strong,"  but  the  Father  had  promised  to  give  Him  a  "portion  with  the  great." 
III.  The  PRA-CTiCAii  bearing  of  the  whole  subject  appears  to  be  this — "  Fear  not."  (C.  H, 
Spurgeon.)  Hades,  or  the  Unseen  : — I.  I  propose  to  explain  what  I  mean  by  Hades. 
The  term  signifies  the  place  Unseen  ;  or,  more  properly,  the  Unseen.  And  by  the 
Unseen  I  understand  a  place  or  state  distinct  from  the  grave,  which  receives  only 
the  bodies,  while  it,  in  its  awful  circle,  includes  the  souls  of  the  departed — different 
from  Gehenna,  or  the  Lake  of  Fire,  which  engulfs  ultimately  both  the  bodies  and 
the  souls  of  the  lost — distinct  from  heaven,  where  "  summer  high  in  bliss"  the 
angelic  spirits,  and  where,  like  a  mount  of  diamond,  arises  the  throne  of  God  1 
As  to  its  character,  it  is  invisible  to  mortal  eye,  and  inaccessible  to  human  footstep. 
It  is  probably  divided  into  two  compartments ;  the  one  containing,  as  in  a  prison, 
the  souls  of  the  wicked  ;  the  other,  as  in  a  place  of  safe  keeping,  preserving  the 
spirits  of  the  just.  It  has  been  asked,  ShaU  this  Hades  be  properly  a  place  or  a 
state  ?  Some  argue  that  spirits  separated  from  their  bodies  cannot  be  confined  to, 
or  connected  with,  any  particular  place,  but  may,  nay  must,  be  at  large  through 
the  vast  spaces  of  the  universe.  But  it  would  rather  appear  that  (as  has  been  said 
by  the  intrepid  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph)  "  to  exist  without  relation  to  place  seems  to 
be  one  of  the  incommunicable  properties  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  and  it  is  hardly  to 
be  conceived  that  any  created  spirit,  of  however  high  an  order,  can  be  without 
locality,  or  without  such  determination  of  its  existence,  at  any  given  time,  to  some 
certain  place,  that  it  shall  be  true  to  say  of  it,  '  Here  it  is,  and  not  elsewhere  ; '  " 
and  that,  therefore,  there  is  somewhere  a  particular  spot  where  all  separated  spirits 
reside.  Another  question  irresistibly  occurs,  Where  is  this  place  situated  ?  Some 
maintain  that  it  lies  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  ground  this  opinion  upon  the 
fact  that  the  language  of  Scripture  frequently  represents  the  dead  as  gone  down- 
wards— upon  the  fact  that  Christ  is  said  to  have  descended  into  the  lower  parts  of 
the  earth ;  upon  the  fact  that  all  nations,  in  all  ages,  have  supposed  the  abode  of 
the  dead  to  be  beneath.  But  without  venturing  further  into  this  dark  and  doubtful 
field,  I  remark  once  more,  that  this  state  is  not  an  ultimate  or  everlasting  state. 

II.     I    would    DISABUSE   YOUB    MINDS   OF     SOME    MISCONCEPTIONS     OP     THIS     DOCTRINE. 

You  are  not,  then,  in  the  first  place,  to  confound  Hades  with  Purgatory,  or  tc 
suppose  that  it  gives,  in  the  slightest  degree,  countenance  to  that  wretched  fiction 
of  the  Koman  Catholic  Church.  The  two  places  are  essentially  distinct.  Hades  i£ 
a  place  both  of  woe  and  of  enjoyment,  each  unmingled  in  its  kind.  In  Purgatory 
there  is  no  joy  at  aU,  and  the  misery  inflicted  is  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  its 
victims  fit  for  the  enjoyments  of  heaven,  and  free  from  the  torments  of  hell. 
Again,  I  beg  of  you  not  to  suppose  that  this  is  a  new  doctrine.  It  is  as  old  as  the 
Old  Testament.  III.  I  come  now  to  argue  the  point  from  Scripture.  I  might, 
indeed,  have  found  plausible  probabilities  in  support  of  it.  It  is  probable  that  for 
souls  separated  from  their  bodies  there  should  be  a  place  set  apart.  God  has 
provided  distinct  habitations  for  every  other  separate  variety  of  created  objects. 
He  has  provided  the  land  for  terrestrial  quadrupeds ;  it  is  their  world.  He  has 
provided  the  sea  for  fish ;  it  is  their  peculiar  province  and  native  element.  He  has 
provided  the  air  for  birds.  For  angels  He  has  expanded  heaven ;  and  for  devils 
laid  the  dark  foundations  of  hell.  Why  should  He  not,  then,  on  the  same 
principle,  have  prepared  a  separate  abode  for  a  class  of  beings  so  essentially  distinct 
from  every  other  in  the  universe,  as  separate  spirits,  which  are  neither  angels  nor 
devils,  nor  properly  speaking,  men  ?  Separate  spirits,  however  perfect  in  nature, 
are  obviously  in  an  imperfect  or  unfinished  state.  Wanting  their  material  frames, 
they  are  comparatively  naked ;  unsheathed  in  sense,  they  cannot  hold  such  free 
intercourse  with  material  things.  It  seems  fit,  therefore,  that  a  kind  of  hiding-place 
should  be  provided  for  them.  But  is  Scripture  quite  silent  on  the  theme  ?  No ;  it 
utters  a  distinct,  if  not  a  deafening  sound.  1.  Hades,  in  Scripture,  is  quite  a 
different  place  from  helL  The  real  terms  in  Holy  Writ  for  hell  are,  Gehenna  or 
Tophet,  or  the  Lake  of  Fire.  Hades  is  never,  we  believe,  used  to  denote  hell 
properly  so  called.  It  is  sometimes  used  in  connections  where  it  must  mean  some 
other  place — "Death  and  Hades  were  cast  into  the  Lake  of  Fire."  How  absurd 
it  were  to  speak  of  hell  being  cast  into  hell  1  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in 
Sheol  or  Hades."    Here,  assuredly,  the  term  cannot  mean  hell,  else  it  will  follow 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION. 


that  Christ's  soul  went  down  alive  into  that  fearful  pit,  and  shared  there  in  the 
torments  of  the  damned — a  horrible  supposition.  It  follows,  therefore,  inevitably, 
that  the  place  where  Christ  went  down  was  not  the  place  of  final  punishinent.  But 
that  place  was  Hades.  But  neither  is  it  heaven  by  the  same  showing,  since  it  were 
absurd  to  speak  of  Christ's  soul  being  not  left  there.  Neither  can  it  be  the  grave, 
since  into  the  grave  His  soul  never  went,  and  from  it  could  never  have  risen.  2. 
The  fact  that  Christ  did  go  to  Hades  proves  that  His  people  must  go  too  ;  and  that 
He  went  there  is  undeniable.  Look,  again,  at  the  2nd  chapter  of  the  Acts,  31st 
verse,  where  Peter,  after  having  quoted  David's  language  in  the  16th  Psalm,  adds, 
"  He  seeing  this  before,  spake  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that  His  soul  was  not 
left  in  hell  (or  Hades),  neither  did  His  flesh  see  corruption."  It  follows,  demon- 
strably, that  if  His  soul  was  not  left  in  Hades,  in  Hades  it  must  have  been.  Again, 
in  the  4th  chapter  of  the  Ephesians,  at  the  9th  verse,  we  find  the  following  words : 
"  Now  that  He  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  He  also  descended  first  into  the  lower 
parts  of  the  earth  ?  "  What  were  these  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?  Surely  they  in- 
cluded Hades.  It  is  vain  to  tell  us  that  they  denote  simply  the  fact  that  His  body 
descended  into  the  grave.  Did  His  body  alone  ascend  into  the  heavens  ?  Is  not 
the  He  who  ascended  the  very  He  who  descended  ?  If  He  ascended  body  and  spirit, 
must  He  not  have  descended  body  and  spirit  too  ?  And  if  He  descended  in  spirit, 
where  but  to  Hades  could  that  spirit  have  gone  ?  If  Christ  went  to  Hades,  it 
follows  that  His  people  go  too.  We  argue  this  from  His  language  to  the  penitent 
thief, — "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  Paradise,"  which  means  some  place  of 
happiness  where  the  twain  were  to  meet  that  very  day.  It  could  not  be  heaven, 
since  Christ  went  not  there  till  His  ascension.    IV.  But  I  come  to  answeb  some  or 

THE   MOBE  PBOMINENT  OBJECTIONS   TO   THIS   VIEW.      1.    SomS  will  Say  :   Is  HOt  HadcS, 

according  to  this  doctrine,  a  prison ;  and  how  can  a  prison  be,  in  any  sense,  or  to 
any  parties,  a  place  of  happiness  ?  I  simply  answer :  Why  should  it  not  ?  Is  not 
a  prison  a  place  of  safe-keeping  ?  Are  not  the  innocent  kept  in  prison  equally  with 
the  guilty  till  the  day  of  trial  ?  Hades  to  the  good  may  be  a  prison ;  but  such  a 
prison  as  is  a  house  in  a  day  of  storm — such  a  prison  as  is  woven  by  a  mother's 
arms  round  her  dear  babe.  2.  Is  not  this  a  damping  view  ?  I  have  always,  says  a 
Christian,  expected  that  when  I  died  I  should  go  to  the  highest  heaven.  But  what 
if  you  were  expecting  wrong  ?  Will  not  the  society  of  thy  departed  friends  be  a 
source  of  deep  gladness  to  thee  in  that  strange  world  ?  It  is  a  mere  vulgar  error 
to  seek  to  confine  happiness  within  the  compass  of  even  the  highest  heaven.  No ; 
it  shall  overflow  into  Hades.  3.  It  will  be  said :  How  do  these  views  agree  with 
the  expressions  of  Paul — "  I  have  a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is 
far  better ;  to  be  absent  from  the  body  is  to  be  present  with  the  Lord  "  ?  And  will 
there  not,  in  Hades,  be  a  revelation  of  Christ  far  brighter  than  the  most  favoured 
of  His  people  ever  can  enjoy  upon  earth,  even  though  His  personal  presence  be 
absent  ?  To  a  disembodied  spirit  what  is  personal  presence  ?  Can  we  conceive  of 
it  without  eyes  seeing  His  comeliness ;  without  ears  hearing  His  voice ;  without 
hands  handling  His  sides ;  without  feet  standing  beside  Him,  on  that  firm  and  lofty 
ground  which  borders  His  great  high  throne  ?  Is  not  "  seeing  Christ  as  He  is  " 
expressly  stated  to  be  contemporaneous  with  His  future  and  final  appearance? 
«'  We  know  that  when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him,  seeing  Him  as  He  is." 
Ought  a  Christian  to  have  no  loftier  ambition  ?  Is  not  a  spiritual  vision  of  the 
moral  and  spiritual  Jesus,  of  the  depth  of  His  wisdom,  and  the  warmth  of  His 
love,  equally  desirable  with  a  sight  of  His  person  ?    V.  But  how  does  this  consobt 

WITH  THE  common  VIEW  WHICH  HOLDS  THAT  WICKED  MEN  GO  IMMEDIATELY  AFTER 
DEATH   TO   THE   EVIL   ONE,   AND   THAT   HIS   PBESENCE   AND   AGENCY   CONSTITUTE   A.   LABGK 

PABT  OF  THEiB  TOBMENT  ?  I  am  Dot  careful  to  answer  in  this  matter.  I  know 
already  that  the  influences  of  the  Evil  Spirit  are  not  confined  to  heU ;  they  are  felt 
on  earth,  and  they  may,  for  aught  I  know,  be  extended  to  Hades  too.  Whether  the 
devU  in  personal  subsistence  shall  be  present  with  his  victims  there,  is  a  question 
that  cannot  be  resolved,  and  which  is  not  worth  solution.  But  what  are  we  to 
understand  by  Stephen's  vision,  taken  in  connection  with  his  prayer  "  Lord  Jesus, 
receive  my  spirit."  No  more,  probably,  than  this,  that  Christ,  through  His 
almighty  power  and  Divine  spirit,  receives  the  spirits  of  His  people  when  they  die, 
saves  them  from  the  power  of  the  enemy,  acquits  them,  and  bestows  them  in  safe 
keeping,  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand,  till  dawns  the  day  of  supreme  and  eternal 
decision.  But  has  there  not  been  generally  thought  to  be  a  judgment  after  death, 
and  does  not  this  imply  that  every  spirit  shall,  unless  chased  away  by  His  frown 
and  its  own  wickedness,  find  immediate  refuge  in  the  "  bosom  of  its  Father  and  its 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

God"?  But  where  shall  this  judgment  take  place?  Must  it  be  necessarily  in  the 
highest  heavens  ?  May  it  not  take  place  in  the  very  room  where  the  man  has  just 
gasped  his  last,  or  at  the  gate  of  Hades  ?  The  place  of  the  general  judgment  is 
plainly  declared,  that  of  the  personal  and  private  tribunal  is  left  in  awful  uncer- 
tainty. But  again,  it  may  be  asked,  can  it  be  conceived  that  the  spirits  of  the  just 
and  of  the  unjust  are  included  in  the  same  place?  We  ask:  Why  not?  We 
quote  not  "  Let  both  grow  until  the  harvest  or  end  of  the  world,"  because  the 
reference  in  that  passage  is  to  this  world,  not  to  the  next.  But,  we  ask :  Why, 
though  the  place  be  one,  should  not  the  lines  of  demarcation  be  numerous,  and 
distinct,  and  deep  ?  Will  not  the  great  laws  of  moral  attraction,  which  partially 
operate  even  here — drawing  together  similar  spirits  by  a  mighty  assimilating  and 
converging  process — there  have  their  perfect  work,  and  account  for  the  greatness 
of  the  gulf  which  separates  the  one  side  of  Hades  from  Abraham's  bosom  ?  It 
remains  that  we  find,  in  fine,  the  uses  of  this  doctrine.  1.  Is  it  true  ?  Then  it 
must  have  its  good  uses  ;  and  then  the  responsibility  of  it  is  shifted  back  from  us 
upon  the  everlasting  arms  of  the  God  of  Truth  Himself.  No  seed  of  truth  can 
produce  evil  consequences,  or  fail  to  produce  good.  2.  It  gives  an  enlarged  view 
of  God's  universe.  It  points  out,  to  those,  I  mean,  who  have  recently  heard  of  it 
for  the  first  time,  a  new  province  in  the  Almighty's  dominions.  3.  This  doctrine 
is  cheering  to  the  Christian — cheering  both  as  it  confutes  the  gloomy  doctrines  of 
materialism  and  the  sleep  of  the  soul ;  and  as  it  divides  to  him  the  awful  ladder 
of  approach  to  the  supreme  summit  and  pinnacle  of  the  heavens.  We  tremble  at 
the  thought  of  being  introduced  suddenly,  and  at  once,  among  the  ancients  of  the 
heavenly  world — into  the  centre  of  the  circle  of  eternity — and  amid  the  blaze  of 
those  starry  splendours,  at  which  "  angels  tremble  as  they  gaze."  This  doctrine 
shows  believers  an  intermediate  stage — an  arbour  on  their  far  pilgrimage — a  gentler 
and  a  milder  light,  through  which  they  pass  into  the  "  perfect  day."  Once  more, 
it  is  full  of  terrors  to  the  wicked.  It  holds  out  to  them  the  prospect  of  looking 
forward  from  Hades  to  a  gulf  deeper  and  darker  still,  into  which  they  shall  yet  be 
plunged.  It  tells  them  that  their  misery  shall  not  be  consummiited  at  once,  but 
shall  go  on  by  distinct  and  terrible  stages  towards  its  completion.    (G.  Gilfillan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  Write  the  things  which  thou  hast  seen. — Christ  enjoining  the 
record  of  His  revelation  to  man  and  explaining  its  meaning  : — These  words  suggest 
two  general  remarks  concerning  Christ.  I.  He  requires  men  to  record  the 
REVELATIONS  He  MAKES  TO  THEM.  1.  Thosc  which  had  been  experienced.  2.  Those 
things  which  were  now  present.  3.  Those  which  were  approaching.  Now  these 
three  classes  of  things  John  had  to  write  down.  Whatever  man  has  seen,  or  will 
see  of  the  Divine,  he  is  bound  to  record — "  Write."  Literature,  though  sadly  cor- 
rupted and  the  source  of  enormous  mischief,  is  a  Divine  institution.  Kightly 
employed  it  is  one  of  the  grandest  forces  in  human  life.  Thank  God  for  books,  our 
best  companions,  always  ready  with  their  counsel  and  their  comfort.  They  are  arks 
that  have  borne  down  to  us,  over  the  floods  of  centuries,  the  vital  germs  of  departed 
ages.  II.  He  explains  to  men  the  meaning  of  the  revelation  He  makes  to  them. 
1.  The  unknown  of  the  knowable.  What  is  mystery  to  one  man  is  not  so  to 
another  ;  and  what  is  mystery  to  a  man  to-day  is  no  mystery  to-morrow.  2.  The 
unknown  of  the  unknowable.  He  whom  we  call  God  is  the  great  mystery,  the  abso- 
lutely unknowable — whom  no  man  hath  seen  or  can  see.  Now  in  the  former  sense  the 
meaning  of  the  word  "  mystery  "  is  here  employed.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Sacred 

literature : — I.  That  it  contains  the  record  of  things  which  the  authors  have  seen. 
1.  Which  men  have  seen  with  the  eye  of  the  body.  2.  Things  which  the  authors  have 
seen  with  the  eye  of  the  mind.  3.  Things  which  the  authors  have  seen  with  the 
eye  of  the  soul.  II.  That  it  contains  the  record  of  things  which  are  happening 
AROUND  us.  "  And  the  things  which  are."  The  Bible  records  the  history  of  the  past 
ages,  of  a  great  antiquity,  and  in  this  coincides  with  our  expectation  ;  but  it  also 
touches  the  moral,  political,  and  historic  life  of  men  to-day.  God  knew  the  ages 
before  they  commenced  their  march,  and  has  enabled  men  to  anticipate  their  mean- 
ing by  the  gift  of  a  holy  inspiration.  III.  That  it  contains  the  record  of  things 
WHICH  pertain  to  THE  FUTURE.  "And  the  things  which  shall  be  hereafter." 
{Joseph  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Concerning  writing : — 1.  That  men  may  by  writing 
communicate  what  light  God  gives  them  for  the  good  of  the  Church.  It  is  true  the 
Gospel  was  at  first  spread  and  planted  by  preaching,  that  is  more  properly  the  means 
of  conversion.  There  is  reason  also  for  this,  if  we  consider  (1)  The  relation  that  is 
amongst  all  the  members  of  the  Catholic  Church,  whereby  all  are  tied,  to  be  edifying 


CHAP.  I.]  REVELATION.  95 

one  to  another,  &o.  (2)  The  end  wherefore  God  had  given  men  gifts,  which  is  to 
profit  withal :  and  yet  (3)  That  a  man  cannot  by  word  make  his  gift  forthcoming 
in  the  extent  that  he  is  obliged ;  there  is  therefore  a  necessity  of  using  writing  for 
that  end,  it  being  a  singular  gift  of  God  for  promoting  edification.  2.  That  none 
should  take  on  them  to  write  anything,  as  the  Lord's  mind,  for  the  edification  of  the 
Church,  without  a  call  to  it :  I  mean  not  an  extraordinary  call,  as  John  had ;  but 
this  I  mean,  that  as  there  is  an  ordinary  call  needful  to  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel,  so,  in  the  general,  that  same  consequence  will  hold  in  respect  of  writing 
for  such  an  end.  And  if  we  look  through  the  Scripture,  we  will  find  a  call  for 
writing  as  well  as  for  preaching.  And  to  warrant  writing,  we  would  conceive  so 
much  to  be  necessary  as  may  (1)  Satisfy  the  man  himself  as  to  his  being  called  to 
Buch  an  eminent  duty  by  God,  and  therefore  there  must  be  somewhat  to  hold  out  to 
him  that  it  is  God's  mind  he  should  undertake  such  a  task.  (2)  That  men  walk  not 
by  their  own  satisfaction  alone;  but  that  there  may  be  so  much  as  to  convince 
others,  that  God  put  them  on  that  work.  3.  That  a  man  therefore  may  have  peace 
as  to  his  undertaking,  we  conceive  there  is  a  concurrence  of  several  things  needful 
to  be  observed :  As  (1)  There  is  a  necessity  of  a  single  end,  to  wit,  God's  glory, 
others'  edification ;  and  in  part  may  come  in,  his  own  exoneration  as  to  such  a  duty. 
It  is  not  self-seeking,  nor  getting  of  a  name,  nor  strengthening  such  a  particular  party 
or  opinion,  that  will  give  one  peace  in  this  matter.  (2)  It  is  necessary,  not  only 
that  the  thing  be  truth ;  but  that  it  may  be  edifying,  profitable,  and  pertinent,  at 
such  a  time :  God's  call  to  anything,  doth  ever  time  it,  and  tryst  it  well,  as  most 
subservient  to  the  scope  of  edification.  (3)  Besides  these,  there  are  circumstances  in 
the  concurrence  of  providences  trysting  together,  in  reference  to  the  person  writing, 
to  the  subject  written  of,  the  time  wherein  and  occasion  whereupon,  and  such  like : 
which  being  observed,  may  contribute  to  give  some  light  in  the  thing.  As  (a)  If  the 
person  be  called  publicly  to  edify  the  Church  ;  if  he  be  of  that  weight,  as  his  testi- 
mony may  prove  profitable  in  the  Church  for  the  strengthening  and  confirming  of 
others,  or  the  like  considerations  ;  though  no  new  thing  be  brought  forth  by  him  : 
which  ground,  as  a  moral  reason,  Luke  gives  to  Theophilus  of  his  writing  the 
Gospel  (Luke  i.  1).  (6)  Considerations  may  be  drawn  from  the  subject.  As  (i.)  If 
it  be  a  necessary  point  that  is  controversed.  (ii.)  If  the  Scripture  opened  be  dark 
and  obscure ;  and  possibly  not  many  satisfyingly  writing  of  it.  (iii.)  If  the  way  of 
handling  it  be  such  as  gives  any  new  advantage  to  truth,  or  to  the  opening  of  that 
Scripture,  (c)  The  time  would  be  considered,  if  such  a  truth  be  presently  contro- 
verted, or  such  a  subject  necessary  to  be  spoken  unto  now ;  if  such  a  person's 
interposing  may  be  useful,  if  such  a  duty  be  neglected,  or  if  such  a  Scripture  be  not 
made  use  of,  and  the  like,  (d)  Occasion  also  may  be,  from  God's  putting  one  to 
have  thoughts  of  such  a  subject  when  others  are  otherwise  taken  up,  some  not 
having  access  to  be  edifying  otherwise ;  as  when  occasion  of  study  is  given,  and  the 
thing  by  public  delivery  or  secret  communication  is  known  to  others,  and  called  for 
by  them  to  be  made  public :  or  that  they  would  set  themselves  to  it,  God  giving 
occasion  of  health,  quietness,  means,  &c.,  for  it :  the  thing  getting  approbation  from 
such  as  are  single,  and  intelligent,  judging  such  a  thing  useful;  in  this  the 
spirits  of  God's  servants  would  be  subject  to  others.  {James  Durham.)  The 
mystery  of  the  seven  stars  .  .  .  and  the  seven  golden  candlesticks. — The  stars  and 
candlesticks: — It  is  the  realm  in  which  they  are  stationed,  and  its  characteristics 
as  indicated  in  the  provision  made  for  it.  Where  you  see  stars  there  is  darkness. 
And  how  dark  is  that  world,  that  kingdom,  that  community,  that  heart,  into  which 
the  light  of  Christianity  has  not  effectually  penetrated  ?  With  all  the  splendour  of 
its  genius,  all  the  glory  of  its  arms,  all  the  brilliancy  of  its  power,  how  savage,  how 
like  a  sepulchre,  full  of  chilly  gloom  and  festering  death  !  When  the  Gospel  first 
arose  upon  the  world,  in  what  state  did  it  find  mankind  ?  Let  the  apostle  answer 
(Kom.  i.  22-32).  And  when  God's  messengers  came  to  them  with  the  light  of  truth  and 
righteousness,  how  were  they  treated  ?  Let  the  same  apostle  answer  (Heb.  xi.  35-38). 
Even  the  Lord  of  the  covenant  was  crucified  and  killed,  and  all  His  apostles  martyred, 
and  the  Church's  first  age  made  one  continuous  baptism  of  blood  by  the  enthroned 
malignity  of  the  unsanctified  heart.  Such  is  humanity,  unreached  and  unredeemed 
by  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  (Luke  x.  3).  Those  stars  and  candlesticks 
have  not  been  useless.  Some  hearts,  communities,  and  kingdoms  have  been 
attracted  by  the  light,  and  have  learned  to  appreciate  its  transforming  beauty,  and 
are  found  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  walking  and  rejoicing  in  it.  But  still  the  world 
in  the  main  is  a  dark  and  wicked  world.  The  light  sent  of  God  is  "  a  light  that 
shineth  in  a  dark  place,"  and  will  so  continue  "  until  the  day  dawn  "  for  the  great 


06  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

consummation.  Till  then,  therefore,  we  must  expect  to  suffer  and  to  fight.  {J.  A, 
Seisg,  D.D.)  The  seven  golden  lampstands  : — I.  A  Church's  business  is  to  hold 
UP  THE  LIGHT.  A  church  which  fails  in  aggressive  evangelistic  activity  has  failed 
utterly.  What  is  the  good  of  a  lamp-post  if  there  is  no  light  in  it  ?  It  is  only  a 
nuisance,  for  people  to  knock  their  heads  against  in  the  dark.  A  large  number  of 
the  so-called  Christian  organisations  of  this  day  are  lampstands  without  a  light. 
But  then,  let  us  remember,  too,  that  whilst  thus  one  must  strongly  assert  that  the 
function  of  the  Church  is  to  lift  up  a  light  which  is  not  its  own,  on  the  other  hand, 
whosoever  partakes  of  that  light — \^ich  he  cannot  lift  unless  he  loves — is  changed 
into  its  nature.  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  They  are  made  light  by  contact 
with  the  Light ;  as  a  mirror  laid  in  the  sunshine  will  reflect  the  beams  that  fall  upon 
it,  and  will  cast  them  into  some  corners  which,  without  its  intervention,  they  would 
not  have  reached,  and  will  be  capable  of  being  gazed  on  with  undazzled  eye  by  some 
whose  optics  were  too  weak  to  look  upon  the  light  itself.  Now  the  scope  of  this 
light-bearing  and  witnessing  for  Jesus  Christ  which  is  the  purpose  of  the  Church, 
and  of  each  individual  in  it,  is  not  to  be  unduly  narrowed.  The  Christian  com- 
munity is  bound  to  bring  the  principles  of  Christ's  Gospel  to  bear  upon  all  forms  of 
life,  individual,  social,  moral,  and  political,  and  sometimes  economical.  That  is 
the  function  of  the  individual  members  of  the  Church  because  they  are  Christians. 
There  is  one  more  word  I  would  like  to  say,  and  that  is,  if  it  is  the  purpose  of  a 
Christian  Church  to  hold  forth  the  light,  how  utterly  irrelevant  and  puerile  becomes 
the  question  whether  we  are  to  send  the  Gospel  to  distant  lands,  and  how  ridiculous 
the  attempt  to  pit  home  against  foreign  evangelistic  enterprise  necessarily  becomes. 
"  Light  is  light,  which  radiates,"  and  you  may  as  well  expect  a  sunbeam  to  elect 
upon  which  side  it  shall  shine,  and  how  far  it  shall  travel,  as  try  to  prescribe  to  the 
expansive  and  outward-rushing  instincts  of  Christian  beneficence,  the  sphere  within 
which  they  are  to  confine  themselves.  Where  I  can  shine  I  am  bound  to  shine,  and 
England  has  not  got  the  language  that  is  going  to  fill  the  world  in  a  century  or 
two,  and  the  religion  which  will  bless  humanity,  only  in  order  that  with  her  world- 
wide empire  she  may  have  markets  for  her  produce,  or  gather  as  in  a  net  the  riches 
of  the  nations.  EC.  This  office  is  the  conjoint  business  of  the  whole  Church. 
You  have  sometimes  seen  methods  of  illumination  by  which  a  rough  triangle  of 
wood  is  dotted  all  over  with  tin  sockets,  and  tapers  stuck  in  them.  That  is  not  the 
way  in  which  a  Church  is  to  do  its  evangelising  work.  The  symbol  of  our  text 
gives  a  better  metaphor — one  lampstand  holding  one  light.  Now  that  contains  two 
thoughts.  1.  One  is  the  universal  obligation.  It  is  the  whole  Church  which 
composes  the  stand  for  the  lamp.  It  is  the  whole  of  any  Church  which  is  bound 
equally  to  evangelistic  effort.  We  are  all  disposed  to  think  that  the  Church  should 
do  a  deal.  What  about  A.,  B.,  C,  the  members  of  it?  It  is  their  business.  And 
it  only  becomes  the  duty  of  the  community  because  it  is  the  duty  of  each  individual 
within  it.  2.  A  second  thought  is  combined  action.  We  must  be  contented  often 
to  be  iiisignificant,  to  do  functional  work,  to  be  one  of  the  great  crowd  whose  hand 
on  the  rope  gives  an  indivisible  but  to  Him  up  yonder  not  imperceptible  pull  to 
bring  the  vessel  to  shore.  There  are  a  myriad  little  spheres  in  the  raindrops  which 
make  the  rainbow,  and  each  of  them  has  a  little  rainbow  in  its  own  tiny  depths, 
but  they  all  fuse  together  into  the  sevenfold  arch  of  perfect  beauty  that  spans  the 
sky.  III.  This  office  is  discharged  under  the  inspection  op  Jesus  Christ. 
According  to  the  vision  of  which  the  text  is  the  interpretation  Christ  is,  and 
according  to  the  words  of  one  of  the  letters  He  walks,  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 
candlesticks.  The  presence  of  the  Christ  is  the  condition  of  the  churches 
discharging  their  functions.  "  He  walks,"  says  the  letter  already  referred  to, 
"  in  their  midst,"  which  is  the  emblem  of  His  continual  activity.  In  so  far  as 
we  are  lights,  we  are  lights  kindled,  and  therefore  burning  away.  There  must  be 
a  continual  replenishing  of  the  inward  supply  from  which  the  power  of  illumination 
comes,  as  is  set  forth  in  another  instance  in  the  Old  Testament  in  which  this 
symbol  appears — viz.,  in  Zechariah's  prophecy,  where  he  sees  the  arrangements  by 
which  the  oil  is  fed  to  the  golden  candlestick.  The  oil  must  be  fed  to  us,  in  so  far 
as  we  are  not  lampstands,  but  lamps.  That  is  to  say,  the  great  High  Priest  of  the 
Temple  moves  as  His  predecessors  did  in  the  ancient  sanctuary,  and  trims  the 
lamps,  not  quenching  the  smoking  flax,  but  raising  it  to  a  clearer  flame.  That 
presence  stimulates.  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  He  walks  in  the  midst.  It  is 
made  more  solemn  when  we  remember  how,  in  these  letters  that  follow  my  text, 
there  is  in  each  case  repeated,  "  I  know  thy  works."  That  inspection  of  our  acts 
is  not  all  that  He  is  here  for,  thank  God !  but  He  is  here  for  that.     Oh,  if  we 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION,  97 

■ — ■ 1 

believed  it,  what  different  people  we  should  be,  and  what  a  different  Church  this 
would  be  I  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  seven  golden  candlesticks  : — Your  attention 
will  be  called  to  the  striking  symbol  of  the  Church,  as  exhibited  by  the  golden 
candlestick,  which,  like  that  which  stood  in  the  tabernacle,  had  its  seven  branches. 
We  notice  the  fitness  of  this  symbol  of  the  golden  candlestick,  I.  In  its  position. 
The  Church  of  Christ  still  waits  without  the  veil,  and  sheds  her  blessed  light  to 
show  to  the  world  the  Saviour.  II.  The  office  of  the  Church.  It  does  not 
sanctify,  nor  save,  but  it  does  hold  forth  the  true  light,  and  shed  its  brightness  on  a 
darkened  world.  III.  The  unity  or  the  Church.  IV.  The  source  of  life  to 
THE  Church.  V.  The  beauty  of  the  Church  and  her  holy  services.  VI.  The 
VALUE  of  the  Church.  {J.  H.  Norton.)  Things  common  to  all  churches  ;^-I. 
That  all  Christian  Churches  ought  to  be  presided  over  by  competent  and 
duly-qualified  pastors.  1.  That  all  Christian  Churches  should  be  presided  over 
by  a  recognised  pastor.  2.  That  the  pastor  is  the  head  and  representative  of  the 
Church  to  which  he  belongs.  3.  That  the  pastor  exercises  a  great  moral  influence 
upon  the  Church  with  which  he  is  connected.  II.  That  all  Christian  Churches 
ARE  under  the  PERSONAL  SCRUTINY  OF  Christ.  1.  Christ  kuows  the  Church. 
This  thought  should  solemnise  our  Church  life,  and  make  it  reverent  in  its 
disposition  of  soul.  2.  Christ  rules  the  Church.  His  rulership  is  for  the  moral 
welfare  and  defence  of  the  Church,  and  should  be  obediently  acknowledged.  3. 
Christ  passes  judgment  on  the  Church.  He  passes  judgment  on  the  works,  the 
patience,  the  suffering,  the  discipline,  the  creed,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Church, 
and  condemns  or  approves  accordingly.     IH.  That  all  Ceuiistian  Churches  are 

ENGAGED  IN  SPIRITUAL  CONFLICT.  IV.  ThAT  ALL  CHRISTIAN  ChURCHES  SHOULD  BE 
SENSITIVE    TO     THE     REVELATION     OP    THE     DiVINE   SpIBIT.       LcSSODS  : — 1.   That    the 

ministerial  ofl&ce  has  the  sanction  of  Heaven.  2.  That  Churches  should  be 
careful  in  the  selection  of  their  pastor.  3.  That  Churches  should  seek  to 
coltivate  a  pure  and  fervent  spiritual  life.    {J,  S,  Exell,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vers.  1-7.  Epiiesns. — The  address  to  Ephesus : — ^I.  The  porm  of  address.  1.  The 
place.  Ephesus.  Situated  in  a  rich  and  extensive  country,  and  upon  the  banks  of 
a  luxuriant  river,  it  became,  in  all  probability,  celebrated  for  the  pleasures  of  the 
chase,  on  which  account  its  richest  offerings  were  presented  on  the  shrine  of  Diana. 
It  was  in  its  greatest  glory  in  the  apostolic  age,  its  population  at  that  time 
amounting  to  some  hundreds  of  thousands.  The  ruins  of  its  theatre  still  remain, 
which  is  computed  to  have  accommodated  twenty  thousand  spectators.  Its  com- 
merce, its  literature,  its  opulence,  and  its  luxury  were  in  similar  proportion.  2. 
The  Church  of  Ephesus.  (1)  How  great  were  the  advantages  which  the  Ephesian 
Church  enjoyed !  The  foundation  is  laid  during  a  few  months'  visit  from  the  great 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is  sustained  by  the  labours  of  Priscilla  and  Aquila.  It 
is  favoured  with  the  discourses  of  the  eloquent  Apollos.  It  next  enjoys  the  entire 
ministrations  of  Paul  for  two  years  and  three  months.  He  is  succeeded  by  Timothy, 
of  whom  Paul  says,  he  knew  no  man  so  like-minded  with  himself,  who  evidently 
gave  the  prime  of  his  days  to  the  Ephesians.  A  most  instructive  and  encouraging 
letter  is  sent  them  by  Paul,  for  their  guidance  both  in  doctrine  and  practice. 
Timothy  receives  full  instructions  from  the  apostle  for  the  performance  of  his 
pastoral  duties  among  them.  And  to  crown  all  their  privileges,  during  the  apostolic 
age,  John,  the  last  of  the  apostles,  gives  them  the  benefit  of  the  rich  experience  of 
his  latter  days,  and  the  benedictions  of  his  last  breath.  (2)  The  chief  difficulties 
with  which  the  gospel  had  to  contend  in  this  city,  (a)  The  prejudices  of  the  Jews. 
(6)  The  pride  of  human  learning,  (c)  The  influence  of  a  popular  idolatry  and  an 
interested  priesthood,  (d)  The  effect  of  riches,  (e)  Sensual  indulgence.  (3) 
The  gospel  when  faithfully  preached,  and  accompanied  by  pastoral  visits 
and  fervent  prayer,  will  surmount  all  opposition,  and  extensively  prevail.  3. 
The  angel  of  the  Church  at  Ephesus.  4.  The  character  in  which  Christ 
addresses  this  Church.  H.  The  subject  of  communication.  1.  The  Ephesians 
are  commended  here  for  their  zealous  and  active  performance  of  Christian 
duties ;  for  their  patience  and  bubmission  under  trial  and  persecution ;  and  for 

7 


98  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

their  purity  of  discipline.  2,  He  has  something  against  them,  as  well  as  in 
their  favour.  He  does  not  dispute  the  sincerity  of  their  love,  but  reproves  them 
for  its  diminished  fervour.  It  was  not  so  pure,  burning,  and  enkindUng  as  at 
first.  Diminution  of  love  in  His  people  is  displeasing  to  Christ,  on  their 
account  as  well  as  His  own.  Love  is  the  fruit  of  all  other  graces  of  the 
Christian  combined.  If  this  decays,  the  whole  work  of  grace  in  the  soul  is  on  the 
decline.  3.  The  admonition :  "  Kemember,  therefore,  from  whence  thou  art 
fallen,"  &c.  4.  The  threatening:  "Or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,"  &c. 
Unless  the  flame  of  love  be  kept  bright  and  glowing.  He  will  withdraw  His  support. 
He  will  not  hold  up  an  expiring  lamp.  The  light  of  the  gospel  is  not  extinguished, 
but  is  removed  from  one  place  to  another.  If  it  has  become  dim,  or  ceased  to  shine 
in  one  part  of  the  earth,  it  burns  with  brilliancy  in  another.  While  its  first  fervour 
was  declining  in  Judaea,  it  burst  forth  in  the  cities  of  the  Gentiles.  The  gospel 
seeks  the  hearts  of  men.  If  they  are  withheld  in  one  place,  it  seeks  them  in 
another.  5.  The  closing  commendation :  "  But  this  thou  hast,"  &c.  HI.  A 
GENERAii  APPLICATION  is  appended  to  the  address  to  the  Church  at  Ephesus,  and  the 
same  order  is  observed  in  the  rest :  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear,"  &c. 
{G.  Rogers.)  Ephesm — the  strenuous  Church  : — Ephesus  is  the  type  of  a  strenuous 
Church.  There  is  something  singularly  masculine  in  the  first  part  of  the  descrip- 
tion. "I  know  thy  works" — that  is,  thine  achievements;  not  thy  desires  and 
purposes  and  aspirations,  not  even  thy  doings,  but  thy  deeds.  This  Church  in  its 
severe  self-discipline  affords  a  welcome  contrast  to  the  easily-excited  populace  amid 
whom  they  lived,  rushing  confusedly  into  the  theatre  and  shouting  for  two  hours, 
"  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians."  The  patience  of  the  Church  is  twice  men 
tioned ;  the  second  time  it  is  patience  not  as  a  feature  of  the  workman,  but  the 
patience  of  him  who  can  suffer,  and  suffer  in  silence.  And  this  virtue  has  a  three- 
fold delineation— patience,  endurance,  fortitude.  "  Thou  hast  patience,  and  thou 
didst  bear  for  My  name's  sake,  and  thou  hast  not  grown  weary."  There  is  another 
mark  of  the  masculine  character  in  Ephesus,  a  noble  intolerance  of  evil — "  thou 
canst  not  bear  bad  men."  And  with  this  intolerance  is  the  power  to  discriminate 
character,  the  clear  judgment  which  cannot  be  deceived — "  thou  didst  try  them 
which  call  themselves  apostles,  and  they  are  not,  and  didst  find  them  false."  There 
is  no  surer  mark  of  a  masculine  nature  than  this  keen  insight  into  pretentiousness, 
and  fidelity  of  rebuke.  Then  comes  the  exposure  of  the  great  defect  of  Ephesus. 
"I  have  against  thee  that  thou  hast  left  that  love  which  thou  hadst  at  the  first."  It 
is  love  in  its  largest  sense  which  the  Church  once  had  and  now  has  lost ;  the  love  of 
God  animating  piety  undoubtedly,  but  no  less  certainly  the  love  of  men  making 
service  sweet.  Nor  is  it  the  feeling  alone  which  has  changed,  it  is  not  that  love  as 
a  sentiment  is  lost ;  but  love  in  its  far  reach  has  gone,  kindliness  and  tender  con- 
sideration and  disregard  of  self,  the  grace  that  suffers  long  and  is  kind,  that  beareth 
all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  believeth  all  things.  The  toilsomeness,  the  en- 
durance, the  stern  self -judgment,  the  keen  discrimination  of  character,  are  obvious; 
but  the  spirit  that  rises  above  toil  or  sweetens  toil,  the  grace  to  woo  and  wed,  has 
fled.  We  can  understand  the  history  only  too  well.  Life  has  many  sore  trials, 
none  sorer  than  this — that  virtues  which  are  unexercised  die  out,  and  that  the  cir- 
cumstances which  call  for  some  virtues  and  give  occasion  for  their  development 
seem  to  doom  others  to  extinction.  The  Christian  character  cannot  live  by  severity 
alone.  There  were  two  demands  which  the  Church  at  Ephesus  had  forgotten — the 
demand  for  completeness  of  Christian  character,  never  more  urgent  than  when  the 
times  are  making  us  one-sided  ;  the  demand  of  God  Himself  for  the  heart.  There 
must  be  impulse  in  His  people  if  they  are  to  continue  His  people ;  there  must  be 
love  in  all  who,  not  contented  with  doing  "  their  works,"  desire  to  do  the  work  of 
God.  I.  There  is  an  obscured,  a  limited  perception  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  "  These 
things  saith  He  that  holdeth  the  seven  stars,"  &c.  A  strenuous  Lord  for  a 
strenuous  Church  ;  but  also  a  Lord  holding  His  manifold  graces  in  reserve  when  He 
has  to  do  with  a  reserved  people.  For  the  nurture  of  piety  we  need  all  that  He  will 
reveal  to  us  of  Himself,  all  that  can  endear  Him,  all  that  can  startle  us,  all  that 
can  exalt  His  image.  There  is  not  a  single  channel  by  which  Christ  finds  His  way 
to  the  soul  which  should  not  be  open  to  Him ;  a  full  Christ  is  needed  for  a  full  man 
and  for  a  complete  Church.  II.  The  warning  of  the  fifth  verse  must  have  been 
very  surprising  to  the  angel  of  the  Ephesian  Church.  The  Church  seemed  to  be  so 
efi&cient.  Its  works  had  been  so  hard,  and  yet  they  had  been  done.  Its  achieve- 
ments were  patent.  Especially  its  service  in  the  cause  of  truth  was  conspicuous  ; 
the  Church  had  not  lost  its  zeal,  its  candour,  its  piercing  vision.    Ephesus  warns 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  99 

us  against  the  perils  of  the  Puritan  temper ;  it  warns  us  also  against  the  stoical 
temper,  with  its  tendency  to  a  not  ignoble  cynicism,  of  which  some  of  our 
gravest  leaders  in  literature  have  been  the  exponents.  Puritanism  plus  love  has 
accomplished  great  things,  and  will  do  yet  more ;  for  a  masculine  tenderness  is 
God's  noblest  gift  to  men.  But  Puritanism,  when  the  first  love  is  lost,  drags  on  a 
sorrowful  existence,  uninfluential  and  unhappy ;  its  only  hope  being  the  capacity 
for  repentance,  which,  God  be  praised,  has  never  failed  it.  Perhaps  the  most 
solemn  part  of  the  message  is  that  in  which  the  Lord  Himself  declares — '*  I  am 
coming ;  I  will  shake  thy  candlestick  out  of  its  place.'*  The  Lord  can  do  without 
our  achievements,  but  not  without  love.  He  can  supply  gifts  unendingly,  can 
make  the  feeble  as  David ;  but  if  love  be  wanting  He  wUl  shake  the  noblest  into 
destruction,  and  remove  them  out  of  the  way.  There  is  one  striking  Word 
immediately  following  this  warning,  a  word  of  commendation  ;  it  is  the  only  one  of 
the  messages  in  which  a  word  of  commendation  does  come  in  after  the  warning 
has  been  uttered,  and  it  is  a  commendation  of  feeling.  "  But  this  thou  hast,  that 
thou  hatest,"  &c.  Hatred  is  hardly  the  feeling  we  should  have  expected  to  be 
commended :  but  it  is  feeling,  and  any  feeling  is  better  than  apathy  or  stolidity. 
Where  men  can  feel  hatred,  other  feeUng  may  come  ;  love  may  come  where  men 
have  not  reduced  themselves  to  machines.  HI.  An  altogether  unexpected  thing  in 
the  message  to  the  Church  at  Ephesus  is  the  promise  with  which  it  ends — "  To 
him  that  overcometh,"  &c.  In  only  two  promises  of  the  New  Testament  does  this 
word  '*  paradise  "  appear,  with  its  suggestion  of  the  primeval  garden,  where  the 
father  and  mother  of  men  wandered  innocent  and  happy :  in  the  promise  made  by 
the  dying  Jesus  to  the  penitent  thief,  and  here.  The  faithful  men  of  Ephesus, 
stern-featured,  with  drawn  brows,  fighting  on,  knowing  that  their  hearts  are 
withering  in  the  conflict,  and  yet  not  seeing  how  they  can  relax,  are  caught  with  a 
word.  An  image  is  presented  to  them  which  may  break  down  even  their  self- 
control,  and  set  them  longing  for  the  wondrous  things  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
that  love  Him.  And  this  was  exactly  what  Ephesus  needed,  although  it  was  the 
one  thing  it  had  schooled  itself  to  do  without.  Ephesus  had  too  little  of  what  so 
many  have  too  much  of — sensibility,  passiveness,  willingness  to  receive,  to  be 
made  something  of,  to  be  quiet  and  let  the  Blessed  One  save  them  who  had  long 
been  striving,  and  of  late  so  ineffectually,  to  serve  Him.  Good  as  strenuousness  is 
— and  of  human  virtues  it  is  among  the  chief — even  better  is  the  responsive  spirit. 
When  God  is  the  giver,  it  is  well  for  us  to  receive  rather  than  to  give.  {A. 
Mackennal,  D.D.)  Letter  to  Ephesus: — I.  The  Head  of  the  Church  has 
A  MINUTE  knowledge  OF  ALL  THE  SERVICES  OF  His  PEOPLE.  1.  There  is  dis- 
tinguished labour.  "  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour."  The  Church 
at  Ephesus  had  been  a  working  Church.  It  had  been  operating  on  the  sur- 
rounding regions  of  depravity,  darkness,  and  death.  In  its  early  life  it  was 
eminently  an  aggressive  Church.  I  would  have  Christ's  Church  as  ambitious  as 
Alexander.  As  he  waved  his  battle-flag  over  a  conquered  world,  so  would  I  that  the 
Church  might  unfurl  the  banner  of  a  nobler  conquest  over  every  nation,  and 
kindred,  and  people,  and  tongue.  2.  There  is  distinguished  patience.  This 
patience  may  be  understood  as  indicating  long-suffering  in  relation  to  those  by  whom 
the  saints  in  Ephesus  were  surrounded — long-suffering  both  in  waiting  for  the 
germination  of  the  seed  which  they  had  sown  in  many  tears,  and  in  the  meek 
endurance  of  fiery  trials.  The  point  to  be  noted  here  is,  that  Christ  is  mindful,  not 
only  of  the  outward  manifestations  of  the  spiritual  life — such  as  many  labours  and 
many  offerings — but  also  of  the  hidden  graces  which  cluster  round  the  heart.  He 
sees  not  only  the  moral  warrior  brandishing  his  sword  in  the  thickest  of  the  battle, 
but  also  the  wounded  and  suffering  soldier  ;  and  sweetly  says  to  such,  "I  know  thy 
patience."  How  few  can  tone  themselves  to  the  high  strength  of  doing  everything 
by  doing  nothing !  Patience  is  undervalued  by  an  excited  world ;  but  Jesus  notes  it 
in  its  long  vigils,  marks  it  trimming  its  dim  lamp  in  the  solemn  midnight,  and 
sweetly  whispers  His  word  of  commendation,  which  is  always  invigorating  as  the 
breath  of  immortality.  3.  There  is  distinguished  jealousy  for  the  right.  "  Thou 
canst  not  bear  them  which  are  evil,"  &c.  It  must  ever  be  remembered  that  there  is 
a  spurious  charity.  It  is  morally  impossible  that  Christians  and  anti-Christians  can 
have  any  sympathetic  fellowship.  Woe  unto  the  Church  when  moral  distinctions 
are  lightly  regarded  !  To  confound  light  with  darkness,  sweetness  with  bitterness, 
is  to  mock  the  first  principles  of  holy  government,  and  to  destroy  for  ever  the  pos- 
sibility of  holy  brotherhood.  While,  therefore,  we  would  not  presumptuously 
ascend  the  judgment-seat,  we  believe  it  is  impossible  to  burn  in  too  deeply  the  line 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n- 

which  separates  the  sympathy  of  compassion  from  the  sympathy  of  complacency. 
3.  There  was  distinguished  persistence  in  the  right  course.  "  And  hast  borne, 
and  hast  patience,  and  for  My  name's  sake  hast  laboured,  and  hast  not  fainted." 
The  eulogium  might  be  read  thus :  "I  know  thy  labour,  and  yet  thou  dost  not 
labour,  i.e.,  thou  dost  not  make  a  labour  of  thy  duties  "  :  in  such  case  duty  was  not 
a  hard  taskmaster.  There  was  such  a  sunny  joyousness  and  musical  cordiality 
about  these  saints,  that  they  came  to  their  work — work  so  hard — with  the  freshness 
of  morning,  and  under  their  touch  duty  was  transformed  into  privilege.  There  is  a 
lesson  here  for  Christian  workers  through  all  time.  When  work  is  done  with 
the  hand  only,  it  is  invariably  attended  with  much  constraint  and  difficulty ;  but 
when  the  heart  is  engaged,  the  circle  of  duty  is  run  with  a  vigour  that  never  wearies 
and  a  gladness  which  never  saddens.  Not  only  so,  the  Ephesian  saints  eminently 
succeeded  in  uniting  patience  with  perseverance.  They  were  not  only  patient  in 
suffering,  but  patient  in  labour.  They  did  not  expect  the  morning  to  be  spring  and 
the  evening  to  be  autumn,  but,  having  due  regard  to  the  plan  of  Divine  procedure, 
combined  in  wise  proportions  the  excitement  of  war  with  the  patience  of  hope. 
The  Ephesians  were  right :  they  blended  persistence  with  patience,  and  were 
extolled  by  Him  who  knew  the  hardest  toil,  and  exemplified  the  most  unmurmuring 
endurance.  The  fundamental  point  is,  that  Christ  knew  all  this.  "  I  know  thy 
works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy  patience."  There  is  not  a  toiler  in  the  vineyard  on 
whose  bent  form  the  Master  looks  not  with  approbation.  He  sees  the  sufferer  also. 
All  that  He  observes  influences  His  mediation,  so  that  in  every  age  "  He  tempereth 
the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb."  II.  The  Head  of  the  Church  mabks  evebt 
DECLENSION  OF  PIETY.  "  Nevertheless  I  have  somewhat  against  thee."  This 
method  of  reproof  is  eminently  suggestive.  It  gives  a  lesson  to  parents.  Would 
you  be  successful  in  reproving  your  children  ?  Let  commendation  precede 
rebuke ;  let  your  "  nevertheless"  be  winged  with  love  and  hope,  and  it  will  fly  to 
the  farthest  boundary  of  your  child's  intellectual  and  moral  nature,  and  showers  of 
blessings  will  be  shaken  from  those  heavenly  wings.  It  gives  a  lesson  to  pastors 
also.  Our  words  of  remonstrance  or  rebuke  will  be  more  successful  as  they  are  pre- 
ceded by  every  acknowledgment  which  justice  and  generosity  can  suggest.  When 
the  Master  is  compelled,  so  to  speak,  to  rebuke  His  Church,  He  proceeds  as  though 
He  would  gladly  turn.  The  rebuke  comes  with  a  hesitation  which  did  not  mark 
the  eulogy.  He  resorts  to  a  negative  form  of  statement — "  Thou  hast  left  thy  first 
love."  Look  at  the  declension  spoken  of.  1.  This  declension  is  described  as  having 
begun  in  the  heart.  Christ  does  not  charge  the  saints  at  Ephesus  with  having 
changed  their  doctrinal  views  ;  but,  placing  His  finger  on  the  heart,  says,  "  There 
is  a  change  here."  You  know  the  enthusiasm  of  "  first  love."  If  any  work  is  to 
be  done  in  the  Church — if  any  difficulties  are  to  be  surmounted — if  any  icebergs 
are  to  be  dissolved — if  any  cape,  where  savage  seas  revel  in  ungovernable  madness, 
is  to  be  rounded,  send  out  men  and  women  in  whose  hearts  this  "  first  love  "  bums 
and  sings,  and  their  brows  will  be  girt  with  garlands  of  conquest.  Our  business, 
then,  is  to  watch  our  heart-fiures.  When  the  temperature  of  our  love  lowers,  there 
is  cause  for  terror.  It  is  instructive  to  mark  the  many  and  insidious  influences  by 
which  the  gush  and  sweU  of  affection  are  modified.  Take  the  case  of  one  who  has 
been  distinguished  for  much  service  in  the  cause  of  God,  and  see  how  the  fires  pale. 
He  becomes  prosperous  in  business.  His  oblations  on  the  altar  of  Mammon  are 
costlier  than  ever.  He  toils  in  the  service  of  -self  until  his  energies  are  nearly 
exhausted,  and  then  his  class  in  the  school  is  neglected ;  the  grass  grows  on  his 
tract  district ;  his  nature  has  become  so  perverted  that  he  almost  longs  for  an 
occasion  of  offence,  that  he  may  retire  from  the  duties  of  the  religious  life.  Could 
you  have  heard  him  in  the  hour  of  his  new-born  joy,  when  he  first  placed  his  foot 
In  God's  kingdom,  you  would  not  have  thought  that  he  ever  could  have  been 
reduced  to  so  low  a  moral  temperature.  What  holy  vows  escaped  him  !  How  rich 
he  was  in  promise !  But  look  at  him  now ;  turn  the  leaves  over,  and  with  eager 
eyes  search  for  fruit,  and  say,  Is  the  promise  of  spring  redeemed  in  autumn  ? 
Innumerable  influences  are  continually  in  operation,  which  would  cool  the  ardour 
of  our  first  enthusiasm  for  Christ.  Satan  plies  us  with  his  treacherous  arts ;  the 
world  allures  us  with  its  transitory  charms ;  our  inborn  depravity  reveals  itself  in 
ever-varying  manifestations  ;  pride  and  selfishness,  ambition  and  luxury,  appeal  to 
ns  in  many  voices,  and  beckon  us  with  a  thousand  hands.  2.  This  declension  may 
be  accompanied  by  an  inveterate  hatred  of  theological  heresy — "  But  this  thou  hast, 
that  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  which  I  also  hate."  The  head  may 
be  right  while  the  heart  is  going  in  a  wrong  direction.    I  am  indeed  anxious  that  we 


CHAP.n.]  REVELATION.  101 

should  maintain  a  Scriptural  theology,  that  we  should  **  hold  fast  the  form  of  sound 
words  " ;  at  the  same  time  we  must  remember  that  a  technical  theology  wiU  never 
save  a  soul ;  and  that  a  mere  verbal  creed  will  never  protect  and  increase  our  love 
for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  This  declension  evoked  the  most  solemn  warnings 
and  exhortations.  (1)  The  Church  in  its  collective  capacity  may  incur  the  Divine 
displeasure.  There  may  be  good  individuals  in  the  fellowship,  yet  the  community  as 
a  whole  may  be  under  the  frown  of  Him  who  "walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks."  (2)  The  Church  in  its  collective  capacity  must  betake  itself  to 
repentance.  This  is  evident  when  we  remember  that  there  is  certain  work  properly 
denominated  Church  work.  Take,  for  example,  either  home  or  foreign  evangelisa- 
tion. It  is  not  my  work  solely  as  an  individual  to  "  go  up  and  possess  the  land  "  of 
heathenism:  but  it  is  our  work  as  a  Church  to  carry  the  light  of  heaven  into  "the 
dark  places  of  the  earth."  It  can  only  be  done  by  individuals,  in  so  far  as  they  are 
atoms  in  a  fabric — parts  of  a  whole.  If,  therefore,  we  have  neglected  to  enter  the 
door  of  opportunity  as  a  Church,  the  cry  of  the  angry  Saviour  is,  "  Kepent,  and  do 
the  first  works ;  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly."  (3)  Jesus  will  unchurch 
every  organisation  that  is  unfaithful  to  His  name  ;  He  threatens  to  "  remove  thy 
candlestick  out  of  his  place."  Such  language  may  well  make  us  pause.  Organisa- 
tion is  not  spiritual  brotherhood.  Tell  me  not  of  gorgeous  temples,  of  skilful 
arrangements,  of  complete  machinery ;  I  tell  you  that  you  may  have  all  these  in  an 
unparalleled  degree,  and  yet  "  Ichabod "  may  be  written  on  your  temple  doors  I 
What  is  your  spiritual  life  ?  Is  your  ecclesiastical  mechanism  the  expression  of 
your  love  ?  III.  The  Head  of  the  Church  has  the  richest  blessings  m  reservb 
FOR  ALL  who  OVERCOME  THEIR  SPIRITUAL  ENEMIES.  "  Ovcrcometh  " — the  word  tellfl 
of  battle  and  victory.  There  is  intimation  here  of  an  enemy.  There  is  a  hell  in 
this  word,  and  in  it  there  is  a  devil.  That  your  spiritual  life  is  a  fight  you  need 
not  be  reminded :  every  day  you  are  in  the  battle-field ;  you  live  by  strife.  "  Eat " 
— the  word  tells  of  appetite.  Desire  is  in  this  word,  and  desire  satisfied.  Our 
desire  for  more  of  God  shall  increase  as  the  ages  of  our  immortality  expire, 
and  yet  increasing  desire  is  but  another  way  of  saying  increasing  satisfaction, 
♦'  The  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God."  It  is  but 
little  we  can  say  concerning  such  a  tree :  no  worm  is  gnawing  at  its  root, 
no  serpent  coils  around  its  stem,  no  sere  leaf  trembles  upon  it  as  the  prophet 
of  a  coming  winter ;  its  every  leaf  is  jewelled  with  purer  dew  than  ever  sparkled 
on  the  eyelids  of  the  morning.  A  tree !  'Tis  but  another  word  for  beauty,  for 
beauty  walks  forth  in  ever-varying  manifestations.  A  tree !  'Tis  but  another 
name  for  progress,  for  the  circling  sap  bears  through  every  fibre  life  and  fruit- 
fulness.  A  tree!  Shall  we  assemble  around  that  central  tree?  We  cannot 
do  so  until  we  have  assembled  around  the  Cross.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  words 
of  Christ  to  the  congregation  at  Ephesus : — I.  Tnose  which  concern  Himself. 
1.  His  relation  to  the  Church.  2.  His  knowledge  of  the  Church.  He  knows  not 
merely  overt  acts,  but  inner  motives.  II.  Those  which  concern  the  congrega- 
tion. 1.  He  credits  them  with  the  good  they  possess.  (1)  Their  repugnance  to 
wrong.  (2)  Their  patience  in  toil.  (3)  Their  insight  into  character.  (4)  Their 
hostility  to  error.  2.  He  reproves  them  for  the  declension  they  manifest.  3.  He 
urges  them  to  reform.  III.  Those  which  concern  the  Divine  Spirit.  1.  The 
Divine  Spirit  makes  communication  to  all  the  Churches.  2.  Proper  attention  to 
these  communications  requires  a  certain  ear.  IV.  Those  which  concern  moraIi 
CONQUERORS.  1.  Life  is  a  battle.  2.  Life  is  a  battle  that  may  be  won.  3.  The  win- 
ning of  the  battle  is  glorious.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Peculiarities  of  this  Ephesian 
letter : — I.  Opposition  to  error.  1.  The  origin  of  religious  error  is  often  involved 
in  great  obscurity.  2.  The  manifestation  of  religious  error  is  in  deeds  as  well  as 
doctrines.  There  are  those,  alas !  who  are  orthodox  in  doctrine,  but  corrupt  in 
character.  Why  is  this?  (1]  Because  the  sound  doctrine  remains  in  the  head,  and 
never  enters  the  heart,  and  tne  heart  is  the  spring  of  action.  (2)  Because  some- 
times the  tempting  spirit  suddenly  excites  impulses  which  for  a  time  bury  the  beliefs. 
3.  The  defence  of  religious  error  is  generally  by  an  appeal  to  Divine  authority.  The 
men  who  set  themselves  up  as  "  apostles  "  are  more  likely  to  be  apostates.  4.  The 
dissemination  of  religious  error  is  often  very  rapid.  (1)  Because  human  nature  in 
its  depraved  state  has  a  greater  afl&nity  for  it  than  for  truth.  (2)  Because  religious 
errorists  are  generally  zealous  propagandists.  5.  The  very  existence  of  religious 
error  should  be  hated  by  Christians.  Nothing  is  more  damning  to  the  intellect, 
heart,  soul.  II.  Patient  endurance.  It  needed  patience — 1.  Because  it  had  to 
disseminate  truth.    The  stupidity,  prejudices,  and  indifferentism  of  men  call  for 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

this.  2.  Because  it  has  to  encounter  opposition.  3.  Because  patience  is  necessary 
to  wait.  The  results  of  Christian  labour  are  not  reached  at  once,  and  are  seldom 
so  manifest  as  to  compensate  the  labour  expended.  III.  The  decay  of  love.  1. 
"  Remember."  Beview  the  past,  and  call  to  mind  the  sweet,  delicate,  blooming 
affection  of  thy  first  love,  with  all  the  fresh  joys  and  hopes  it  awakened.  2. 
♦'  Repent."  This  does  not  mean  crying,  weeping,  confessing,  and  throwing  yourself 
into  ecstasies,  but  a  change  in  the  spirit  and  purpose  of  life.  3.  "  Reproduce  " — 
"  do  thy  first  work."  Go  over  thy  past  life,  reproduce  the  old  feeling,  and  re-attempt 
old  effort.  4.  "  Tremble."  Let  declension  go  on,  and  ruin  is  inevitable.  (Caleb 
Morris.)  Phases  of  Church  life  ;  the  Church  declining  in  moral  enthusiasm : 
— I.   That    the    Church  which  is    declinino    in    moral    enthusiasm    may    be 

CHARACTERISED     BY     MANY     COMMENDABLE     EXCELLENCES.  1.      This     Church       WaS 

active  in  work.  Ministerial  and  Church  work  ought  to  be  labour — 
BO  earnest  in  its  spirit  and  determined  in  its  effort  that  it  shall  not  be  mere 
occupation,  but  a  moral  anxiety.  2.  This  Church  was  patient  in  suffering. 
The  Church,  in  our  own  time,  has  great  need  of  this  virtue,  to  prayerfully 
await  the  culmination  of  all  its  purposes,  when  its  victory  shall  be  complete 
and  its  enthronement  final.  We  have  far  too  many  impatient  men  in  the  Christian 
community  who  cannot  bear  reproach  or  impediment.  3.  This  Church  was  keen 
and  true  in  moral  sensibility.  The  world  delights  in  calling  the  Church  intolerant, 
how  can  it  be  otherwise  of  evil  ?  It  cannot  smile  upon  moral  wrong.  4.  It  was 
judicious  in  the  selection  of  its  officials.  Who  these  false  apostles  were  we  cannot 
determine ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  their  credentials  were  examined  and  found  defective. 
Such  deceivers  have  existed  in  aU  ages  of  the  Church,  and  have  become  the  authors 
of  innumerable  heresies.  Christians  should  always  test  the  conduct  and  doctrine  of 
those  whose  pretences  are  great,  and  who  seek  to  obtain  authority  amongst  them ;  as 
men  will  even  lie  in  reference  to  the  most  sacred  things  of  life,  and  as  zeal  is  not 
the  only  qualification  for  moral  service.  5.  It  was  inspired  by  the  name  of  Christ. 
His  name  is  influential  with  the  pious  soul,  because  it  is  the  source  of  all  its  good 
and  hope.  11.  That  the  Church  which  is  declining  in  moral  enthusiasm  is  in  a 
MOST  serious  condition,  AND  INVITES  THE  DiviNE  REBUKE.  1.  In  what  may  the  first 
love,  or  moral  enthusiasm  ol  the  Church,  be  said  to  consist  ?  It  is,  indeed,  sad 
when  the  Church  is  beautiful  in  the  face  but  cold  at  the  heart.  2.  What  is  it  for  a 
Church  to  decline  in  first  love  or  moral  enthusiasm  ?  3.  What  is  it  that  occasions 
a  decline  in  first  love  or  moral  enthusiasm  ?  4.  What  is  it  that  Christ  has  against 
the  Church  which  declines  in  first  love  or  moral  enthusiasm  ?  He  regards  such  a 
Church  as  neglectful  of  great  privileges ;  as  guilty  of  sad  ingratitude ;  as  inexcusable 
in  its  conduct ;  and  earnestly  calls  upon  it  to  repent  and  do  its  first  works.  HI. 
That  the  Chxjrch  declining  in  moral  enthusiasm  must  earnestly  seek  the 
RENEWAL  or  ITS  FERVOUR.  1.  A  ChuTch  in  such  a  condition  must  have  a  vivid 
remembrance  of  its  past  glory.  2.  A  Church  in  such  a  condition  must  have  deep 
contrition  of  soul.  3.  A  Church  in  such  a  condition  must  repeat  the  loving 
activities  of  its  new  and  early  life.    IV.  That  the  Church  neglecting  to  regain 

•THE  MORAL  ENTHUSIASM  OF  ITS  EARLY  LITE  WILL  MEET  WITH  TERRIBLE  RETRIBUTION.     1. 

The  retribution  of  such  a  Church  will  consist  in  the  solemn  visitation  of  Christ.  It 
means  affliction — it  may  be  judgment.  2.  The  retribution  of  such  a  Church 
will  consist  in  woful  obliteration.     V.  That  the  Church  declining  in  moral 

ENTHUSIASM   SHOULD   GIVE   TIMELY   HEED   TO   THE    THREATENED   RETRIBUTIONS   OF   GOD. 

Lessons :  1.  That  the  Church  is  surrounded  by  many  hostile  influences.  2. 
That  the  Church  should,  above  all  things,  seek  to  retain  its  moral  enthusiasm. 
3.  That  the  discipline  of  heaven  toward  the  Church  is  for  its  moral  welfare, 
but,  if  not  attended  to,  will  issue  in  great  dejection.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
These  things  saith  He  who  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand,  who 
"walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks. — Christ's  care  in  glory  for 
His  Church's  good  on  earth : — I.  Why  is  the  Church  called  a  candlestick  ?  1.  A 
candlestick  hath  no  light  in  it  of  itself,  but  light  must  be  put  into  it :  and  therefore  in 
the  case  of  the  candlestick  under  the  law,  to  which  this  here  is  an  allusion,  the 
priests  were  to  light  the  candles.  2.  The  use  of  a  candlestick  is  for  no  other  end 
than  to  hold  up  and  hold  out  the  light,  and  to  this  very  end  the  Lord  hath  insti- 
tuted Churches.  3.  A  candlestick  is  a  thing  movable,  and  with  the  removing  of 
the  candlestick  you  carry  away  the  light ;  the  Lord  removes  the  candlestick  from 
place  to  place ;  though  the  land  remain,  the  Church  is  gone,  that  is  a  dangerous 
judgment :  not  only  an  immediate  removing  of  the  ordinances,  but  of  the  Church, 
for  which  all  ordinances  were  appointed ;  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  103 

them.  4.  It  is  an  allusion  unto  the  candlestick  under  the  law  in  the  tabernacle,  in 
Exod.  XXV.  31,  which  was  a  type  of  the  Church  of  God.  11.  Why  is  the  Church 
CALLED  A  GOLDEN  CANDLESTICK  ?  1.  Becausc  gold  is  the  puicst  metal,  and  the 
Lord  will  have  His  Church  such ;  they  shall  differ  as  much  from  other  men  as 
gold  doth  from  the  common  clay  in  the  streets.  2.  Because  gold  of  all  metals 
is  the  most  precious,  and  of  the  highest  esteem ;  there  is  as  much  difference  between 
the  Church  of  God  and  other  men  as  there  is  between  gold  and  dirt  in  the  street ; 
as  between  diamonds  and  pebbles  in  the  Lord's  esteem.     III.  How  is  Christ  said 

TO  WALK  in  the  MIDST  OF  THE  GOLDEN  CANDLESTICK  ?      It  dcnotCS    a   promisC   of    espC- 

cial  presence  and  fellowship ;  this  is  the  promise  that  the  Lord  made  unto  the 
Jews  (Lev.  xxvi.  12).  1.  There  is  a  gracious  presence  of  Christ  with  His  Church 
in  aU  Church  administrations.  2.  There  is  the  great  glory  of  God  to  be  seen  in 
heaven  ;  and  you  shall  find  that  there  is  a  great  resemblance  between  His  presence 
in  His  Church  and  in  glory  (Heb.  xii.  22,  23).  (1)  Christ  in  heaven  is  present  in 
majesty  and  glory ;  it  is  called  the  throne  of  His  glory,  and  such  is  His  presence 
in  His  Church  too,  and  therefore  observe  it,  He  is  said  to  sit  upon  a  high  throne 
in  the  midst  of  His  Churches  (Kev.  iv.  3).  (2)  In  heaven  the  Lord  is  present  as 
revealing  His  mind  and  will  unto  His  people ;  there  we  shall  know  as  we  are 
known  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  and  so  He  is  present  in  the  midst  of  His  people  (Deut. 
xxiii.  3).  (3)  In  heaven  there  shall  be  a  glorious  and  full  communication  of  all 
grace ;  as  your  communion  shall  then  be  perfect  with  Him,  so  shall  the  communi- 
cation of  all  His  grace  be  to  you.  (4)  In  heaven  the  soul  is  wholly  as  it  were 
resolved  into  God,  that  is,  God  wholly  takes  up  the  whole  soul.  (5)  In  heaven 
there  is  the  presence  of  Christ  among  His  saints  and  angels.  Application:  1. 
How  should  this  command  reverence  in  every  soul  of  you  when  you  come  to  have 
to  do  with  any  Church  administrations  !  2.  Is  there  such  a  gracious  presence  of 
Christ  in  Gospel  administrations,  labour  to  see  it  there,  labour  to  have  your  souls 
affected  with  the  spiritual  presence  or  absence  of  Christ  there.  3.  Kemember 
Christ  is  present,  but  He  is  present  in  holiness.  4.  Take  notice  He  is  present  in 
jealousy.  (1)  If  you  come  at  an  adventure  with  God  in  Church  administrations, 
the  greatest  temporal  judgments  shall  be  inflicted  upon  you  (Ezek.  x.  2).  (2) 
If  the  Lord  spare  you  in  temporal  judgments.  He  will  pour  out  spiritual  judg- 
ments. {Wm.  Strong.)  The  seven  stars  and  the  seven  candlesticks : — I.  The 
Churches  and  their  servants.  I  see  in  the  relations  between  these  men  and  the 
little  communities  to  which  they  belonged,  an  example  of  what  should  be  found 
existing  between  all  congregations  of  faithful  men  and  the  officers  whom  they  have 
chosen,  be  the  form  of  their  polity  what  it  may.  1.  The  messengers  are  rulers. 
They  are  described  in  a  double  manner — by  a  name  which  expresses  subordina- 
tion, and  by  a  figure  which  expresses  authority.  The  higher  are  exalted  that 
they  may  serve  the  lower.  Dignity  and  authority  mean  liberty  for  more  and  more 
self -forgetting  work.  Power  binds  its  possessor  to  toU.  Wisdom  is  stored  in  one, 
that  from  him  it  may  flow  to  the  foolish ;  strength  is  given  that  by  its  holder 
feeble  hands  may  be  stayed.  Noblesse  oblige.  The  King  Himself  has  obeyed  the 
law.  We  are  redeemed  because  He  came  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a  ran- 
som for  many.  He  is  among  us  "  as  He  that  serveth."  God  Himself  has  obeyed 
the  law.  He  is  above  all  that  He  may  bless  all.  He,  the  highest,  stoops  the  most 
deeply.  His  dominion  is  built  on  love,  and  stands  in  giving.  And  that  law  which 
makes  the  throne  of  God  the  refuge  of  all  the  weak,  and  the  treasury  of  all  the  poor, 
is  given  for  our  guidance  in  our  humble  measure.  But  to  be  servant  of  all  does  not 
mean  to  do  the  bidding  of  all.  The  service  which  imitates  Christ  is  helpfulness,  not 
subjection.  Neither  the  Church  is  to  lord  it  over  the  messenger  nor  the  messenger 
over  the  Church.  All  alike  are  by  love  to  serve  one  another ;  counting  every  possession, 
material,  intellectual,  and  spiritual,  as  given  for  the  general  good.  The  one  guid- 
ing principle  is,  "  He  that  is  chiefest  among  you,  let  him  be  your  servant,"  and  the 
other,  which  guards  this  from  misconstruction  and  abuse  from  either  side,  "  One  is 
your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are  brethren."  2.  The  messengers  and  the 
Churches  have  at  bottom  the  same  work  to  do.  Stars  shine,  so  do  lamps.  Light 
comes  from  both,  in  different  fashion  indeed,  and  of  a  different  quality,  but  still 
both  are  lights.  The  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  for  the 
same  purpose, — to  do  good  with.  And  we  have  all  one  office  and  function  to  be 
discharged  by  each  in  his  own  fashion — namely,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Chiist  Jesus.  3.  The  Churches  and  their 
messengers  are  alike  in  their  religious  condition  and  character.  The  successive 
letters  treat  his  strength  or  weakness,  his  fervour  or  coldness,  his  sin  or  victory 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

over  evil,  as  being  theirs.  He  represents  them  completely.  Is  it  not  true  that  the 
religious  condition  of  a  Church,  and  that  of  its  leaders,  teachers,  pastors,  ever  tend 
to  be  the  same,  as  that  of  the  level  of  water  in  two  connected  vessels  ?  Thank 
God  for  the  many  instances  in  which  one  glowing  soul,  all  aflame  with  love  of 
God,  has  sufficed  to  kindle  a  whole  heap  of  dead  matter,  and  send  it  leaping  sky- 
ward in  ruddy  brightness  I  Alas  !  for  the  many  instances  in  which  the  wet  green 
wood  has  been  too  strong  for  the  little  spark,  and  has  not  only  obstinately  resisted, 
but  has  ignominiously  quenched  its  ineffectual  fire !  II.  The  Churches  and  theib 
WORK.  1.  The  Church  is  to  be  light.  (1)  "  Light  is  light,  which  circulates."  The 
substance  which  is  lit  cannot  but  shine ;  and  if  we  have  any  real  possession  of  the 
truth,  we  cannot  but  impart  it ;  and  if  we  have  any  real  illumination  from  the 
Lord,  who  is  the  light,  we  cannot  but  give  it  forth.  (2)  Then  think  again  how 
silent  and  gentle,  though  so  mighty,  is  the  action  of  the  light.  So  should  we  live 
and  work,  clothing  all  our  power  in  tenderness,  doing  our  work  in  quietness,  dis- 
turbing nothing  but  the  darkness,  and  with  silent  increase  of  beneficent  power 
filling  and  flooding  the  dark  earth  with  healing  beams.  (3)  Then  think  again 
that  heaven's  light  itself  invisible,  and  revealing  all  things,  reveals  not  itself.  The 
source  you  can  see,  but  not  the  beams.  So  we  are  to  shine,  not  showing  ourselves 
but  our  master.  2., The  Church's  light  is  derived  light.  Two  things  are  needed 
for  the  burning  of  a  lamp  :  that  it  should  be  lit,  and  that  it  should  be  fed.  In  both 
respects  the  light  with  which  we  shine  is  derived.  We  are  not  suns,  we  are  moons ; 
reflected,  not  self -originated,  is  all  our  radiance.  That  is  true  in  all  senses  of  the 
figure ;  it  is  truest  in  the  highest.  In  ourselves  we  are  darkness,  and  only  as  we 
hold  fellowship  with  Christ  do  we  become  capable  of  giving  forth  any  rays  of 
light.  He  is  the  source,  we  are  but  reservoirs.  He  the  fountain,  we  only  cisterns. 
He  must  walk  amidst  the  candlesticks,  or  they  will  never  shine.  Their  lamps 
had  gone  out,  and  their  end  was  darkness.  Oh !  let  us  beware  lest  by  any  sloth 
and  sin  we  choke  the  golden  pipes  through  which  there  steals  into  our  tiny  lamps 
the  soft  flow  of  that  Divine  oil  which  alone  can  keep  up  the  flame.  3.  The 
Church's  light  is  blended  or  clustered  light.  Union  of  heart,  union  of  effort  is 
commended  to  us  by  this  symbol  of  our  text.  The  great  law  is,  work  together  if 
you  would  work  with  strength.  To  separate  ourselves  from  our  brethren  is  to  lose 
power.  Why,  half  dead  brands  heaped  close  will  kindle  one  another,  and  flame 
will  sparkle  beneath  the  film  of  white  ashes  on  their  edges.  Fling  them  apart  and 
they  go  out.  Eake  them  together  and  they  glow.  III.  The  Churches  and  theib 
Lord.  He  it  is  who  holds  the  stars  in  His  right  hand,  and  walks  among  the 
candlesticks.  The  symbols  are  but  the  pictorial  equivalent  of  His  own  parting 
promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always  "  !  That  presence  is  a  plain  literal  fact,  how- 
ever feebly  we  lay  hold  of  it.  It  is  not  to  be  watered  down  into  a  strong  expression 
for  the  abiding  influence  of  Christ's  teaching  or  example,  nor  even  to  mean  the 
constant  benefits  which  flow  to  us  from  His  work,  nor  the  presence  of  His  loving 
thoughts  with  us.  The  presence  of  Christ  with  His  Church  is  analogous  to  the 
Divine  presence  in  the  material  universe.  As  in  it,  the  presence  of  God  is  the 
condition  of  all  life ;  and  if  He  were  not  here,  there  were  no  beings  and  no  "  here"  : 
so  in  the  Church,  Christ's  presence  constitutes  and  sustains  it,  and  without  Him  it 
would  cease.  So  St.  Augustine  says,  "Where  Christ,  there  the  Church."  For 
what  purpose  is  He  there  with  His  Churches  ?  The  text  assures  us  that  it  is  to 
hold  up  and  to  bless.  His  unwearied  hand  sustains.  His  unceasing  activity  moves 
among  them.  But  beyond  these  purposes,  or  rather  included  in  them,  the  vision 
of  which  the  text  is  the  interpretation  brings  into  great  prominence  the  thought 
that  He  is  with  us  to  observe,  to  judge,  and,  if  need  be,  to  punish.  Thank  God 
for  the  chastising  presence  of  Christ.  He  loves  us  too  well  not  to  smite  us  when 
we  need  it.  He  wiU  not  be  so  cruelly  kind,  so  foolishly  fond,  as  in  any  wise  to 
suffer  sin  upon  us.  Better  the  eye  of  fire  than  the  averted  face.  He  Idves  us  still, 
and  has  not  cast  us  away  from  His  presence.  Nor  let  us  forget  how  much  of  hope 
and  encouragement  lies  in  the  examples,  which  these  seven  Churches  afford,  of  His 
long-suffering  patience.  That  presence  was  granted  to  them  all,  the  best  and  the 
worst, — the  decaying  love  of  Ephesus,  the  licentious  heresies  of  Pergamos  and 
Thyatira,  the  all  but  total  deadness  of  Sardis,  and  the  self-satisfied  indifference  of 
Laodicea,  concerning  which  even  He  could  say  nothing  that  was  good.  All  had 
Him  with  them  as  really  as  the  faithful  Smyrna  and  the  steadfast  Philadelphia. 
We  have  no  right  to  say  with  how  much  of  theoretical  error  and  practical  sin  the 
lingering  presence  of  that  patient  pitying  Lord  may  consist.  For  others  our  duty 
is  the  widest  charity, — for  ourselves  the  most  careful  watchfulness.    For  these  seven 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  105 

Churches  teach  ns  another  lesson — the  possibility  of  quenched  lamps  and  ruined 
shrines.   {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)       Christ's  care  over  Churches  and  ministers  : — I.  What 

18  MEANT  BY  OUR  LoBD's  HOLDING  THE  STABS,  HiS  MINISTEE8,  IN  HiS  HAND.     1.  It  implies 

that  it  is  He  who  appoints  them  to  their  office.   2.  It  is  He  who  imparts  the  quaUfica- 
tions  which  are  necessary  for  the  effectual  discharge  of  their  office.   3.  They  are,  with 
all  their  concerns,  at  His  absolute  disposal.    II.  The  import  op  His  walking  in  the 
MIDST  OF  THE  GOLDEN  CANDLESTICKS.     1.  It  imports  an  accuratc  impression  of  the 
state,  both  as  a  society  and  as  individuals.     2.  It  implies  that  His  business,  so  to 
speak,  lies  in  the  management  of  His  Churches.    It  is  His  "  building,"  His  "  hus- 
bandry."   3.  It  denotes  the  complacency  He   takes  in  them.     (R.  Hall,  M.A.) 
Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ? — The  mention  made  of  *'  stars  "  and  "  candlesticks" 
(or  rather  "  lamp-stands  ")  shows  that  it  is  night.    It  is  the  world's  night ;  it  is  the 
Church's  night.    Day  needs  no  lamps  nor  stars  ;  night  does  both,  for  the  outside 
earth  and  the  inside  chamber.     I.  Who  is  He  that  thus  walketh?    It  is  as 
Priest  and  King  that  He  appears  in  the  midst  of  His  Churches  :  as  such  they  are  to 
acknowledge  Him.     In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  we  see  Him  specially  as  Priest ; 
in  the  Book  of  Kevelation  as  King.    11.  Where  does  He  walk?    Among  the 
seven  golden  candlesticks.    III.  What  does  this  walking  mean?    1.  He  is  near. 
A  present  Christ  is  specially  taught  us  here — Jesus  in  the  midst  of  His  saints  and 
His  Churches.   He  is  near  to  all  of  them,  even  the  backsliding ;  as  near  to  Laodicea 
and  Sardis  as  to  Ephesus  and  Philadelphia.    2.  He  watches  over  them.    "  I  know 
thy  works."    His  eye,  the  eye  of  the  watchful  Priest  and  King,  the  eye  of  the 
watchful  Saviour  and  Shepherd,  is  upon  them.    He  inspects  them,  oversees  them, 
cares  for  them,  values  them,  delights  in  them,  takes  an  interest  in  their  welfare. 
3.  He  supplies  their  need.    All  His  fulness  is  at  hand  for  each  of  them.    4.  He 
mourns  over  their  sins.    His  holy  eye  detects  the  sin ;  His  loving  heart  mourns 
over  it.    There  is  no  anger,  no  fury  here.    All  is  gentleness  and  grace.    5.  He 
cheers  them  with  the  promise  of  victory  and  recompense.    As  if  He  would  say  to 
each,  "  Fight  on,  for  I  am  with  you ;  faint  not,  for  I,  with  aU  My  fulness,  am  near. 
Shine  on,  for  I  delight  in  your  brightness,  and  will  enable  you  to  shine.    And  My 
reward  is  with  Me :  to  him  that  overcometh !  "    {H.  Bonar^  D.D.)        I  know  thy 
works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy  patience. — False  apostles  : — 1.  Christ  would  have 
ns  always  walking  in  the  sense  of  His  Omniscience.    2.  Christ  is  an  unprejudged 
witness,  as  He  taketh  notice  of  their  good  as  well  as  their  evil.      3.  Such  as 
Christ  never  called,  may  take  on  them  highest  titles  in  the  Church,  as  it  seemeth 
these  had  who  called  themselves  apostles.    4.  That  diligence  in  duty,  and  diffi- 
culty in  the  performance  of  it,  often  go  together :  to  do  and  to  bear  are  often 
joined.     6.  Patience  in  suffering,  and  impatience  against  corruptions  and  corrupt 
men,  can  well  stand  together.    6.  There  is  no  name,  privilege,  or  title  that  should 
scare  people,  especially  the  ministers  of  God,  from  searching  or  trying  corrupt 
men,  that  bring  corrupt  doctrine,  though  they  should  have  the  pretext  of  apostles, 
and  had  never  so  great  gifts.    7.  If  folks  will  put  to  proof  many  things  and 
persons  that  have  fair  names,  they  will  be  found  very  unlike  the  names  they  take. 
8.  The  censuring  of  corrupt  unsent  ministers  is  a  most  difficult  task,  what  from 
their  nature,  and  sometimes  from  their  parts  ;  what  from  the  addictedness  of  many 
unto  them,  yet  it  is  a  special  duty :  yet  that  it  is  acceptable  before  Jesus  Christ 
may  appear  from  these  considerations.     (1)  That  the  Scripture  holdeth  forth  no 
kind  of  persons  as  more  abominable  in  tnemselves  and  more  hateful  to  Him 
(Isa.  Ivi.  10).     (2)  There  is  no  kind  of  persons  that  prove  more  dishonourable  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  and  to  His  gospel  than  such :  these  make  the  law  to  be  despised. 
(3)  The  scandalous  unfaithfulness  of  ministers  brings  a  special  blot  upon  all 
religion,  as  if  it  were  but  mere  hypocrisy.     (4)  There  is  no  such  contempt  done  to 
our  Lord  Jesus,  as  for  one  to  pretend  to  have  commission  from  Him ;  and  yet  to 
be  running  unsent  by  Him  ;  or,  having  gotten  commission,  to  miscarry  by  unfaith- 
fulness in   it.     (5)  As  there  is  a  suitableness  in  the  censuring  of  such  Church- 
officers  to  Christ's  mind,  so  there  doth  appear  in  the  same  a  tenderness  of  and 
zeal  unto  His  glory.    Hence  it  is,  that  His  most  zealous  servants,  as  Elias,  Paul, 
did  set  themselves  most  against  that  generation.     (6)  There  is  no  sort  of  men  more 
hurtful  to  the  Church.     (7)  Not  only  is  there  an  obstruction  to  godliness  by  such, 
but  they  have  a  main  influence  upon  the  advancing  of  profanity.     (James  Durham.) 
What  Christ  likes  to  see  in  a  Church : — 1.  Jesus  likes  to  see  a  Church  at  work.    He 
does  not  like  to  see  a  Church  standing  still,  doing  nothing  to  lengthen  its  cords  and 
strengthen  its  stakes.     It  is  our  duty  to  ask  ourselves,  Does  om  work  as  a  Church 
come  up  to  the  standard  of  what  a  Christian  Church  ought  to  be  ?    2.  He  likes  also 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  see  His  people  patient.  He  likes  to  see  them  labouring  and  not  fainting,  not 
becoming  weary  in  well-doing.  He  likes  to  see  them  continuing  instant  in  prayer, 
depending  on  Him  to  send  the  answer  in  His  own  good  time.  3.  Then,  also,  He 
likes  to  see  within  His  Church  a  zeal  for  truth.  "  Thou  canst  not  bear  them  which 
are  evil."  The  dread  of  being  thought  narrow-minded,  or  of  giving  offence  to  the 
godless,  makes  the  Church  become  far  too  tolerant  of  sin.  No  society  of  men  is 
considered  strict  or  narrow-minded  if  it  has  certain  rules  of  membership,  and  if  it 
expels  those  who  violate  its  rules.  Why  should  the  Christian  Church  be  afraid  or 
ashamed  to  maintain  a  discipline  which  even  the  societies  of  the  world  will  carry 
out  ?  Let  us  try  to  imitate  the  Church  of  Ephesus  in  this — and  let  us  not  be  afraid 
of  the  charge  of  intolerance  in  doing  so — that  we  cannot  bear  them  who  are  evil. 
(C.  H.  Irwin,  M.A.)  Religion  active  : — The  new  creature  is  not  a  marble  statue 
or  a  transparent  piece  of  crystal,  which  has  purity  but  not  life.  It  is  a  living  spirit, 
and  therefore  active.  {S.  Charnock.)  Unwearied  patience: — Patience  must  not 
be  an  inch  shorter  than  affliction.  If  the  bridge  reach  but  half  way  over  the  brook, 
we  shaU  have  but  an  ill-favoured  passage.  (T.  Adams.)  And  thou  hast  tried 
them  which  say  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not,  and  hast  found  them  liars. — The 
false  apostle  tried  and  discovered : — What  a  dangerous  and  mischievous  people  false 
teachers  and  false  apostles  are.  They  do  deceive  men  in  the  matter  of  their  souls  ; 
they  are  called  deceivers  and  seducers  (John  ii.  7 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  13),  and  deceitful 
workers  (2  Cor.  xi.  13,  6).  Now  a  man  loves  not  to  be  deceived  in  anything,  no,  not 
in  a  small  matter.  If  I  had  spent  or  given  away  much  more,  it  would  never  have 
grieved  me,  you  say ;  but  I  cannot  endure  to  be  cheated  and  deceived.  And  if  a  man 
cannot  endure  to  be  deceived  in  lesser  things,  what  an  evil  thing  is  it  then  to  be 
deceived  in  the  matters  of  his  soul  ?  Such  are  the  things  that  these  false  teachers 
do  deceive  men  in ;  yea,  they  will  and  do  subvert  men's  faith,  and  spoil  them  of  the 
very  fundamentals  of  their  religion.  Though  they  be  a  dangerous  and  mischievous 
people,  yet  it  is  an  hard  thing  to  discover  them,  for  they  walk  in  the  dark,  and 
transform  themselves  into  ministers  of  light;  they  creep,  and  they  privily  creep  into 
houses,  saith  the  apostle  ;  and  they  will  come  to  you,  saith  our  Saviour,  in  sheep's 
clothing  (Matt.  vii.  15).  That  is,  look  whatever  garb  the  true  prophet  was  or  is 
found  in,  that  will  they  be  found  in  also.  Did  the  true  apostles  preach  Christ  ?  so 
did  the  false  apostles  also  (Phil.  i.  15,  16).  Did  the  true  apostles  and  prophets 
declare  the  deep  things  of  God?  (1  Cor.  ii.  10),  so  did  the  false  prophets  also 
(chap.  ii.  24).  Look  what  that  is  which  the  true  preachers  do,  that  will  false  teachers 
in  appearance  do.  The  same  crow  of  iron,  the  same  scripture  that  is  in  the  hand  of 
a  friend,  is  made  use  of  by  a  heretic,  one  that  is  a  thief,  who  comes  to  make  a  prey 
of  your  faith.  All  teachers  are  to  be  tried  three  ways.  By  their  call;  their 
doctrine  ;  their  fruits  or  lives.  And  thus  you  see  how  those  that  are  false  apostles, 
or  false  teachers,  may  be  tried  and  discovered.  And  is  it  a  commendable  thing  in 
the  eyes  of  Christ  to  make  discovery  of  them  ?  That  it  is  the  special  work  of  Church 
officers  to  try  and  discover  false  teachers  ;  for  this  epistle  is  directed  to  the  angel  of 
the  Church  of  Ephesus.  But  though  it  is  their  work  especially,  yet  it  is  a  work 
incumbent  upon  all  the  saints  and  Churches.  Therefore,  yet  more  practically,  go  to 
God  for  wisdom  and  the  spirit  of  discerning  ;  it  is  Christ  alone  that  doth  see  men's 
fruit  under  all  their  leaves :  beg  this  discerning  spirit,  therefore,  at  the  hands  o£ 
Christ.  Take  heed  that  you  do  not  lie  in  any  sin  or  error,  for  all  sin  and  error 
blinds.  How  shall  you  see  the  error  of  another,  if  you  be  blinded  with  your  own 
sin  and  error  ?  Be  sure  that  you  keep  to  the  Scripture,  and  take  heed  that  you  do 
not  judge  of  doctrines  by  impressions.  Take  heed  that  you  have  not  too  great  a 
charity  towards,  and  opinion  of,  those  that  are  suspected  to  be  false  teachers.  And 
if  you  would  be  sure  to  make  up  a  right  judgment  in  this  great  discovery,  then  stay 
your  time,  ard  wait  long  before  you  close  with  any  of  their  opinions ;  for  saith 
Christ,  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruit.  Now  the  fruit  of  a  tree  is  not  presently 
seen ;  an  ill  tree  in  winter  may  seem  to  be  as  good  as  the  best :  stay  therefore  your 
time.  {W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Hatred  of  evil  essential  to  love  : — This  hate  (of  evil)  is 
as  essential  to  true  love  as  shade  to  light,  ever  deepening  with  the  intensity  of  it. 
{Isaac  Williams.)  For  My  name's  sake  hast  laboured,  and  hast  not  fainted.— 
Labouring  and  not  fainting  : — I.  The  positive  and  negative  good  herb  combined. 
1.  "  Thou  hast  laboured."  To  labour  means  hard  work,  vigorous  action.  Men  may 
work,  but  yet  not  labour,  and  I  fear  there  are  many  who  claim  to  be  working  men 
who  do  not  often  trouble  themselves  with  anything  approaching  to  "  labour."  There 
are  also  working  Christians  who  do  not  approach  to  labouring ;  yet  a  lifetime  of  such 
work  as  theirs  would  not  exhaust  a  butterfly.     Now,  when  a  man  works  for  Christ 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  107 

he  should  work  with  all  his  might.  If  any  master  is  to  be  served  badly,  let  it  not 
be  our  Master  who  is  in  heaven :  we  owe  Him  too  much  to  wish  to  be  eyeservants 
towards  Him.  K  anywhere  a  dilatory  servant  may  be  excused,  certainly  it  cannot 
be  in  the  service  of  Him  who  redeemed  us  with  His  most  precious  blood.  K  I  may 
use  the  figure,  we  ought  to  employ  every  particle  of  our  steam  power :  we  should 
drive  the  engine  at  high  pressure  ;  we  have  no  force  that  can  be  allowed  to  escape  in 
waste.  But  labour  implies  not  merely  strong  effort,  but  a  continuance  of  it,  for  a 
man  might  take  up  a  workman's  tool  and  for  a  few  minutes  make  a  mighty  show  of 
effort,  and  yet  be  no  labourer,  unless  he  kept  on  working  until  his  task  was  done. 
He  merely  plays  at  labour,  that  is  all.  So  have  we  known  too  many  whose  service 
for  God  has  been  occasional ;  fits  and  starts  of  effort  they  have,  but  they  are  soon 
over  ;  their  spasmodic  zeal  is  to-day  so  hot  as  to  be  well  nigh  fanatical,  and  to-morrow 
it  will  be  succeeded  by  an  indifference  far  more  astounding.  K  the  Church  is  said 
to  labour,  it  means  that  she  puts  forth  all  her  strength  as  a  regular  thing.  Like  the 
sun  and  moon  she  continues  in  her  orbit  of  duty.  She  keeps  at  her  life-work ;  with 
all  her  might  she  continues  in  well-doing,  and  is  not  weary.  There  is  the  positive 
good.  2.  The  negative  crowns  the  positive — "  And  hast  not  fainted."  Now,  there 
are  different  degrees  of  fainting.  Some  may  be  said  to  faint  comparatively  when 
they  flag  in  exertion.  They  drop  from  running  to  walking,  from  diligence  to 
indolence.  They  did  run  well ;  what  did  hinder  them  ?  Many  continue  to  do  as 
much  as  ever  they  did  outwardly,  yet  their  heart  is  not  in  it,  and  so  they  faint. 
Some  flag  by  growing  weak  in  all  they  do.  They  do  put  forth  such  force  as  they 
have,  but  they  are  essentially  feeble.  The  power  of  God  has  departed  from  them, 
and,  though  they  may  not  know  it,  Ichabod  is  written  upon  their  works.  Too  many 
go  further  than  this  ;  they  renounce  all  or  a  large  part  of  the  Christian  work  they 
were  accustomed  to  do.  Content  with  the  efforts  of  other  days  they  surrender  to  the 
sluggard's  vice.  And  some  go  even  further  than  that,  for  after  retiring  from  labour 
themselves,  they  cease  to  have  any  care  about  the  Lord's  work.  II.  Excuses  for 
FAINTING.  1.  There  are  some  who  faint  in  the  work  of  God  because  the  work  itself 
has  proved  very  tedious  to  them.  When  they  first  undertook  it  and  the  novelty  wag 
upon  it  they  did  not  tire,  but  now  the  freshness  is  gone,  and  they  have  come  into  the 
real  wear  and  tear  of  it,  they  do  not  enjoy  it  quite  so  much  as  they  thought  they 
should.  They  hoped  for  an  office  in  which  the  chief  labour  should  be  to  gather 
Ulies,  or  lie  upon  beds  of  roses.  The  service  of  the  Crucified  is  far  less  romantic, 
and  far  more  laborious.  There  is  no  royal  road  to  eminence  in  anything,  it  is 
always  uphill  work  and  rough  climbing ;  and  certainly  there  is  no  such  road  in  the 
service  of  God.  2.  Other  excuses,  however,  will  be  sure  to  come,  and  amongst  them 
this,  that  we  have  been  disappointed  up  till  now  in  the  success  of  what  we  have 
attempted.  We  have  sown,  but  the  most  of  the  seed  has  fallen  upon  the  wayside,  or 
upon  the  rocks.  We  must  not  give  up  the  war  because  we  have  not  conquered  yet, 
but  fight  on  till  we  can  seize  the  victory.  Let  us  not  be  weary  in  well-doing,  for  in 
due  season  we  shall  reap  if  we  faint  not.  3.  Another  set  of  excuses  I  must  mention. 
They  are  little,  pettish,  pitiful,  proud  excuses,  but  they  are  very  common.  Here  is 
one.  "  I  shall  leave  the  work,  for  I  am  sure  I  am  not  appreciated  as  I  ought  to  be.** 
Do  you  mean  to  give  way  to  such  pettiness  and  silliness  ?  If  so,  I  have  done  with 
you,  for  you  will  never  do  any  good  in  this  world.  The  slave  of  such  a  mean  feeling 
is  incapable  of  being  free.  "  Ah,"  cries  another,  "  my  complaint  is  more  reason- 
able, for  I  am  discouraged  because  no  one  aids  me  in  my  work."  Oh,  my  brother, 
does  your  life  after  all  depend  upon  the  breath  of  other  men's  nostrils  ?  Has 
it  come  to  this,  that  you  cannot  live  upon  the  approbation  of  your  Master  unless 
you  gain  also  the  smile  of  your  fellow-servants  ?  III.  The  real  causes  of  fainting. 
1.  The  first  is  an  actual  decline  in  spiritual  strength.  It  is  not  merely  that  you  do 
not  do  so  much,  it  is  that  you  are  not  so  much ;  you  have  not  the  amount  of  life  in 
you  which  you  once  had.  And  is  not  this  a  sad  thing  ?  Oh,  to  be  dead  to  these 
spiritual  realities  in  any  degree  is  a  dreadful  death,  and  to  be  callous  to  holy  things 
is  a  terrible  hardness.  May  God  keep  us  from  spiritual  insensibility,  and  may  we 
be  sensitive  to  the  faintest  motion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  It  is  to  be  feared,  also, 
that  those  who  faint  have  lost  their  reliance  upon  Divine  power,  at  least  in  a  degree. 
Confidence  in  God  makes  us  strong,  but  by  turning  away  from  our  great  unseen 
Helper,  we  straightway  begin  to  faint.  3.  Moreover,  I  am  afraid  that  we  forget  that 
the  Lord  requires  of  us  an  unselfish  dedication  to  His  service,  and  that  we  do  not 
serve  Him  at  all  unless  His  glory  is  our  chief  object.  You  must  feel  that  you  would 
have  the  Lord  use  you  just  as  in  His  infinite  wisdom  He  sees  fit  to  do.  You  should 
be  a  piece  of  iron  on  the  Almighty's  anvil :  to  be  welded  into  a  sceptre,  if  He  chooses 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

with  you  to  break  the  potter's  vessels ;  to  be  beaten  into  a  ploughshare  and  plunged 
into  the  earth,  if  by  you  He  means  to  turn  up  the  furrows  of  the  fallow  ground  ;  or 
fashioned  into  a  spear-point,  if  by  you  He  intends  to  smite  His  enemies.  IV.  I  have 
A  LITTLE  MEDICAL  BUSINESS  to  do  in  closing.  Four  sorts  of  persons  are  very  common 
among  us.  To  each  of  these  four  I  desire  to  administer  a  little  medicine.  1.  There 
are  some  who  neither  labour  nor  faint.  2.  The  next  sort  of  persons  to  be  dealt  with  are 
those  who  faint  but  do  not  labour.  3.  Our  third  patient  is  one  who  did  labour  once,  but 
has  fainted.  4.  But  there  are  some  who  labour  and  are  ready  to  faint.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Endurance  : — To  lift  up  some  heavy  weight  from  the  ground  argues  some  strength ; 
but  to  carry  it  for  an  hour,  or  all  day,  is  a  more  perfect  thing.  {Thomai  Manton.) 
Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love. — Inward  deterioration : — Does  it  not  often  happen  in 
the  Christian  life  that  the  soul  retains  earnestness,  patience,  truth,  endurance, 
a  hatred  of  evil,  long  after  it  has  left  its  first  love ;  that  its  religious  service  is 
continued,  apparently  unaltered,  while  the  spirit  that  prompted  that  service  is 
changed  for  the  worse?  But  though  love  is  altered,  there  may  yet  remain  the 
sense  of  duty.  None  without  can  detect  the  difference.  The  soul  itself  is  perhaps 
hardly  conscious  of  it.  Or  if  conscious  of  anything,  it  is  that  prayer  is  not  so  easy 
and  pleasant  as  it  used  to  be,  that  the  thoughts  are  more  wandering,  that  tempta- 
tion is  more  attractive,  and  thanksgiving  is  irksome,  unreal,  and  unblessed.  The 
whole  tendency  of  our  being  is  to  deteriorate.  Most  of  us  can  remember  a  time  at 
which  we  think  we  were  more  fit  to  die  than  we  are  now.  Our  self-examination 
has  told  us  that  we  are  not  now  what  we  were ;  and  perhaps  self-examination  was 
hardly  necessary  for  the  acquirement  of  this  knowledge.  It  is  forced  upon  us  con- 
tinually throughout  the  day  as  we  feel  and  act  so  coldly  towards  good,  so  readUy 
and  kindly  towards  evil.  Now  if  it  be  really  that  we  have  fallen  back  only  one 
Btep  in  faith  and  love,  if  we  have  left  our  first  love,  what  must  we  do  ?  We  must 
struggle  against  the  languor  which  threatens  to  benumb  us.  We  must  struggle  with 
all  our  might,  not  giving  up  any  one  duty  merely  because  it  is  irksome.  This  may 
not  indeed  be  restoration,  but  it  will  at  least  maintain  that  communication  with 
the  Source  of  all  strength  by  which  restoration  may  be  looked  for.  When  we 
have  realised  what  we  once  were,  and  reflect  that  by  God's  grace  we  might  have 
lived  the  rest  of  our  lives  according  to  that  beginning,  and  neared  the  goal  in  the 
heavenward  race,  then  we  may  be  able  to  measure  our  decline,  and,  weeping  over 
what  we  have  lost,  pray  for  grace  to  regain  it.  *'  And  repent."  Yes !  this  must  be. 
We  will  not  trust  in  that  which  remains,  in  our  hatred  of  the  worst  sins,  in 
sympathy  with  Him,  not  in  our  works,  or  our  labour,  or  our  patience,  our  distrust  of 
false  teachers,  our  perseverance  under  trial.  These  are  nothing  without  love.  We 
will  confess  that  other  lords  besides  Him  have  had  dominion  over  us.  We  will  confess 
that  we  have  left  our  first  love,  and  implore  Him  to  recover  us,  and  turn  our  hearts. 
{W.  Mitchell,  M.A.)  The  enthusiasm  of  the  first  love: — I.  What  is  it?  Most 
of  us  can  probably  remember  an  early  enthusiastic  preference  or  affection  for  some 
one.  It  was  like  nothing  else  in  our  lives.  It  stirred  in  us  as  the  spring  stirs  in 
the  earth  when  the  green  shoots  appear.  New  capacities  of  working,  enjoying, 
suffering,  began  to  reveal  themselves.  Now,  the  same  thing  happens  when  Christ 
and  His  love  are  first  revealed  to  us,  and  we  rise  up  and  meet  them.  It  is  an 
absolutely  new  experience.  We  feel  an  intense  interest  and  a  strong  drawing  of  the 
heart.  Spiritual  things  which  seemed  far  off  have  suddenly  come  near.  Life  has 
become  of  meaning  and  value,  not  so  much  for  what  it  brings  to  us,  as  for  what  it 
is ;  because  it  has  become  so  full  of  love  and  of  God.  And  we  feel  within  us  the 
working  of  a  new  passion — a  yearning  to  do  good,  to  sacrifice  ourselves  in  some 
way,  to  make  some  return  to  that  wonderful  Divine  love  which  seems  to  surround 
us  like  an  atmosphere  and  lift  us  like  an  inspiration.  It  is  so  easy  to  do  right ;  it 
seems  shameful,  almost  impossible,  to  do  wrong ;  we  could  not  be  so  disloyal  as  to 
think  of  any  forbidden  thing,  and  a  keen  remorse  seizes  us  if  we  appear  to  swerve 
by  a  hairbreadth  from  the  straight  path.  In  this  first  love,  where  vividly  experi- 
enced, there  are  these  three  elements — an  awakening,  an  enthusiasm,  and  a  jealous 
preference.  We  realise  God ;  we  realise  life ;  we  realise  the  claims  of  men,  the 
beauty  of  goodness,  the  baseness  of  sin,  the  triumphant  power  of  righteousness, 
and  the  wide,  deep  meaning  of  eternity.  But  this  love  is  not  mere  contemplation. 
We  are  eager  to  act  in  the  light  of  this  revelation,  because  all  these  beliefs  are  full 
of  conviction  and  impulse,  and  we  must  do  something  for  the  Christ  who  has  made 
all  things  new — who  has  given  us  a  possession  in  all  things,  and,  above  all, 
a  possession  in  Hinaself.  That  is  the  enthusiasm  of  the  first  love.  But  love  is 
not  love  unless  it  is  jealous— jealous  not  in  a  mean,  but  in  a  high  sense— jealous  of 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION,  109 

any  interference  with  its  course.  Nothing  can  be  tolerated  which  takes  the  edge  ofE 
the  soul,  that  keen  edge  which  ensures  success  in  work  and  conflict  and  prayer. 
II.  Losing  it,  or  bather  leaving  it.  Sometimes  a  man  looks  back  on  the  first 
love  he  felt  to  Christ  with  philosophic  indifference  :  "  Yes,  I  was  rather  interested 
in  these  things  at  one  time — enthusiastic  even  after  a  fashion.  Very  curious,  you 
know,  how  the  mind  works ;  I  can  scarcely  credit  it  now.  Oh,  one  of  those  passing 
phases  of  feeling,  of  course."  Sometimes  a  man  looks  back  to  it  scoffingly  or 
contemptuously  :  *'  I  believe  I  did  once  rather  make  a  fool  of  myself  about  religion. 
I  have  got  more  important  things  now  to  attend  to."  Others  assume  a  tone  of  self- 
congratulation.  They  narrate  how  they  threw  themselves  into  this  piece  of  work 
or  that ;  how  there  was  nothing  they  would  not  do.  A  man  plumes  himself  on  the 
fact  that,  though,  of  course,  he  would  never  think  of  making  sacrifices  and  exerting  i 
himself  in  Christ's  cause  now,  that  at  one  time  he  was  just  as  active  and  self- 1 
denying  as  any  ardent  young  Christian.  Others  I  have  known  look  back  despair- 
ingly :  •'  Yes,  I  once  had  these  experiences  you  speak  of — hopes  bright  beyond  \ 
expression,  and  feelings  fresh  as  the  dawn.  But  the  light  is  gone ;  the  tide  has 
ebbed,  and  won't  flow  again.  I  would  that  these  feelings  could  come  back,  but  we 
don't  look  for  miracles  nowadays."  That  is  what  some  people  say  despairingly. 
Now  the  ways  by  which  men  generally  forfeit  their  best  spiritual  possession  are 
mainly  these  :  Failure  to  feed  it.  All  love  is  hungry,  and  the  finer  and  purer  a  love 
is,  the  more  it  demands  suitable  nutriment.  If  your  first  love  shows  signs  of  failing, 
ask  yourself,  "Am  I  not  starving  it  ?  "  You  are  starving  it  if  you  are  not  seeking 
Christ  as  you  sought  Him  at  first,  asking  Him  to  reveal  Himself  to  you ;  setting 
apart  "  still  hours  " ;  letting  your  heart  go  out  to  the  only  object  to  whom  it  is 
quite  worth  while  for  our  hearts  to  cling.  Or  again,  perhaps  you  are  failing  to 
develop  your  first  love — ^to  give  it  exercise.  What  sacrifices  is  your  love  making  ? 
what  is  it  bringing  to  the  Divine  loved  one's  feet  ?  Once  more,  you  may  be  forfeit- 
ing your  first  love  through  failure  to  guard  it.  There  is  a  keen  spiritual  edge  with 
which  all  the  best  part  of  spiritual  work  is  done.  We  must  whet  the  edge ;  but  we 
must  also  sheathe  it.  In  contact  with  certain  things  it  gets  blunt.  III.  Keeping 
riBST  LOVE.  There  are  two  theories  about  love  that  are  thoroughly  false — the 
theory  of  disenchantment  and  the  theory  of  emotional  exhaustion.  Sometimes  we 
are  told  that  all  love  in  its  very  nature  is  illusion ;  that  our  enthusiasm  for  a  person 
or  cause  is  very  largely  a  creation  of  our  own  fond  imagination ;  and  that  the  cold 
touch  of  reality  slowly  dispels  all  that  sort  of  thing.  This  is  the  philosophy  of  the 
cynics,  and  cynics  are  a  set  of  fools,  blinded  by  the  conceit  of  their  own  superior 
wisdom.  Of  course  there  is  excuse  for  disenchantment  when  the  object  of  our 
affection  changes,  or  when  we  have  been  deceived  in  it.  But  that  cannot  happen 
here ;  Christ  does  not  change.  And  then  as  to  what  may  be  called  emotional 
exhaustion.  Love  necessarily  exhausting  itself  1  what  ignorant  nonsense !  Why, 
love  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on.  And  to  love  Christ  is  to  keep  near  the  fresh  fount 
of  all  love.  It  is  not  an  emptying  of  our  full  hearts ;  it  is  a  filling  of  our  empty 
hearts.  Of  course  the  Divine  love — the  first  love — is  not  stereotyped.  It  does 
not  retain  always  the  same  compleidon  or  the  same  expressions,  but  it  retains,  or 
ought  to  retain,  the  same  intensity.  All  love  passes  through  phases,  and  develops 
not  by  standing  still,  but  by  moving  forward.  It  is  not  meant  that  our  first  love  to 
Christ  should  retain  its  juvenile  form.  But  it  is  meant  that  it  should  retain  its 
ardour,  its  capacity  of  sacrifice,  and  its  jealous  watchfulness.  {John  F.  Ewing,  M.A.) 
The  peculiarities  of  the  Christian's  first  love  : — The  prominent  characteristic  of  every 
soul  truly  converted  to  Christianity  is  love  to  the  Saviour.  The  faith  which  is  the 
gift  of  God,  and  which  is  wrought  in  Christians  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  always  works  by 
love.  Love  is,  therefore,  set  down  as  the  first  and  principal  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  Now, 
there  is  something  peculiar  in  the  exercise  of  this  first  love  of  the  young  convert. 
1.  Its  exercise  is  fervent  and  tender,  not  founded,  indeed,  on  such  accurate  views 
of  the  character  of  Christ  as  are  afterwards  acquired ;  and  commonly  less  pure  from 
mere  animal  excitement,  than  that  of  the  mature  Christian,  but  accompanied  with 
more  joy  and  exultation.  2.  Another  thing  which  stamps  a  peculiarity  on  the  first 
love  of  the  Christian  is  the  novelty  of  the  objects  and  scenes  which  are  now  presented 
to  his  enlightened  mind.  All  his  lifetime  he  has  been  in  darkness  respecting  the  true 
nature  of  spiritual  things.  But  now  the  eyes  of  his  understanding  being  opened,  alnd 
the  true  light  shining  into  them,  everything  appears  new  and  attractive ;  and  some- 
times a  Divine  glory  is  exhibited  to  the  contemplation  of  the  enlightened  mind.  3. 
Again,  God  deals  with  His  children  in  the  infancy  of  their  spiritual  life  as  mothers 
With  their  children  while  they  are  young.    They  furnish  them  with  the  sweetest 


no  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

nutriment,  cherish  them  in  their  bosoms,  carry  them  in  their  arms,  and  rock  them 
in  the  cradle.  But  when  they  have  been  weaned,  and  have  grown  strong,  they  are 
turned  out  to  shift  for  themselves.  Thus,  our  heavenly  Father,  who  exercises  a 
warmer  and  tenderer  affection  for  His  children  than  the  kindest  mothers,  is 
pleased  to  deal  very  tenderly  with  young  converts ;  and  often  pours  streams  of 
Divine  comfort  into  their  susceptible  hearts.  They  are  for  a  season  led  in  smooth 
and  pleasant  paths.  In  their  prayers  and  other  religious  exercises  they  enjoy  liberty 
of  access  to  their  heavenly  Father.  These  are  indeed  halcyon  days,  and  will  be 
often  afterwards  remembered  with  a  mournful  pleasure,  when  the  scene  is  greatly 
changed ;  and  especially  when  inbred  corruption  grows  strong.  The  early  days  of 
the  true  Christian  may  also  be  well  illustrated  by  the  feelings  of  the  newly  enlisted 
soldier.  He  rejoices  in  the  "pomp  and  circumstance"  of  the  military  life;  is 
animated  by  the  sound  of  martial  music,  and  by  the  sight  of  splendid  banners, 
and  the  gorgeous  costume  of  his  officers.  But  how  different  are  the  condition  and 
feelings  of  the  same  person  when  he  receives  marching  orders;  and  especially 
when  he  is  led  into  battle.  {A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Spiritual  declension  reproved, 
admonished,  and  threatened  : — I.  A  beproof.  Who  does  not  lament  to  see  an 
exquisite  piece  of  workmanship  marred  by  some  one  defect ;  for  in  this  case,  the 
neighbourhood  and  prominency  of  the  excellency  renders  the  fault  more  obvious,  and 
more  offensive.  Everything  in  the  Divine  life  is  prone  to  degenerate.  Where  is  the 
denomination  or  church  that  has  long  remained  in  its  glory  ?  But  the  reproof  is 
addressed  to  individuals.  There  were  those  who  had  fallen,  and  the  charge  is — 
dereliction  of  their  first  love.  Now  in  Christianity  provision  is  made  not  only  for  a 
believer's  perseverance  in  the  ways  of  God,  but  for  his  growth  and  progress,  "  Add 
to  your  faith,  virtue,"  <fec.  And  as  the  Saviour  demands  this,  so  you  must  acknow- 
ledge that  He  deserves  it ;  and  why,  do  you  love  Him  the  less  and  serve  Him  less. 
"  What,"  says  he,  •'  have  you  been  mistaken  in  my  character,  have  I  injured  you  ; 
have  I  not  been  increasing  my  claims  upon  you ;  and  while  I  am  doing  more  for 
you,  are  you  doing  less  for  me?"  H.  An  admonition.  1.  "Remember."  All 
religion  commences  in  serious  thought.  There  is  nothing  more  useful  than  self- 
recollection  ;  there  is  no  means  better  for  reviving  the  soul  than  a  review  of  former 
experiences.  2.  "  Repent."  This  is  enjoined  in  Scripture  not  only  on  sinners,  but 
also  on  saints ;  and  they  will  be  the  subjects  of  it  as  long  as  they  remain  in  the  world, 
as  long  as  the  performance  of  duty  has  deficiency  in  it.  3.  Renewed  obedience,  "  do 
the  first  works" ;  begin  again,  be  as  simple,  as  earnest,  as  patient,  as  circumspect, 
as  at  first.  How  mortifying  would  be  such  a  requisition  to  an  Israelite  in  the 
wilderness,  to  be  turned  back  to  walk  over  all  his  journey  again  ; — how  mortifying 
to  an  apprentice,  after  being  for  years  engaged  in  business,  expecting  to  get  forward, 
to  be  put  back  to  his  first  work,  and  to  have  the  first  rough  implements  put  into  his 
hands  again ; — how  mortifying  to  a  scholar  when  hoping  to  be  dismissed  from  his 
studies,  and  to  return  home,  to  be  led  back  from  class  to  class,  and  have  the  first 
elementary  book  again  put  into  his  hands.  III.  A  threatening.  1.  How  are  we 
to  understand  this  threatening  ?  how  is  it  to  be  accomplished  ?  It  is  accomplished 
when  men  fall  into  such  languor  and  insensibility  in  Divine  things  as  to  be  incapable 
of  edification.  If  a  man  cannot  use  aliment,  or  it  he  cannot  digest  it,  it  is  the  same 
as  if  it  was  taken  away,  for  he  will  surely  die ;  and  such  is  the  condition  of 
thousands  who,  from  week  to  week,  hear  the  gospel ;  it  makes  no  impression,  they 
hear  it,  but  they  are  sermon  proof,  heaven  proof,  and  hell  proof.  The  gospel  is  to 
them  of  no  avail  whatever.  2.  The  dreadfulness  of  this  state.  If  God  were  from 
this  hour  to  declare  that  the  sun  should  never  rise  again  on  this  country,  or  that  no 
rain  should  ever  again  drop  upon  the  land,  it  would  be  an  infinitely  less  judgment, 
than  if  he  were  to  withdraw  the  gospel  and  the  means  of  grace ;  for  this  judgment 
does  not  so  much  regard  the  body  as  the  soul ;  or  time  so  much  as  eternity.  Some 
judgments  are  corrective,  but  this  is  penal.  Some  judgments  are  meant  to  convert, 
but  this  to  destroy.  3.  The  certainty  of  this  threatening.  We  are  slow  to  believe. 
How  superficial  our  belief  is  in  this  respect  appears  from  the  unsteadiness  of  our 
Christian  practice.  Surely  if  we  believed  we  should  be  established ;  but  when  you 
hear  such  language  as  this,  you  are  prone  to  suppose  it  never  can  be  realised.  It 
will  be  necessary  for  me,  therefore,  to  inform  you,  that  he  who  has  denounced  this 
threatening  is  faithful.  "  God  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  lie,  or  the  Son  of 
Man  that  He  should  repent."  {W.  Jay,  M.A.)  On  leaving  our  first  love: 
— I.  A  CHARGE  PREFERRED.  "  Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  1.  What  is 
meant  by  the  first  love  ?  Ask  the  young  convert,  who,  after  having  received 
the  sentence  of  death  in  his  conscience;   after  trembling  under  the  curse  of  a 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION,  111 

broken  law ;  after  struggling  in  the  bondage  of  darkness,  doubt,  and  fear,  has 
come  forth  under  the  leading  of  the  Spirit,  into  the  light,  liberty,  and  joy  of  the 
gospel  1  2.  What  then  is  it  to  leave  this  happy  state  ?  It  is  to  let  the  heart  grow 
cold  and  indifferent  to  Him  whom  we  can  never  love  enough !  It  is  to  lose  the 
sweet  enjoyment  of  privileges,  and  consider  duty  wearisome.  It  is  to  have  services 
formal  and  ordinances  barren.  It  is  to  have  idols  in  the  temple  of  the  soul,  so  that 
the  whole  is  not,  as  it  ought  to  be,  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  LL  We  have  an 
ADMONITION  GIVEN.  1.  This  admonition  relates  to  the  past.  The  Lord  here  calls 
the  Ephesian  Church  to  bring  their  past  experience  and  character  to  mind.  They 
had  fallen.  They  had  been  once  much  higher  in  Christian  standing  than  now. 
Their  minds  had  been  more  elevated  in  holy  and  heavenly  conceptions,  and  their 
practice  more  dignified  and  honourable.  Then,  leaving  our  first  love  to  Christ  is 
falling.  Now,  this  is  a  state  just  the  reverse  of  what  a  Christian's  state  ought  to 
be.  2.  This  admonition  relates  to  the  present.  "  Eepent !  "  seeing  by  a  review  of. 
the  past,  to  what  danger  the  soul  has  been  exposed ;  what  guilt  has  been  contracted ; 
what  honour  and  enjoyments  have  been  lost ;  what  injury  has  been  done  to  religion ; 
what  injustice  to  Christ,  the  work  of  reformation  must  immediately  begin.  3.  This 
admonition  relates  to  the  future.  "  And  do  thy  first  works."  All  will  be  vain  and 
unreal  without  this.  There  must  be  fruits  meet  for  repentance,  to  prove  it  genuine. 
III.  A  THREATENING  DENOUNCED.  Lcssous :  1.  It  is  possiblc  for  there  to  be  many 
things  commendable  in  Christians,  and  yet  something  to  call  for  a  solemn  threaten- 
ing, like  that  in  our  text.  2.  It  is  evident  that  leaving  our  first  love  is  very 
criminal  in  the  sight  of  Christ.  3.  The  removal  of  the  gospel  from  souls  in  any 
way  is  a  most  awful  punishment.  {Essex  Remembrancer.)  Love's  complaining: — 
I.  Christ  perceives.  1.  He  does  not  so  perceive  the  faults  as  to  be  forgetful  pf 
that  which  He  can  admire  and  accept.  He  has  a  keen  eye  for  all  that  is  good. 
When  He  searches  our  hearts  He  never  passes  by  the  faintest  longing,  or  desire,  or 
faith,  or  love,  of  any  of  His  people.  He  says,  "  I  know  thy  works."  2.  But  this  is 
our  point,  that  while  Jesus  can  see  all  that  is  good,  yet  in  very  faithfulness  He  sees 
all  that  is  evil.  His  love  is  not  blind.  It  is  more  necessary  for  us  that  we  should 
make  a  discovery  of  our  faults  than  of  our  virtues.  3.  This  evil  was  a  very  serious 
one ;  it  was  love  declining.  It  is  the  most  serious  ill  of  all ;  for  the  Church  is  the 
bride  of  Christ,  and  for  a  bride  to  fail  in  love  is  to  fail  in  all  things.  4.  It  was 
Jesus  Himself  who  found  it  out.  How  good  of  Him  to  care  one  jot  about  our  love ! 
This  is  no  complaint  of  an  enemy,  but  of  a  wounded  friend.  5.  Jesus  found  it  out 
with  great  pain.  6.  The  Saviour,  having  thus  seen  this  with  pain,  now  points  it 
out.  7.  The  Saviour  pointed  out  the  failure  of  love ;  and  when  He  pointed  it  out 
He  called  it  by  a  lamentable  name.  "  Kemember,  therefore,  from  whence  thou 
art  fallen."  8.  The  Master  evidently  counts  this  decline  of  love  to  be  a  personal 
wrong  done  to  Himself.  "  I  have  somewhat  against  thee."  It  is  an  offence 
against  the  very  heart  of  Christ.  H.  What  the  Saviour  prescribes.  1.  The  first 
word  is  Kemember.  "  Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  Remember,  then,  what  thy 
first  love  was,  and  compare  thy  present  condition  with  it.  At  first  nothing 
diverted  thee  from  thy  Lord.  He  was  thy  life,  thy  love,  thy  joy.  Eemember  from 
whence  thou  art  fallen.  Remember  the  vows,  the  tears,  the  communings,  the  happy 
raptures  of  those  days;  remember  and  compare  with  them  thy  present  state. 
Remember  and  consider,  that  when  thou  wast  in  thy  first  love,  that  love  was  none 
too  warm.  Even  then,  when  thou  didst  live  to  Him,  and  for  Him,  and  with  Him, 
thou  wast  none  too  holy,  none  too  consecrated,  none  too  zealous.  Remember 
the  past  with  sad  forebodings  of  the  future.  He  who  has  sunk  so  far  may  fall 
much  farther.  2.  The  next  word  of  the  prescription  is  "  Repent."  Repent  as  thou 
didst  at  first.  Repent  of  the  wrong  thou  hast  done  thy  Lord.  3.  But  then  he  says 
in  effect.  Return.  The  third  word  is  this — "Repent,  and  do  the  first  works." 
There  must  be  in  every  declining  Christian  a  practical  repentance.  Do  not  be 
satisfied  with  regrets  and  resolves.  IH.  He  persuades.  1.  With  a  warning.  •'  I 
will  come  unto  thee,"  &c.  Our  Lord  means,  first,  I  will  take  away  the  comfort  of 
the  Word.  But  the  candlestick  also  symbolises  usefulness :  it  is  that  by  which  a 
Church  shines.  The  use  of  a  Church  is  to  preserve  the  truth,  wherewith  to 
illuminate  the  neighbourhood,  to  illuminate  the  world.  God  can  soon  cut  short  our 
usefulness,  and  He  will  do  so  if  we  cut  short  our  love.  2.  With  a  promise,  "  To 
him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  midst  of 
the  paradise  of  God."  Observe,  those  who  lose  their  first  love  fall,  but  those  who 
abide  in  love  are  made  to  stand.  In  contrast  to  the  fall  which  took  place  in  the 
paradise  of  God,  we  have  man  eating  of  the  tiee  o.'  !if^.  f'.rcl  so  living  for  ever.     If 


113  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

we,  through  grace,  overcome  the  common  tendency  to  decline  in  love,  then  shall 
we  be  confirmed  in  the  favour  of  the  Lord.  Note  again,  those  who  lose  their  first 
love  wander  far ;  they  depart  from  God.  "  But,"  saith  the  Lord,  '•  if  you  keep 
your  first  love  you  shall  not  wander,  but  you  shall  come  into  closer  fellowship.  I 
will  bring  you  nearer  to  the  centre.  I  will  bring  you  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  which 
is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God."  The  inner  ring  is  for  those  who  grow  in 
love ;  the  centre  of  all  joy  is  only  to  be  reached  by  much  love.  Then  notice  the 
mystical  blessing  which  lies  here,  waiting  your  meditation.  Do  you  know  how  we 
fell  ?  The  woman  took  of  the  fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree,  and  gave  to  Adam,'  and 
Adam  ate  and  fell.  The  reverse  is  the  case  in  the  promise  before  us :  the  Second 
Adam  takes  of  the  Divine  fruit  from  the  tree  of  promise,  and  hands  it  to  His  spouse ; 
she  eats  and  lives  for  ever.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Forsaking  the  first  love : — I.  The 

GREATNESS   OF  THE   SIN  OP   COLDNESS   IN    CHRISTIANS,   AND    HOW  OFFENSIVE    IT    IS    TO 

God.     1.  You  have  no  right  to  feel  this  indifference  towards  God  or  man.    2.  This 
coldness  is  not  a  mere  defect,  it  bespeaks  some  degree  of  the  positive  action  of  the 
most  polluting  passions.      3.  It  is  a  dreadful  abuse  of  God.     It  is  passing  by  His 
infinite  glories  after  other  objects.     4.  It  involves  all  the  guilt  of  base  ingratitude. 
5.  There  is  in  this  thing  the  violation  of  an  oath,  or  a  solemn  breach  of  covenant. 
n.  What  is  to  be  done,  and  how  we  are  to   escape   from  this  fearful  con- 
dition.    [E.  Griffin,  D.D.)      Backsliding : — I.  Its  nature.     1.  Some  backslide  in 
heart.    This  consists  in  the  withdrawment  of  the  affections  from  God.    2.  Some 
backslide  in  life.    When  a  person  becomes  careless  of  God  in  his  heart,  he  will 
probably  soon  manifest  the  defect  in  his  conduct.      3.    There  are  others  who 
backslide  in  doctrinal  sentiment.    II.  Its  symptoms.    1.  Love  of  the  world.    2.  A 
cold  formal  spirit  in  the  exercises  of  devotion.    3.  When  the  heart  has  lost  all 
delight  in  spiritual  things,  we  have  another  evidence  of  being  in  a  backsliding  state. 
4.  Association  with  men  of  the  world  is  another  evidence  of  a  backsliding  state. 
By  this  we  mean,  all  that  association  which  is  imcalled  for  by  the  business  or 
relationships  of  life.     5.  A  state  of  backsliding  is  testified  by  negligence  in  attend- 
ing the  means  of  grace.    III.  Its  evils.     1.  It  dishonours  God.     2.  It  deprives 
us  of  happiness.    The  pleasures  of  religion  are  suspended  where  there  is  incon- 
sistency of  conduct,  and  where  the  spirit  of  the  world  reigns.      3.  It  gives  our 
enemies  advantage  over  us.      4.  It  prepares  us  for  terrible  darkness  in  a  dying 
hour.     IV.  Its  cure.    We  must  take  heed  of  that  disposition  which  would  lead 
us  to  suppose  that  the  case  is  incurable.     This  is  the  greatest  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  recovery.    We  must  remember  that  against  such  reasoning  the  testimony  of 
the  word  of  God  is  directed.      The  facts  of  Scripture  prove  it.     David,  Peter,  and 
others  fell  far  from  God ;  and  they  verified  the  word,  "  tho'  a  just  man  fall  seven 
times,  he  shall  rise  again."     1.  Come  back  with  fervent  prayer.      2.  If  we  would 
have  this  state  rectified,  we  must  begin  where  we  began  at  first :  we  must  repent  and 
do  our  first  works.    And  in  doing  this,  let  us  be  sure  that  we  rest  on  the  right 
foundation.    3.  We  must  call  to  mind  former  days,  and  compare  them  with  the 
present.      {Essex  Remembrancer.)      Declension  from  first  love : — I.  What  was  oub 
first  love  ?    Oh,  let  us  go  back — it  is  not  many  years  with  some  of  us.    Then  if 
you  are  Christians,  those  days  were  so  happy  that  your  memory  will  never  forget 
them,  and  therefore  you  can  easily  return  to  that  first  bright  spot  in  your  history. 
Oh,  what  love  was  that  which  I  had  to  my  Saviour  the  first  time  He  forgave  my 
sins.    I  could  realise  then  the  language  of  Kutherford,  when  he  said,  being  full  of 
love  to  Christ,  once  upon  a  time,  in  the  dungeon  of  Aberdeen — "  0   my  Lord,  if 
there  were  a  broad  hell  betwixt  me  and  Thee,  if  I  could  not  get  at  Thee  except  by 
wading  through  it,  I  would  not  think  twice,  but  I  would  plunge  through  it  all,  if  I 
might  embrace  Thee  and  call  Thee  mine."    Now  it  is  that  first  love  that  you  and  I 
must  confess,  I  am  afraid,  we  have  in  a  measure  lost.     Let  us  just  see  whether  we 
have  it.    When  we  first  loved  the  Saviour  how  earnest  we  were ;  there  was  not  a 
single  thing  in  the  Bible  that  we  did  not  think  most  precious  ;  there  was  not  one 
command  of  His  that  we  did  not  think  to  be  like  fine  gold  and  choice  silver.    That 
first  love  does  not  last  half  so  long  as  we  could  wish.    Some  of  you  stand  convicted 
even  here ;  you  have  not  that  burning  love,  that  ridiculous  love  as  the  worldling 
would  call  it,  which  is,  after  all,  the  love  to  be  most  desired.     No,  you  have  lost 
your  first  love  in  that  respect.    Again,  how  obedient  you  used  to  be.      If  you  saw 
a  commandment,  that  was  enough  for  you — you  did  it.     But  now  you  see  a  com- 
mandment, and  you  see  profit  on  the  other  side ;  and  how  often  do  you  dally  with 
the  temptation,  instead  of  yielding  an  unsullied  obedience  to  Christ  I    Again,  how 
h^ppy  you  used  to  be  in  the  ways  of  God.     There  was  a  time  when  every  bitter 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  113 

thing  was  sweet ;  whenever  you  heard  the  Word,  it  was  all  precious  to  you.  Now 
you  can  grumble  at  the  minister.  Alas !  the  minister  has  many  faults,  but  the 
question  is,  whether  there  has  not  been  a  greater  change  in  you  than  there  has 
been  in  him.  Again,  when  we  were  in  our  first  love,  what  would  we  do  for  Christ  ? 
Now,  how  little  will  we  do.  II.  Where  did  you  and  I  lose  our  first  love,  if  we 
have  lost  it  ?  Have  you  not  lost  your  first  love  in  the  world,  some  of  you  ?  Is  it 
not  marvellous,  that  when  you  grew  richer  and  had  more  business,  you  began  to  have 
less  grace?  It  is  a  very  serious  thing  to  grow  rich.  Dost  thou  not  think,  again,  that 
thou  hast  lost  thy  first  love  by  neglecting  communion  with  Christ  ?  Has  there  not 
been,  sometimes,  this  temptation  to  do  a  great  deal  for  Christ,  but  not  to  live  a  great 
deal  with  Christ  ?  Perhaps,  too,  you  attend  the  means  so  often,  that  you  have  no 
time  in  secret  to  improve  what  you  gain  in  the  means.  Mrs.  Bury  once  said,  that 
if  "  all  the  twelve  apostles  were  preaching  in  a  certain  town,  and  we  could  have 
the  privilege  of  hearing  them  preach,  yet  if  they  kept  us  out  of  our  closets,  and  led 
us  to  neglect  prayer,  better  for  us  never  to  have  heard  their  names,  than  to  have 
gone  to  hsten  to  them."  We  shall  never  love  Christ  much  except  we  live 
near  to  Him.  HI.  Seek  to  get  your  first  love  restored.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Loss  of  the  first  love : — I  have  often  been  constrained  to  notice  that  when  Chris- 
tians, from  time  to  time,  throw  themselves  into  actual  labour  for  the  Lord,  there  is 
a  great  danger  of  a  reaction  coining,  a  consciousness  of  weariness :  they  begin  to 
grow  "  weary  of  well  doing  " ;  perhaps  there  are  a  few  disappointments ;  the  work  is 
not  going  on  so  flourishingly.  When  the  wind  and  tide  are  in  our  favour,  there  are 
some  of  us  who  can  work  very  hard ;  we  can  pull  a  very  lusty  oar  as  long  as  the 
boat  seems  to  make  progress,  but  when  we  find  the  tide  dead  against  us,  and  it 
seems  as  though  we  were  making  no  headway,  we  begin  to  feel  faint,  and  weary,  and 
ask  somebody  to  take  the  oar.  That  is  a  dangerous  snare.  Can  we  honestly  and 
truthfully  say  that  we  are  workers,  that  we  are  labourers,  and  that  we  are  patient 
labourers,  so  plodding  that  we  have  "  not  fainted  "  in  spite  of  all  the  difficulties 
with  which  we  have  been  surrounded  ?  Is  there  anything  more  that  could  be  said  in 
their  favour  ?  Yes,  something  still.  These  Ephesian  converts  had  held  to  God's 
truth  in  a  day  when  there  was  a  good  deal  of  theological  discussion,  and  also  theo- 
logical misconception  and  error.  They  were  "  orthodox  to  the  backbone"  ;  our  Lord 
had  no  fault  to  find  with  them  in  this  respect;  they  "  hated  the  deeds  of  the  Nico- 
laitanes,"  they  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  How  happy  were  these  men  I 
the  Word  of  God,  how  they  loved  to  pore  over  it !  what  treasures  they  found  in  it  I 
It  was  a  joy  to  them  to  open  the  sacred  page.  "  But,"  you  say,  "I  suppose  Christian 
experience  will  not  always  be  identical " :  and,  certainly,  it  is  not.  WeU  then,  when 
we  have  first  passed  out  of  darkness  into  light,  it  is  natural  that  there  should  be  a 
good  deal  of  emotion  in  our  experience,  and  much  of  this  may  reasonably  be  ex- 
pected to  pass  away  as  we  become  more  estabhshed  Christians.  Now  there  may  be 
a  great  deal  of  truth  in  all  this,  and  yet  such  pleading  may  indicate  but  too  surely 
••  the  loss  of  the  first  love."  Our  experience  is  subject  to  change.  But  how  is  it  to 
change  ?  I  wonder  whether  St.  Paul  loved  his  Master  less,  or  more,  when  he  said 
towards  the  end  of  his  life,  '•  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith,  hence- 
forth there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,"  than  he  did  at  the  moment 
when  he  first  committed  his  soul  into  His  hands.  Do  you  suppose  it  is  a  sign  of 
ripening  experience  to  substitute  work,  energy,  and  a  thousand  other  things  for 
"love."  Oh,  let  us  not  delude  ourselves.  There  is  one  thing  more  important  than 
•'  work,"  yes,  more  important  than  "  labour,"  even  more  important  than  orthodoxy, 
and  that  one  thing  is  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  If  we  have  got  Him  we  shall  have  all 
the  rest,  and  if  we  have  got  the  rest  and  have  not  got  Him,  we  have  nothing.  "  I 
have  somewhat  against  thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  How  do  people 
"  lose  their  first  love"  ?  We  think,  as  we  first  experience  it,  that  it  is  so  delightful  in 
itself,  there  is  so  much  of  heaven  upon  earth  in  such  experience,  that  we  must  be 
worse  than  mad  ever  to  forfeit  it.  Now  do  not  suppose  that  anybody  throws  it  away 
wilfully."  It  is  little  by  little  that  "  the  first  love  "  is  lost.  1.  Many  people  "  lose  " 
it  by  earthly  business.  They  lead  bustling  lives  ;  they  have  so  many  cares  pressing 
upon  them,  so  much  to  think  about,  so  much  to  be  undertaken.  It  is  even  so  with 
some  of  our  Christian  workers.  Or,  perhaps,  in  our  worldly  employment,  we  are  bent 
upon  certain  objects  which  are  out  of  harmony  with  the  wUl  of  Christ.  There  is 
some  dark  form  of  worldly  care,  or  it  may  be  of  religious  activity — something  or 
other  has  crept  in  between  us  and  God,  and  the  whole  heaven  is  darkened,  the  light 
is  eclipsed,  and  the  blessedness  is  gone.  2.  Or,  again,  there  are  many  Christians 
who  "lose  their  first  love"  by  forming  another  love.     Thou  art  forfeiting  that 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


blessed  inner  life  of  love,  which  can  only  be  realised  by  those  who  understand  the 
full  force  of  the  first  great  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  but 
Me."  3.  Yet  again,  how  many  of  us  "  lose  our  first  love  "  by  little  acts  of  thought- 
lessness. Love  is  a  very  jealous  thing.  {W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Spiritual 
declension  : — I.  Its  symptoms  :  The  first  test,  to  which  we  would  bring  the 
professing  Christian  who  is  anxious  to  determine  whether  love  is  growing 
cold  in  himself,  is  that  furnished  by  secret  prayer  and  the  study  of  God's 
Word.  Prayer  has  been  not  inaptly  called  the  breathing  of  the  soul;  and 
you  may  be  sure,  that  where  this  grows  shorter  and  more  difl&cult,  there  can 
be  no  healthful  play  in  the  organs  of  life.  And  as  one  great  symptom  of 
spiritual  decline  may  be  derived  from  the  more  private  means  of  grace,  so 
may  another  from  the  more  public.  The  Christian  in  whom  vital  religion  is  in 
a  healthy  condition,  attaches  great  worth  to  the  public  ordinances  ;  neglect  of  these 
is,  however,  a  sign  of  declining  love.  But  now  take  another  symptom — equally  de- 
cisive, though  perhaps  more  easily  overlooked.  There  is  no  feeling  stronger  in  the 
Christian  than  that  of  desire  to  promote  God's  glory  in  the  salvation  of  his  fellow- 
men.    But  suppose  him  to  become  comparatively  indifferent  to  the  diffusion  of  the 

gospel so  that  it  is  not  with  the  heart,  though  it  may  be  with  the  purse  and  the 

hand,  that  he  helps  forward  the  cause  of  the  Kedeemer  ;  ah !  who  will  say  that  the 
love  is  not  losing  its  fervour  ?  who  will  deny  the  spiritual  decline?   But  again ;  there 
is  a  broad  separating  line  between  the  men  of  the  world  and  the  men  of  religion. 
And  the  healthful  Christian  is  quite  aware  of  this.     He  guards  accordingly  with 
godly  jealousy  against  any  such  conformity  as  would  do  violence  to  his  profession. 
But  there  may  be — and  there  often  is— a  great  change  in  these  respects.     The  man 
of  religion  comes  to  view  the  world  with  less  fear,  and  less  repugnance.     Alas  !  this 
is  one  of  the  strongest  of  symptoms  that  the  fervour  is  departing  from  the  love.   And 
not  unlike  the  symptom  of  making  light  of  the  difference  between  religion  and  the 
world  is  that  of  making  light  of  the  difference  between  various  creeds.     The  dis- 
tinguishing doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  prized  by  the  ardent  Christian  as  treasures 
without  which  he  were  unutterably  poor.    Hence  he  looks  with  abhorrence,  for 
example,  on  Socinianism ;  it  would  strip  Christ  of  His  Divinity,  and  this  he  feels 
would  be  the  stripping  himself  of  immortality.    But  this  repugnance  to  error  may 
not  continue.    And  wheresoever  there  is  this  lowered  sense  of  the  indispensableness 
of  fundamental  truths,  and  of  an  increasing  disposition  to  think  gently  of  wrong 
systems  of  religion,  you  may  be  sure  that  the  love  is  fast  losing  its  fervour.    You 
may  be  certain,  further,  that  where  there  is  no  increase  in  religion  there  must  be 
some  radical  deficiency  ;  nay,  where  there  is  no  increase  there  must  be  a  decrease. 
Judge  then  yourselves,  ye  who  would  know  whether  ye  are  the  subjects  of  spiritual 
declension.  Is  it  a  greater  privilege  to  you  to  pray,  and  a  less  labour  to  be  obedient? 
Have  you  a  firmer  command  over  your  passions  ?   Is  the  will  more  in  harmony  with 
the  Divine  ?    Is  the  conscience  more  sensitive,  and  is  the  judgment  prompter  in  de- 
ciding for  what  is  right  against  what  is  agreeable?    II.  Its  dangers.    For  some  of 
you  might  be  disposed  to  say — "  Well,  what  if  our  love  be  less  ardent  than  it  was? 
it  does  not  follow  that  we  must  be  in  great  peril ;  the  love  may  be  warm  enough  for 
salvation,  and  yet  not  as  warm  as  it  was  at  first."    But  if  you  remember  how  our 
Lord  reasoned  in  regard  of  "  the  salt  which  had  lost  its  saltness  "—and  this  is  but 
another  figure  to  express  the  same  thing  as  the  love  losing  its  fervour.    The  grand 
difficulty  is  not  that  of  producing  love  at  first,  but  of  restoring  its  heat  when  it  has 
been  suffered  to  grow  cold.    Even  amongst  ourselves,  in  reference  to  human  attach- 
ment, the  difficulty  of  rousing  a  decayed  affection  is  almost  proverbial.     The  party 
who  has  loved  and  then  ceased  to  love,  is  of  all  others  the  least  Ukely  to  love  again. 
The  ashes  of  the  decayed  sentiment  seem  to  smother  the  fresh  sparks.    And  the 
difficulty  which  is  experienced  in  the  revival  of  human  affection  might  be  looked  for, 
when  it  is  the  love  of  God  and  of  Christ  which  has  grown  languid.     You  are  to  ob- 
serve, that  a  great  deal  must  have  been  done  for  the  man  in  whom  the  love  of  God 
has  once  been  kindled.     The  Spirit  of  God  must  have  striven  with  this  man— so  as 
to  arouse  in  him  the  dormant  immortality,  and  brought  him  to  experience  the  power 
of  the  gospel.    But  it  is  not  the  course  of  this  celestial  Agent,  to  persist  in  working 
where  there  is  no  earnestness  in  holding  fast  what  He  has  already  granted.    If  you 
expose  yourselves  to  the  damps  of  the  world  or  unnecessarily  permit  the  icy  winds  of 
temptation  to  beat  upon  you.  He  will  work  on  you  with  less  and  less  energy  or  ooxn- 
municate  less  and  less  of  animating  grace.    And  we  cannot  but  suppose,  that  this 
Spirit  is   more  displeased  when  neglected  by  one  on  whom  He  has  effectually 
wrought,  than  when  resisted  by  another  with  whom  He  has  striven  in  vain.   But  the 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  115 

Spirit  may  be  recalled ;  and  then  the  smothered  flame  may  be  rekindled.  We  will 
not  deny  it ;  God  forbid  that  we  should.  We  are  not  required  to  make  the  case  out 
hopeless,  but  only  full  of  difficulty.  Take  away  the  life  from  religion,  leave  us 
nothing  but  formality,  and  there  is  not  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  an  individual,  so 
useless  to  others  and  to  himself,  as  the  one  in  whom  the  love  remains,  but  remains 
in  its  ashes  and  not  in  its  fires.  It  is  the  insidiousness  of  the  disease  which  makes 
it  so  difficult  to  cope  with.  The  resemblance  is  continually  fixed  on  us,  between 
what  our  medical  men  caU  consumption,  and  what  our  theological  call  spiritual  de- 
cline. You  know  very  well,  that  the  presence  of  consumption  is  often  scarcely 
suspected  till  the  patient  is  indeed  past  recovery.  There  is  perhaps  no  disease 
which  less  tells  its  victim  what  its  fatal  errand  is.  You  know  how  beautifully 
brilliant  it  often  makes  the  eye  and  the  cheek.  Alas !  this  is  but  emblematic  of 
what  it  does  to  the  heart,  flushing  it  with  hope  and  suffusing  it  with  life,  when  the 
winding  sheet  is  woven  and  the  shadow  is  falling.  But  this  disease,  so  insidious,  so 
flattering,  so  fatal,  is  the  exact  picture  of  spiritual  decline.  Ministers  and  kinsmen 
may  perceive  no  difference  in  the  man ;  equally  regular  in  the  public  duties  of 
religion,  equally  large  in  his  charities,  equally  honourable  in  his  dealings, 
equally  pure  in  his  morals.  The  fatal  symptoms  may  be  all  internal ;  and 
because  they  are  not  such  as  to  draw  observation,  there  may  be  no  warning 
given  by  others ;  and  the  sick  man,  not  examining  himself,  and  not  finding 
that  his  religious  friends  suppose  him  to  be  on  the  decline,  will  be  all  the  more 
likely  to  feel  persuaded  of  his  safety,  and  to  learn  his  disease,  alas !  only  from 
his  death.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  true  problem  of  Christian  experience : — I. 
The  relation  of  the  first  love,  or  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  disciple- 
BHiP,  TO  the  subsequent  LIFE. — What  we  call  conversion  is  not  a  change  distinctly 
traceable  in  the  experience  of  all  disciples,  though  it  is  and  must  be  a  realised  fact 
in  all.  There  are  many  that  grew  up  out  of  their  infancy,  or  childhood,  in  the  grace 
of  Christ,  and  remember  no  time  when  they  began  to  love  Him.  Even  such,  how- 
ever, will  commonly  remember  a  time  when  their  love  to  God  and  Divine  things 
became  a  fact  so  fresh,  so  newly  conscious,  as  to  raise  a  doubt  whether  it  was  not 
then  for  the  first  time  kindled.  In  other  cases  there  is  no  doubt  of  a  beginning — a 
real,  conscious,  definitely-remembered  beginning — a  new  turning  to  God,  a  fresh-bom 
Christian  love.  It  is  now  realised,  as  far  as  it  can  be — the  very  citizenship  of  the 
soul  is  changed ;  it  has  gone  over  into  a  new  world,  and  is  entered  there  into  new 
relations.  But  it  has  not  made  acquaintance  there ;  it  scarcely  knows  how  it  came 
in,  or  how  to  stay,  and  the  whole  problem  of  the  life-struggle  is  to  become  established 
in  what  has  before  been  initiated.  What  was  initiated  as  feeling  must  be  matured 
by  holy  application,  till  it  becomes  one  of  the  soul's  own  habits.  A  mere  glance  at 
the  new-born  state  of  love  discovers  how  incomplete  and  unreliable  it  is.  Kegarded 
in  the  mere  form  of  feeling,  it  is  all  beauty  and  life.  A  halo  of  innocence  rests  upon 
it,  and  it  seems  a  fresh  made  creature,  reeking  in  the  dews  of  its  first  morning.  But 
how  strange  a  creature  is  it  to  itself — waking  to  the  discovery  of  its  existence, 
bewildered  by  the  mystery  of  existence.  An  angel,  as  it  were,  in  feeling,  it 
is  yet  a  chUd  in  self-understanding.  The  sacred  and  pure  feeling  you  may 
plainly  see  is  environed  by  all  manner  of  defects,  weaknesses,  and  half-con- 
quered mischiefs,  just  ready  to  roll  back  upon  it  and  stifle  its  life.  It  certainly 
would  not  be  strange  if  the  disciple,  beset  by  so  many  defects,  and  so  little 
ripe  in  his  experience,  should  seem  for  a  while  to  lose  ground,  even  while  strenuously 
careful  to  maintain  his  fidelity.  And  then  Christ  will  have  somewhat  against  him. 
He  will  not  judge  him  harshly,  and  charge  it  against  him  as  a  crime  that  has  no 
mitigations ;  it  will  only  be  a  fatal  impeachment  of  his  discipleship,  when  he  finally 
surrenders  the  struggle,  and  relapses  into  a  prayerless  and  worldly  life.  11.  The 
subsequent  life,  as  related  to  the  beginning,  or  FIRST  LOVE.  The  paradise  of  first 
love  is  a  germ,  we  may  conceive,  in  the  soul's  feeling  of  the  paradise  to  be  fulfilled 
in  its  wisdom.  And  when  the  heavenly  in  feeling  becomes  the  heavenly  in  choice, 
thought,  judgment,  and  habit,  so  that  the  whole  nature  consents  and  rests  in  it  as 
a  known  state,  then  it  is  fulfilled  or  completed.  At  first  the  disciple  knows,  we  shaU 
see,  very  little  of  himself,  and  still  less  how  to  carry  himself  so  as  to  meet  the  new 
state  of  Divine  consciousness  into  which  he  is  born.  At  first  nothing  co-operates  in 
settled  harmony  with  his  new  life,  but  if  he  is  faithful,  he  will  learn  how  to  make 
everything  in  him  work  with  it,  and  assist  the  edifying  of  his  soul  in  love.  A  very 
great  point  to  be  gained,  by  the  struggle  of  experience,  is  to  learn  when  one  has  a 
right  to  the  state  of  confidence  and  rest.  At  fijst  the  disciple  measures  himself 
wholly  by  his  feeling.     If  feeling  changes,  as  it  wUl  and  must  at  times,  then  he  con- 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

demns  himself,  and  condemning  himself  perhaps  without  reason,  he  breaks  his 
confidence  towards  God  and  stifles  his  peace.  Then  he  is  ready  to  die  to  get  back 
his  confidence,  but  not  knowing  how  he  lost  it,  he  knows  not  where  to  find  it.  But 
finally,  after  battering  down  his  own  confidence  and  stifling  his  love  in  this  manner 
by  self -discouragement  for  many  years,  he  is  corrected  by  God's  Spirit  and  led  into 
a  discovery  of  himself  and  the  world  that  is  more  just,  ceases  to  condemn  himself  in 
that  which  he  alloweth,  so  to  aUow  himself  in  anything  which  he  condemneth  ;  and 
now  behold  what  a  morning  it  is  for  his  love  I  His  perturbed,  anxious  state  is  gone. 
God's  smile  is  always  upon  him :  first  love  returns,  henceforth  to  abide  and  never 
depart.  Everywhere  it  goes  with  him,  into  all  the  callings  of  industry  and  business, 
into  social  pleasures  and  recreations,  bathing  his  soul  as  a  divine  element.  By  a 
similar  process  he  learns  how  to  modulate  and  operate  his  will.  On  one  side  his 
soul  was  in  the  Divine  love.  On  the  other  he  had  his  will.  But,  how  to  work  his 
will  so  as  perfectly  to  suit  his  love,  he  at  first  did  not  know.  He  accordingly  took 
his  love  into  the  care  of  his  will ;  for  assuredly  he  must  do  all  that  is  possible  to 
keep  it  alive.  He  thus  deranged  all  right  order  and  health  within  by  his  violent 
superintendence,  battered  down  the  joy  he  wished  to  keep,  and  could  not  understand 
what  he  should  do  more ;  for,  as  yet,  all  he  had  done  seemed  to  be  killing  his  love. 
He  had  not  learned  that  love  flows  down  only  from  God,  who  is  its  object,  and  can- 
not be  manufactured  within  ourselves.  But  he  discovers  finally  that  it  was  first 
kindled  by  losing,  for  the  time,  his  will.  Understanding  now  that  he  is  to  lose  his 
will  in  God's  wiU,  and  abandon  himself  wholly  to  God,  to  rest  in  Him  and  receive 
of  His  fulness ;  finding,  too,  that  will  is  only  a  form  of  self-seeking,  he  makes  a  total 
loss  of  will,  self,  and  all  his  sufficiency ;  whereupon  the  first  love  floods  his  nature 
again,  and  bathes  him  like  a  sea  without  a  shore.  And  yet  it  will  not  be  strange  if 
he  finds,  within  a  year,  that,  as  he  once  overacted  his  will  in  self-conduct,  so  now 
he  is  underacting  it  in  quietism  ;  that  his  love  grows  thin  for  want  of  energy,  and, 
returning  to  his  wUl  again,  he  takes  it  up  in  God  ;  dares  to  have  plans  and  ends, 
and  to  be  a  person  ;  wrestles  with  God  and  prevails  with  Him ;  and  so  becomes,  at 
last,  a  prince,  acknowledged  and  crowned  before  him.  At  first  he  had  a  very  per- 
plexing war  with  his  motives.  He  feared  that  his  motive  was  selfish,  and  then  he 
feared  that  his  fear  was  selfish.  He  dug  at  himseK  so  intently,  to  detect  his  selfish- 
ness, as  to  create  the  selfishness  he  feared.  The  complications  of  his  heart  were 
infinite,  and  he  became  confused  in  his  attempt  to  untwist  them.  He  blamed  His 
love  to  God  because  he  loved  Him  for  His  goodness,  and  then  tried  to  love  Him  more 
without  any  thought  of  His  goodness.  He  was  so  curious,  in  fact,  to  know  his 
motives  that  he  knew  nothing  of  them ;  and  finally  stifled  his  love  in  the  effort  to 
understand  it,  and  act  the  critic  over  it.  At  length,  after  months  or  years,  it  may  be, 
of  desolation,  he  discovers,  as  he  had  never  done  before,  that  he  was  a  child  in  his 
first  love,  and  had  a  child's  simplicity.  And  now  he  has  learned  simplicity  by  his 
trial  I  Falling  now  into  that  first  simplicity,  there  to  abide,  because  he  knows  it, 
the  fiirst  love  blooms  again — blooms  as  a  flower,  let  us  hope,  that  is  never  to  wither. 
His  motive  is  pure  because  it  is  simple  ;  and  his  eye,  being  single  toward  God,  his 
whole  body  is  full  of  light.  You  perceive,  in  this  review,  how  everything  in  the  sub- 
sequent life  of  the  disciple  is  designed  of  God  to  fulfil  the  first  love.  A  great  part  of 
the  struggle  which  we  call  experience,  appears  to  operate  exactly  the  other  way ;  to 
confuse  and  stifle  the  first  fire  of  the  Spirit.  Still  the  process  of  God  is  contrived  to 
bring  us  round,  at  last,  to  the  simple  state  which  we  embraced,  in  feeling,  and  help 
us  to  embrace  it  in  wisdom.  Then  the  first  love  fills  the  whole  nature,  and  the 
diviae  beauty  of  the  child  is  perfected  in  the  divine  beauty  of  a  vigorous  and  vic- 
torious manhood.  The  beginning  is  the  beginning  of  the  end — the  end  the  child 
and  fruit  of  the  beginning.  Where  the  transition  to  this  state  of  Divine  conscious- 
ness, from  a  merely  self-conscious  life  under  sin,  is  inartificially  made,  and  distorted 
by  no  mixtures  of  tumult  from  the  subject's  own  eagerness,  it  is  in  the  birth,  a  kind 
of  celestial  state,  like  that  of  the  glorified — clear,  clean,  peaceful  and  full,  wanting 
nothing  but  what,  for  the  time,  it  does  not  know  it  wants — the  settled  confidence, 
the  practically-instructed  wisdom,  the  established  and  tried  character  of  the  glori- 
fied. And  yet  aU  the  better  is  it,  imparadised  in  this  glory,  this  first  love,  this 
regenerative  Hfe,  this  inward  lifting  of  the  soul's  order,  that  a  prize  so  trans- 
cendent is  stUl,  in  a  sense,  to  be  won  or  fought  out  and  gained  as  a 
victory.  For  life  has  now  a  meaning,  and  its  work  is  great — as  great,  in 
fact,  in  the  humblest  walks  and  affairs  as  in  the  highest.  {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
The  decline  of  spiritual  love  : — I.  Its  indications.  How  can  we  discern  the  subtle 
beginnings  of  this  decline  ?    At  the  outset,  let  us  clear  away  an  error  which  has 


CHAP.n.]  REVELATION.  117 

been  the  source  of  perplexity  and  even  needless  despondency  to  some  earnest  men. 
The  loss  of  the  first  freshness  of  spiritual  emotion  is  not  necessarily  a  decline  of 
spiritual  love.  The  early  excitement  is  not  strength — true  strength  comes  when  it 
passes  into  action.  The  early  splendour  of  the  morning  is  beautiful,  but  who 
would  wish  that  it  should  never  melt  into  the  stronger  glory  of  the  noonday  ?  The 
first  emotions  of  childhood  are  beautiful,  but  who  would  not  exchange  them  in  all 
their  freshness  for  the  calm,  sober  power  of  manhood  ?  So  in  Christian  life  :  the 
young  excitement  must  mature  into  more  quiet  but  abiding  power.  We  must,  then, 
look  deeper  than  the  changef ulness  of  emotion  to  detect  the  signs  of  declining  love ; 
we  must  enter  into  the  very  nature  of  love  itself,  and  we  shall  find  them  there.  1. 
Love  is  profound  self-sacrifice.  In  love  the  soul  comes  out  of  the  sphere  of 
merely  personal  life:  the  thought  of  the  "I,"  and  the  "mine,"  are  no  longer 
supreme ;  they  almost  vanish  in  living  for  another.  A  man's  self  becomes  associa- 
ted with  another  self,  and  the  two  souls  become  one  in  devotion.  Therefore,  when 
our  life  finds  another  centre,  and  the  world,  or  its  friendships,  or  its  ambitions, 
create  our  ruling  emotions  ;  when  to  be  alone  with  God  is  no  longer  blessedness  ; 
when  prayer  loses  its  inspiration  ;  when  we  begin  to  trust  in  our  own  power — to  rest 
in  self,  and  be  coldly  contented  there;  when  the  feeling  rises,  *•  I  am  rich  and  in- 
creased in  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing,"  knowing  not  all  the  time  that  "  we  are 
wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  bUnd,"  then  the  light  of  love  is  fading,  and 
earthborn  clouds  are  quenching  its  brightness.  2.  Love  proves  its  reality  by  the 
resemblance  it  creates  to  the  beloved.  No  man  can  long  conceal  the  fire  that  burns 
on  his  heart's  altar,  so  no  true  Christian  can  conceal  his  love  to  Christ.  If  we  do 
not  grow  more  true,  more  holy,  more  submissive,  our  resemblance  to  Christ  is 
growing  fainter  and  our  love  is  declining.  3.  Love  proves  its  reality  by  its  courage 
in  confronting  opposition.  Therefore,  when  men  can  turn  us  aside,  when  ex- 
pediency can  mould  us,  when  we  stand  like  cowards  looking  back  lingeringly  on  the 
path  we  have  forsaken,  afraid  to  return,  afraid  to  go  on  ;  when,  in  the  midst  of  a 
sinful  generation,  we  are  ashamed  of  Christ,  and  deny  Him  by  selling  our  Christian 
principle  for  gain,  truth  for  peace,  devotion  for  safety.  Christian  profession  for  the 
friendship  of  the  world — then  is  the  fire  of  our  love  going  down,  the  altar  becoming 
cold,  the  temple  growing  dark,  and  "  we  have  left  our  first  love."    II.  Its  dangers. 

1.  It  renders  the  Christian  a  hindrance  to  the  power  of  truth.  A  man  professing  to 
live  for  Christ,  professing  to  be  inspired  by  an  infinite  love,  professing  to  believe  in 
a  glorious  inmiortality,  and  yet  cold  and  indifferent !  The  world  reads  that,  and 
what  wonder  that  it  mocks  at  faith  ?  Like  an  iceberg,  such  a  man  stands  between 
the  world  and  the  sun  of  God's  gospel,  chilling  its  warmth,  and  killing  its  power. 

2.  The  inner  coldness  of  heart  is  the  beginning  of  denial  in  the  life.  The  man 
whose  love  is  declining  is  going  on  a  path  that  will  soon  lead  him  into  open  denial, 
for  when  spiritual  love  lights  not  his  altar,  there  are  dark  powers  ever  slumbering 
near  that  will  kindle  another  fire  there.  The  man's  besetting  sin  is  never  far  away, 
and  it  will  soon  crowd  his  circumstances  with  temptation.  And  this  danger 
is  all  the  greater  because  it  is  so  silent,  m.  Its  remedy.  1.  "Eemember." 
It  is  sad  work  to  look  back  over  the  past,  and  trace  the  path  of  failure 
and  decline.  The  decay  of  all  beautiful  life  is  sad,  but  sad  it  is  indeed  when  a  man 
can  trace  it  in  his  own  soul.  It  is  well  to  be  thus  sorrowful ;  it  is  a  blessed  thing  if 
the  tears  do  fall  1  2.  But  rest  not  in  mournful  retrospect.  "  Kepent,  and  do  the 
first  works."  Go  back  to  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  gaze  there  till  your  coldness  is 
melted  and  your  love  springs  afresh.  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  Spiritual  declensions  : — 
I.  Inquire  into  the  nature  of  this  first  love,  and  the  manner  in  which  it 

GENERALLY  OPERATES   IN    THE   COMMENCEMENT   OF  THE   CHRISTIAN  LIFE.       1.    The  early 

love  of  true  believers  has  in  it  something  which  distinguishes  it  from  that  which 
follows  afterwards,  not  indeed  in  its  nature,  but  in  its  adjuncts  and  mode  of  opera- 
tion. An  increasing  knowledge  of  Christ  will  increase  and  confirm  our  attachment 
to  Him,  and  we  shall  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  in  proportion  as  we  cul- 
tivate communion  with  Him.  Yet  at  first  there  is  often  a  greater  warmth  of  affec- 
tion, a  more  operative  energy,  a  greater  disposition  to  make  sacrifices  and  to 
encounter  difficulties,  than  is  displayed  in  the  subsequent  parts  of  life.  2.  This 
"  first  love  "  is  probably  so-called  because  it  is  generally  the  first  principle  that  dis- 
covers itself  in  Christian  converts ;  and  before  the  other  parts  of  their  character 
have  had  time  to  develop  themselves,  we  often  witness  some  of  the  effects  of  this 
holy  principle.  (1)  In  producing  an  aversion  of  the  mind  from  what  is  displeasing 
to  the  object  beloved.  (2)  The  Christian's  first  love  produces  ardent  desires 
and  a  vigorous  pursuit  after   spiritual  and  heavenly  objects.      (3)  It  appears 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.il 

in  a  fixed  and  decided  resolution  to  cleave  to  the  Lord,  and  to  follow  Him. 

(4)  Early  love  discovers  itself  in  an  affectionate  regard  for  those  who  have 
been  the  honoured    instruments    of    bringing  us    to  the  knowledge  of    Christ. 

(5)  Another  effect  of  this  principle  is,  a  readiness  to  submit  it  to  the 
institutions  of  the  gospel,  and  openly  to  profess  the  name  of  Jesus,  notwithstanding 
the  difficulties  which  may  He  in  the  way.     il.  Point  out  some  of  the  symptoms 

OF   SPERITUAIi   DECLENSION,    OR     WHEN    IT     MAY     BE    SAID    THAT    WE   HAVE     "LEFT   OUR 

FIRST  LOVE."  1.  Losing  that  relish  and  savour  of  heavenly  things  which  was 
formerly  experienced,  is  an  unhappy  sign  of  religious  declension.  2.  A  vain  and 
trifling  conversation  is  another  of  these  symptoms  of  decay.  When  persons  are 
disposed  to  talk  about  anything  rather  than  the  concerns  of  their  souls,  and  the 
things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  though  there  may  be  nothing  directly 
sinful  in  the  subject  of  discourse,  yet  it  betrays  a  great  want  of  spirituality,  and  a 
declension  in  the  power  of  religion.  3.  Keligious  declensions  generally  begin  at 
the  closet;  and  where  the  important  duties  of  meditation,  self-examination,  and 
private  prayer,  are  either  totally  neglected  or  performed  in  a  superficial  manner, 
we  need  no  stronger  proof  of  having  indeed  forsaken  our  first  love.  4.  The 
prevalency  of  a  selfish  spirit  is  another  fearful  sign.  Instead  of  adding  grace  to 
grace,  and  building  up  themselves  on  their  most  holy  faith,  they  are  adding  house 
to  house,  and  land  to  land,  while  the  edification  of  the  Church  and  the  general 
interests  of  religion  are  only  regarded  as  secondary  objects.  What  can  more  fear- 
fully portend  the  ruin  of  a  people  who  are  in  such  a  case !  5.  A  disposition  to 
contend  for  doctrinal  religion,  rather  than  for  that  which  is  practical  and  experi- 
mental, is  a  sign  of  spiritual  decay.  Where  persons  are  over-zealous  about  minor 
points,  and  are  httle  concerned  to  promote  the  religion  of  the  heart  and  a  universal 
obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  they  resemble  the  Pharisees,  who  were  punctihous 
enough  in  tithing  mint  and  anise  and  cummin,  while  they  neglected  the  weightier 
matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  faith,  and  the  love  of  God.  6.  When  the  care 
of  our  families  is  neglected,  and  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  is  not  strictly 
inculcated,  this  also  is  a  sign  of  spiritual  declension.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
First  love  left : — These  are  words  of  complaint ;  some  would  call  it  fault-finding ; 
and,  as  such,  might  have  repelled  us  from  the  complainer.  But  such  is  the  nature 
and  tone  of  the  complaint,  that  we  feel  attracted,  not  repelled  ;  humbled,  but  not 
hurt.  The  reproof  is  keen,  yet  it  casts  no  shadow  on  the  grace  of  the  reprover. 
But  the  preface  to  the  complaint  claims  special  notice ;  for  that  complaint  does  not 
stand  alone.  And  what  strikes  us  most  in  it,  is  the  minute  enumeration  of  services 
performed  by  this  Church,  ere  He  speak  the  words  of  censure.  "  I  know  thy  works," 
&c.  He  was  no  austere  man,  no  hard  master,  no  censorious  fault-finder,  but  loving 
and  generous,  possessed  to  the  uttermost  of  that  "  charity  which  suffereth  long,"  <fec. 
But  it  is  not  the  mere  recital  of  His  servant's  good  deeds  that  strikes  us  ;  it  is  His 
manifest  appreciation  of  these.  His  delight  in  them.  His  grateful  sense  of  the 
service  rendered.  Faults  there  would  be  in  these  labours,  but  He  sees  none ;  imper- 
fections in  the  endurances  of  trial,  but  He  makes  mention  of  none.  He  speaks  as 
one  full  of  gratitude  for  favours  conferred.  He  names  His  servant's  name,  and  is 
not  ashamed  to  confess  him.  What  a  dignity,  what  a  value,  is  thus  affixed  to  every 
act,  even  of  the  simplest,  commonest  service  for  Him  !  But  our  text  goes  beyond 
all  this.  It  teaches  us  His  desire  for  our  love,  and  His  disappointment  at  losing  it, 
or  any  part  of  it.  It  is  not  so  much  our  labour  as  our  love  that  He  asks.  The 
star  had  grown  dim,  the  flower  faded,  warm  love  had  cooled,  and  the  Ephesus  of 
the  second  generation  was  not  the  Ephesus  of  the  first.  Over  this  lost  first  love  He 
mourns,  as  the  gem  which  of  all  others  He  prized  the  most.  It  is  not  of  slothful 
service,  or  waning  zeal,  or  failing  liberality,  or  slackening  warfare  that  He  com- 
plains. This  is  the  substance  of  the  complaint,  the  burden  of  the  disappointment — 
the  loss  of  half  a  heart!  What  true  hearted  man  but  must  be  humbled  and 
melted  down  beneath  it  1  Why  should  He  love  so  much  and  I  so  little  ?  But 
let  us  follow  out  a  little  further  this  Divine  rebuke,  this  touching  remon- 
strance. "  Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love ! "  And  for  what  reason  ?  Did 
the  coldness  begin  on  My  side  or  on  thine  ?  Have  I  become  less  lovable,  less 
loving  ?  "  Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love  !  "  And  what  or  whom  hast  thou  substituted  ? 
Hast  thy  power  of  loving  ceased,  and  thy  heart  contracted  ?  Or  is  there  some  second 
love  that  has  usurped  the  place  of  the  first  ?  Is  it  the  world  that  has  thus  come 
in  ?  Is  it  pleasure  ?  Is  it  literature  or  science  ?  Is  it  business  ?  Is  it  politics  ? 
Is  it  the  creature  in  some  of  its  various  forms,  and  with  the  seductive  glitter  of  its 
many-sided  beauty?     "Thou   hast  left   thy  first  love!"    And  what  hast  thou 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  119 

gained  by  the  leaving  ?     What  has  this  strange  turn  of  capricious  affection  done  for 
you  ?     Has  it  made  you  a  happier,  holier,  truer,  stronger,  more  noble,  more  earnest 
man  ?    Ah  !  ask  your  hearts  what  has  been  your  gain  ?    A  few  indulgences  which 
once  you  did  not  dare  to  venture  on.     A  few  gay  smiles  of  worldly  companiooship. 
A  few  pleasures,  for  which,  till  your  first  love  had  gone,  you  had  no  relish.      These 
are  some  of  the  things  for  which  thou  hast  exchanged  thy  first  love  I     For  these 
thou  hast  sold  thy  Lord  !  Oh,  heartless  Ephesian,  retrace  thy  steps  at  once  I    Thou 
didst  run  well :    who  hath  hindered  thee  ?    Begin  once  more  at  the  beginning.    Go 
back  to  the  fountain  head  of  love  —  I  mean  thy  Lord's  love  to  thee,  the  sinner — 
there  refill  thy  empty  vessel.    Go  back  to  the  blessed  Sun,  whoee  light  is  still  as  free 
and  brilliant  as  ever ;    there  rekindle  thy  dying  torch ;    there  warm  thy  cold  heart, 
and  learn  to  love  again  as  thou  didst  love  at  first.    {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)         The  fatal 
fiaw  in  the  Ephesian  Churches : — It  is  curious  that  a  Church  so  marked  for  its 
patience  and  purity  should  be  threatened  with  the  loss  of  its  very  existence  unless 
it  repented.   Had  sensuality,  or  violence,  or  fraud  entered  the  Church  ?  Far  from  it, 
the  Church  is  praised  for  its  exclusion  of  the  evil  lives.     A  high  morality  marked 
its  members,  and  in  maintaining  their  high   standard  they  had  exercised  their 
patient  endurance  of   the  world's  scorn  and  opposition.     Such  a  character  had 
seemed  to  us  almost  perfect.    But  God  looks  upon  the  heart.     He  saw  beneath 
this  admirable  exterior  a  weakening  in  the  springs  of  spiritual  life.      The  pride  of 
consistency    had  continued   to    keep   the  Church  to  its  old  forms  of  excellence, 
but  the  Divine  love-in  the  heart,  which  had  been  before  its  only  source  of  conduct, 
had  lost  its  strength.     The  outward  life  was  beautiful,  but  the  heart  was  decay- 
ing.    Zeal,  orthodoxy,  carefulness,  boldness,  heroism,  were  all  there,  but  the  love 
of   God,   out   of   which   all  these  virtues   should   spring,   in    order  to   be  God- 
like and  permanent,    was   failing,    and    on    this    failing    our  Lord    rests    His 
eyes    as    He    warns  this  prosperous  Church  of  its   danger.      It  had   begun   to 
lose  its  spiritual  stimulus :    to  substitute  self  for  Christ,  pride  for  humility ;    to 
change  principle  into  routine,  and  to  make  the  religious  life  a  perfunctory  life. 
It  was  only  a  beginning,  but   God  saw  the  danger  of  a  beginning,  and  warned 
the  Church  accordingly.  The  beginning  was  the  great  departure ;  all  else  would  be  but 
natural  sequence.    Hence  the  beginning  was  to  be  stoutly  rebuked.      The  beginning 
was  the  sin,  the  root-sin,  to  be  repented  of.    We  do  not  know  to  what  influences  the 
Ephesian  Church  yielded  when  it  began  to  lose  its  love  principle  as  the  source  of  its 
life.    It  may  have  been  a  strong  satisfaction  with  its  own  attainments.     It  scarcely 
could  have  been  a  conformity  to  the  world.     That  side  of  error  it  seems  to  have 
avoided,  and  to  have  exposed  itself  on  the  other  to  spiritual  pride.    But  these  ex- 
tremes meet.     They  are  equally  hostile  to  a  genuine  godly  life.    The  worldly  con- 
formity ;s  the  more  odious  because  it  is  so  open  and  conspicuous,  but  the  spiritual 
pride  is  as  really  a  departure  from  God  and  a  surrender  to  Satan.    It  is  often  hard 
to  detect,  because  it  goes  clothed  with  the  garb  of  a  strict  outward  life,  and  this  fact 
makes  it  peculiarly  dangerous  as  a  guide  to  undeveloped  Christians.     Still,  there 
are  marks  by  which  even  this  type  of  Christian  can  be  discovered,  and  its  harm- 
fulness  avoided.     These  spiritually  proud  Christians  are  apt  to  show  great  severity 
toward  all  who  differ  with  them.     They  are  right  in  all  their  views  and  practices, 
and  all  others  are  wrong.     Dogmatic  and  dictatorial,  they  will  brook  no  opposi- 
tion, and  in  disposition  and  in  action  {as  far  as  they  can  be)  they  are  as  relentless 
as  the  Dominican  inquisitors.     Their  faith  is  presumption,  their  zeal  fanaticism. 
And  all  this  comes  about  because  their  love  is  giving  place  to  pride.     You  will 
see  these  zealots  oversetting  the  Divine  order  for  their  favourite  hobby.     They 
will  dip  the  shafts  of  controversy  into  poison  and  spend  their  strength  in  aiming 
them  at  their  brethren  who  cannot  pronounce  their  shibboleth.     In  all  this  they 
are  most  sincere.     Their  lives  are  pure  and  honest.     They  have  much  that  com- 
mands commendation,  and  their  steadfastness  is  a  glory  to  the  Church.    But  they 
have  allowed  the  principle  of  love  to  fade  in  their  hearts,  and  Satan  has  found 
an  entrance  there  to  vitiate  motive  and  impulse.     [H.  Crosby.)        Red-hot  religion 
has  its  place  and  value,  but  white-hot  religion,  the  silent,  intense  force  which 
acts  without  sparks  or  noise,  is   a  diviner  thing.    Is  it  thus  with  our  love  to 
God?    Has  that  passion  simply  changed  from  red  to  white?     Has  sentiment 
become  principle,   the  ecstasy  a  habit,  the  passion  a  law?     If   so,   the  former 
days  were  not  better  than  these.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.)        Ashes  on  a  rusty  altar : — 
The  reUgious  profession  of  some  people  is  like  the  ashes  on  a  rusty  altar,  which 
show  that  there  once  were  warmth  and  light  and  flame,  but  which  also  show  that 
it  is  long  since  they  worshipped  there.     {J.  Hamilton^  D.D.)        Emotion  wanted 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

in  religion: — It  is  said  we  want  principle  in  religion,  not  sentiment.  We  want  both. 
As  well  say  we  do  not  want  sails,  only  the  hull  of  the  vessel.  With  conscience 
for  the  rudder,  and  truth  for  the  hull,  we  want  emotion — for  that  is  motion,  surely. 
And  Christ  says :  "  I  know  thy  works.  Nevertheless,  I  have  somewhat  against 
thee,  because  thou  has  left  thy  first  love."  Decay  of  love  :  — "  As  when  the  root  of 
a  tree  perisheth,"  says  Thomas  Manton,  "  the  leaves  keep  green  for  a  while,  but 
within  a  while  they  wither  and  fall  off;  so  love  is  the  root  and  heart 
of  all  other  duties,  and  when  that  decayeth  other  things  decay  with  it." 
Neglected  love  : — The  hottest  heart  of  love,  like  heated  iron,  if  left,  will  get  cold  of 
itself.  {W.  W.  Andrew,  M.A.)  Zeal  for  truth  must  he  loving  : — There  is  some- 
thing without  which  even  zeal  for  truth  may  be  but  a  scorching  and  devouring 
flame ;  and  that  is  the  "  first  love,"  the  love  ever  fresh  and  tender  for  Him  who 
first  loved  us,  the  love  which  teaches  us  to  win  and  not  to  alienate,  to  raise  and  not 
to  crush,  those  who  may  only  be  mistaken  in  their  views,  and  are  not  determined 
enemies  of  God.  {W.  Milligan,  D.D.)  Remember  therefore  from  whence  thou 
art  fallen. — Now,  and  then : — A  celebrated  orator  once  delivered  a  lecture,  the  title 
of  which  was  "  Now  and  Then ; "  and  he  proceeded  to  point  out  in  eloquent 
language  the  vast  improvements  in  civilisation  and  in  useful  arts  whic|i  had  been 
effected  since  his  own  early  days.  But  a  very  different  Now  and  Then  is  suggested 
by  the  text.  1.  First,  consider  man  as  he  appears  to  view  when  newly  created. 
How  great  he  seems  I  He  was  created  in  the  image,  after  the  likeness,  of  God 
Himself.  This  was  true  of  him  in  respect  of  his  personality.  As  distinguished 
from  the  things  and  creatures  having  life,  which  had  been  previously  created,  man 
was  a  *'  person  "  with  powers  of  will,  of  origination,  of  causation,  of  thought.  As 
a  person,  he  was  made  capable  of  holding  communion  with  a  personal  God.  Man 
was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  too,  in  respect  of  his  dominion.  He  is  the  vice- 
gerent of  God  on  earth,  ruling  a  mighty  empire ;  the  rest  of  creation  lies  at  his  feet. 
Everything  animate  and  inanimate  was  subjected  to  his  sway.  And  this  supremacy 
of  man  was  a  shadow  of  the  sovereignty  of  God.  Again,  man  was  created  in  the 
image  of  God  in  respect  of  purity.  There  was  not  a  thought  of  his  heart  which  he 
would  have  been  ashamed  for  God  to  know.  His  will  was  in  entire  harmony  with 
the  will  of  God.  He  rejoiced  in  fellowship  with  Him.  2.  "Kemember  from 
whence  thou  art  faUen."  The  fall  of  man.  It  is  an  event  which  we  cannot  ponder 
without  being  oppressed  by  a  sense  of  awful  mystery.  Like  all  the  facts  connected 
with  sin,  its  nature,  its  punishment,  and  the  cure  provided  for  it  in  the  gospel,  the 
narrative  of  the  Fall  leaves  on  the  mind  a  deep  conviction  that  God  regards  sin 
with  a  hatred  which  we  cannot  fully  comprehend,  and  to  which  revelation  itself 
does  not  supply  the  key.  Mysterious  as  this  doctrine  of  original  sin  is,  the  whole 
religion  of  the  Bible  assumes  the  truth  of  it  and  is  based  upon  it.  The  evil  extends 
not  only  to  the  actual  deeds  of  men,  but  to  the  imaginations,  the  thoughts,  desires, 
and  affections  of  the  heart.  Those  who  have  been  brought  up  in  a  moral  and 
religious  atmosphere  are  happily  guarded  from  the  outbreak  of  sin  by  their  habits 
and  associations  and  the  good  opinion  of  those  around  them.  But  this  outward 
appearance  does  not  affect  or  govern  the  state  of  the  heart.  Even  under  favourable 
circumstances  the  corrupt  state  of  the  heart  may  be  recognised.  "  Remember  from 
whence  thou  art  fallen."  (1)  Let  the  remembrance  of  it  remind  us  of  the  absolute 
necessity  of  conversion.  Man  must  be  changed  in  nature  and  disposition,  in  mind 
and  heart,  in  order  that  he  may  be  restored  to  the  image  of  God.  (2)  Let  the 
remembrance  of  it  deepen  our  humility.  There  is  nothing  which  effectually  hides 
pride  from  man,  save  the  consciousness  wrought  in  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that 
he  is  by  nature  sinful.  "  Where  is  boasting  then  ?  It  is  excluded."  (3)  Let  the 
remembrance  of  it  strengthen  our  hatred  of  sin.  It  is  the  man  who  comes  up  to 
the  Temple,  crying  out  of  the  depths  of  a  contrite  heart,  "  God,  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner,"  whom  God  sends  "down  to  his  house  justified."  (4)  Lastly,  let  the 
remembrance  of  it  exalt  our  conceptions  of  the  surpassing  love  of  Christ,  and  of  the 
mighty  work  of  redemption,  which  He  died  to  accomplish.  He  came  to  restore  in 
man  the  image  and  likeness  of  God.  There  is  no  salvation  in  any  other.  Think 
^f  what  man  is.  There  is  no  tribe,  no  race,  not  infected  with  this  taint  of  sin.  The 
holiest  men  ever  known  are  those  who  have  most  keenly  felt,  most  bitterly  lamented, 
their  own  sinfulness.  There  must  be  a  mediator,  a  sacrifice,  an  advocate,  to  make 
such  beings  acceptable  to  God.  {F.  F.  Goe,  M.A.)  Backsliding  : — I.  What 
then,  in  the  first  place,  are  the  great  evils  which  are  peculiar  to  the  sin  of  back- 
sliding from  God  ?  1.  In  the  first  place,  I  say  to  you  that  it  is  awfully  aggravated 
for  the  reason  that  it  is  committed  against  more  light  than  others  have.     There  are 


CHAP.n.]  REVELATION.  121 

men  that  sin  through  ignorance.  This  cannot,  however,  be  said  of  the  man  who 
has  once  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious : "  he  does  not  sin  because  he  knows  no 
better.  But  you  are  to  observe  that  there  is  a  light  which  he  cannot  extinguish  : 
and  what  is  that?  There  is  the  light  which  his  memory  casts  upon  him.  2. 
Secondly,  backsliding  is  a  sin  not  only  against  light,  but  against  the  love  of  God. 
Backsliding  is  a  sin  against  pardoning  mercy.  3.  In  the  third  place,  remember 
that  this  conduct  greatly  injures  the  cause  of  God.  First  of  all  it  has  a  saddening 
effect  on  the  Church  itself.  And,  secondly,  it  very  often  happens  that  when  one 
backslides  from  God  he  takes  others  with  him.  4.  This  conduct  condemns  itself, ' 
and  is  a  witness  against  itself.  Observe  the  two  states.  Once  you  sought  the  Lord 
earnestly,  and  called  on  Him  in  sincerity  and  in  truth.  Remember  what  you  were, 
and  look  at  what  you  are  now.  I  ask  you  for  a  moment,  which  of  these  two  states 
is  the  right  one  ?  Would  you  say,  I  am  right  now  ;  or  must  you  not  be  obliged  to 
say.  Oh,  no,  those  were  the  days  in  which  indeed  I  was  right.  5.  Remember  that 
you  are  bringing,  by  your  conduct,  an  evil  report  on  good  men.  How  is  it  that  you 
left  the  Lord,  and  left  His  people  ?  What  is  the  language  of  this  conduct  to  those 
that  are  round  about  you  but  this — "  I  tried  religion,  and  I  did  not  Uke  it?  "  There 
are,  as  I  have  said,  evils  in  your  case.  And  will  you  just  allow  me  to  remind  you 
that  you  are  in  danger.  You  are  in  danger  of  desertion  from  God.  Secondly, 
I  must  remind  you  that  you  are  in  danger  not  only  of  desertion,  but  of  the  terrors 
which  are  consequent  on  the  fulfilment  of  His  awful  threat.  If  this  be  the  case, 
then  take  heed,  brethren,  some  of  you  are  standing  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice 
now,  into  which,  if  you  fall,  oh,  the  terrors  of  that  eternity,  the  horrors 
of  that  state,  into  which  you  will  plunge  yourselves  by  the  carelessness  of 
walking  and  backsliding  from  the  Lord  your  God  !  (P.  C.  Turner.)  Religious 
declension  : — I.  What  abe  the  fiest  works  of  the  sincere  convert  ?  They  were 
penitence,  prayer,  and  faith.  H.  A  state  of  religious  declension,  of  spiritual 
decay,  will  manifest  itself  either  in  a  partial  or  total  abandonment  of  these 

FIRST  WORKS.  HI.  ThE  ONLY  WAY  IS  TO  RETRACE  THE  STEPS  YOU  FORMERLY  TOOK,  OR  AS  IT 
18  EMPHATICALLY  DESCRIBED  IN  THE  TEXT,  "  TO  DO  THE  FIRST  WORKS."    (T.  Morell,  M.A.) 

His  lost  ideal : — The  degenerate  plant  has  no  consciousness  of  its  own  degradation, 
nor  could  it,  when  reduced  to  the  character  of  a  weed  or  a  wild-flower,  recognise  in 
the  fair  and  delicate  garden-plant  the  type  of  its  former  self.  The  tamed  and 
domesticated  animal,  stunted  in  size,  and  subjugated  in  spirit,  could  not  feel  any 
sense  of  humiliation  when  confronted  with  its  wild  brother  of  the  desert,  fierce, 
strong,  and  free,  as  if  discerning  in  that  spectacle  the  noble  type  from  which  itself 
had  fallen.  But  it  is  different  with  a  conscious  moral  being.  Reduce  such  an  one 
ever  so  low,  yet  you  cannot  obliterate  in  his  inner  nature  the  consciousness  of  fall- 
ing beneath  himself  ;  you  cannot  blot  out  from  his  mind  the  latent  reminiscence  of 
a  nobler  and  better  self  which  he  might  have  been,  and  which  to  have  lost  is  guilt 
and  wretchedness.  [J.  Caird.)  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  remove 
thy  candlestick  out  of  his  place,  except  thou  repent. — The  coming  of  Christ  a  warn- 
ing against  declension : — The  awf ulness  of  this  warning  will  the  more  appear,  if  we 
consider  to  what  Church  it  was  directed.  It  was  not  spoken  to  the  Church  of 
Galatia,  which  had  been  so  soon  shaken  from  the  faith,  and  entangled  in  the 
heresies  of  Gnostics  and  judaising  teachers  :  nor  to  the  Church  in  Corinth,  which 
had  been  rent  by  schisms,  tempted  by  rivalry  among  its  gifted  members,  and  pro- 
faned by  a  contemptuous  usage  of  the  Holy  Sacrament  of  His  Body  and  Blood.  It 
was  spoken  to  the  Church  in  Ephesus,  famous  from  the  beginning  for  its  burning 
and  indignant  zeal  against  the  illusions  of  Satan  ;  in  the  midst  of  which  they  that 
had  used  curious  arts  brought  forth  their  costly  books  and  burnt  them  before  all 
men ;  illustrious  for  the  long  abode  of  St.  Paul ;  for  his  three  years  of  tears  and 
warnings ;  for  his  epistle  of  prayers  and  commendations  ;  it  was  to  this  Church  so 
cherished,  illuminated,  and  blessed  that  these  words  were  spoken;  "I  have  some- 
what against  thee :  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  The  Ephesian  Church  in 
its  outset  so  kindled  and  ardent,  had,  by  slow  and  measured  decrease,  parted  with 
its  inward  devotion.  There  are  certain  inferences  which  bear  pointedly  upon  our 
own  state  and  probation  to  be  drawn  from  this  warning,  and  to  these  we  shall  do 
well  to  turn.  .  1.  For  example,  one  great  practical  truth  issuing  from  what  has  been 
said  is  this :  that  there  may  be  much  fair  and  really  commendable  religion,  where 
all  is  not  right  at  heart.  Whole  branches  of  the  Church,  with  all  their  altars 
standing,  and  with  all  their  visible  appointments  of  Divine  worship  abundantly  and 
publicly  maintained,  may  yet  be  far  gone  before  God.  And  a  Christian,  with  all 
his  usages  of  religion  still  continued,  may  yet  have  left  his  first  love.    For  these 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

outward  and  passive  customs  are  the  last  to  give  way ;  the  inward  disease  must  be 
far  advanced  towards  its  full  and  fatal  ripeness  before  the  outward  habits,  which 
cost  80  little  and  imply  so  much,  are  visibly  affected.    Cankered  trees  still  put  forth 
their  leaves,  long  after  their  source  of  fruitfulness  is  dry.    A  sense  of  duty  outlives 
all  fervour  of  heart.    What  was  once  a  delight  is  stiU  felt  to  be  an  obligation. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  is  the  state  of  multitudes  whom  the  Church 
refrains  to  censure,  and  the  world  believes  devout.     2.  Another  truth  we  may  learn 
is,  that  when  there  is  anything  wrong  at  heart,  all  beside,  how  good  soever  it  may 
appear  and  be,  is  marred.    The  state  of  the  heart  is  the  very  soul  of  a  religious 
life ;  and  it  is  on  this  that  the  direct  eye  of  God  is  fixed.    Where  there  is  any  per- 
mitted declension  of  the  heart,  there  two  evils  are  always  present.    It  cancels  and 
annuls  the  whole  worship  and  service  of  outward  religion.    It  opens  the  beginnings 
of  incalculable  departures  from  God.    And  that  for  this  reason.    All  acts  of  a 
religious  life  are  thenceforth  done  with  a  slack  and  unmeaning  intention.    But  all 
the  force  of  obedience  is  in  the  motive.    It  is  this  that  gives  emphasis  and  meaning 
to  fasts,  prayers,  labours,  alms,  for  the  Name  of  Christ.    To  feed  natural  hunger 
from  mere  natural  benevolence  is  not  ministering  to  Christ,  but  obeying  a  mere 
animal  impulse,  good  indeed,  but  stunted,  and  not  necessarily  Christian.     The 
same  is  more  manifestly  true  of  the  higher  acts  of  religion ;  for  instance,  the  Holy 
Communion.    What  does  it  become  but  a  dutiful  formality,  a  heartless  reverence  ? 
And  further,  as  the  motives  of  the  heart  grow  slack,  they  become  divided.    It  is 
intensity  that  unites  the  wiU ;  when  it  moves  slowly  and  with  reluctance  it  is  soon 
distracted  by  a   multitude    of    forces.     Self-sparing,    neighbouring    temptations, 
worldly  regards,  personal  schemes,  private  attachments,  the  influence  of  example, 
indulgence  of  particular  affections  of  the  mind,  soon  come  in  to  divide  a  heart  wluch 
has  ceased  to  be  united  in  the  love  of  Christ.     "  Where  the  carcase  is,  there  will 
the  eagles  be  gathered  together."    And  this  slack  and  divided  state  of  heart,  as  it 
cancels  the  force  of  all  religion,  so  it  is  the  beginning  of  unknown  declension.    Even 
though  it  begin  in  no  more  than  a  colder  affection  or  a  relaxed  resolution,  yet  it  may 
end  in  quenching  the  Spirit  of  God.     Slight  diseases  bring  on  great  decays :  the 
least  bias  in  a  never-resting  wheel  tends  to  the  extremest  deviations :  a  selfish  heart 
may  end  in  crucifying  Christ  afresh  unto  itself ;  and  a  soul  without  love  may  sink 
into  the  darkness  of  atheism.     There  are  certain  classes  of  people  to  whom  these 
truths  are  especially  needful.     1.  As  first,  to  those  that  have  been  carefuUy  brought 
up  from  childhood  in  the  knowledge  and  duties  of  religion.    It  often  happens  that 
those  who  in  childhood  have  been  deeply  affected  by  religion,  become  in  after  years 
cold  and  relaxed.    Little  by  little  a  new  tone  of  feeling  comes  over  them,  and  com- 
bines uneasily  with  old  practices ;  and  as  the  new  power  strengthens,  they  must 
needs  give  way  first  in  one  habit,  then  another,  till  the  barriers  of  the  whole 
character  are  broken  through.     2.  Another  class  of  persons  to  whom  these  warn- 
ings are  most  pointed  are  those  who,  after  a  sinful  or  careless  life,  have  once  been 
brought  to  repentance.    Afflictions,   death   of  friends,  great  sicknesses,  narrow 
escapes  of  life  or  ruin,  worldly  reverses,  and  the  like,  often  bring  about  great 
changes  of  heart.     They  awaken  sharp  pangs  of  remorse,  and  a  sudden  sense  of 
danger.    This  is  followed  by  deep  humiliation,  and  by  emotions  of  sorrow  and 
shame,  by  earnest  resolutions.     Perhaps  few  people  have  been  afflicted  without 
some  such  emotions  as  these  ;  and  true  and  heartfelt  as  they  are,  they  often  endure 
but  a  little  time.    They  are  the  sudden  burst  of  a  forced  shoot,  not  the  steady 
growth  of  years.    Their  very  fulness  makes  them  unstable.    After  recovery  or  return 
to  the  usual  ways  of  life,  their  first  emotions  gradually  find  a  level  in  the  ordinary 
commonplace  of  former  habits.    After  awhile  they  countenance  doubtful  acts,  and 
in  the  end  themselves  commit  them:   and  then  begins  a  reaction  against  the 
change.    Little  by  little  it  is  rescinded :  first  one  resolution  is  annulled,  and  then 
another.    In  the  end  they  return  into  their  former  selves  with  this  only  difference, 
that  they  have  once  repented,  and  again  turned  from  their  repentance.     3.  And 
once  more,  these  thoughts  are  full  of  wholesome  admonition  to  those  that  habitually 
communicate.     It  is  the  effect  of  the  Holy  Communion  to  confirm  the  habits  of 
mind  with  which  we  approach  the  altar.    If  we  come  to  it  with  a  lively  repentance, 
and  an  awakened  conscience,  with  thankfulness,  and  love,  howsoever  faint,  be  it 
only  true,  the  spiritual  virtues  which  30  forth  from  that  Holy  Sacrament  will 
deepen  and  perfect  all  these  devout  affections.     If  we  come  with  unimpressed 
hearts  and  a  sluggish  conscience,  with  shallow  emotions,  and  thoughts  that  termi- 
nate on  the  bread,  and  on  the  wine,  frequent  communion  wiU  be  an  occasion  of 
making  these  dangerous  states  of  heart  inveterate.    Perhaps  you  can  remember  that 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION,  123 

day  when,  after  long  preparation,  and  fear,  and  anxious  searching  of  yourselves, 
you  came  with  a  beating  heart  to  the  altar.  How  you  were  only  half  aware,  as  you 
knelt  before  the  unseen  Presence  of  your  Lord,  how  near  He  was  to  you;  and  yet 
your  hearts  burned  while  your  eyes  were  holden ;  and  all  that  day,  and  all  the  day 
after,  the  consciousness  was  present  still.  Have  you  ever  so  communicated  since  ? 
Do  you  now  go  to  that  Holy  Sacrament  with  a  cold  self-possession,  as  to  some 
familiar  thing  which  you  have  measured,  and  weighed,  and  scrutinised ;  or  with  a 
mind  less  sensitive  and  fearful,  and  with  a  whole  tone  of  character  lowered  and  less 
devout  ?  To  all  these,  then,  and  to  all  who  are  conscious  that  they  are  not  what 
they  were,  there  is  but  one  way  of  return.  The  first  step  is  penitent  recollection. 
"  Eemember  therefore  from  whence  thou  art  fallen."  Call  up  again  with  all  the 
vividness  of  memory  the  holier  seasons  of  your  past  life.  Kemember  your  confirma- 
tion— your  first  communion — your  earlier  devotions — the  aspirations  you  once 
breathed  towards  Him  whose  love  has  waxed  cold  in  you ;  and  the  tokens  of  His 
tender  care,  to  which  you  once  clung  so  fast.  The  next  step  is  by  special  confession 
of  our  particular  and  detailed  offences,  to  repent ;  that  is,  in  sorrow  to  forsake  our 
present  self  with  a  perfect  change  of  heart.  Before  we  can  be  once  more  what  we 
have  forfeited,  our  new  and  debased  character  must  be  thoroughly  put  off.  This  is 
the  penalty  of  sin.  And,  lastly,  we  must  begin  the  greatest  work  of  life  aU  over 
again.  "Do  the  first  works  "  ;  that  is,  the  earliest  and  the  best — the  first-fruits  we 
offered  in  better  days  to  God.  This  is  the  inevitable  law  of  our  recovery.  "  Except 
ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  Heaven."  [JS.  E.  Manning.)  Neglect  of  the  gospel  followed  by  its  removal : — 
What  then  is  it  which  a  man  has  to  do  who  is  desirous  of  becoming  truly  repentant  ? 
We  reply  that  his  great  business  is  earnest  prayer  to  Christ,  that  he  would  give  him 
the  Holy  Spirit,  to  enable  him  to  repent.  Of  course  we  do  not  mean  that  he  is  to 
confine  himself  to  prayer,  and  make  no  effort  at  correcting  what  may  be  wrong  in 
his  conduct.  But  there  is  more  in  this  exhortation  than  the  summons  to  repent- 
ance :  memory  is  appealed  to  as  an  assistant  in  the  duty  to  which  men  are  called. 
The  great  evil  with  the  mass  of  men  is,  that,  so  far  at  least  as  eternity  is  concerned, 
they  never  think  at  aU — once  make  them  think,  and  you  make  them  anxious  ;  once 
make  them  anxious,  and  they  will  labour  to  be  saved.  We  should  feel  that  we 
were  gaining  a  great  moral  hold  on  a  man,  if  we  prevailed  on  him  to  contrast  what 
he  is  with  what  Adam  was  ere  he  ate  the  forbidden  fruit.  It  is  a  contrast  which 
must  produce  the  sense  of  utter  degradation.  And  if  I  have  been  like  the  Ephesian 
Church,  what  Scripture  calls  a  backslider,  may  not  memory  tell  me  of  comforts  I 
experienced,  when  walking  closely  with  God,  of  communion  with  eternity  so  real  and 
distinct  that  I  seemed  already  delivered  from  the  trammels  of  flesh  ?  It  may  well 
be,  if  indeed  I  have  declined  in  godliness,  that  through  musing  on  past  times,  there 
will  be  excited  within  me  a  poignant  regret.  There  will  come  back  upon  me,  as 
upon  the  criminal  in  his  cell,  the  holy  music  of  better  days ;  and  there  will  be  a 
penetrating  power  in  the  once  gladdening  but  now  melancholy  strain,  which  there 
would  not  be  in  the  shrill  note  of  vengeance.  And  thus  in  each  case,  memory  may 
be  a  mighty  agent  in  bringing  me  to  repentance.  But  we  turn  from  the  exhortation 
to  the  threatening  contained  in  our  text,  "  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will 
remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his  place,  except  thou  repent."  Where  are  those 
Christian  societies  to  which  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  inscribed  their  Epistles  ?  Where 
is  the  Corinthian  Church,  so  affectionately  addressed,  though  so  boldly  reproved,  by 
the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles?  Where  is  the  Philippian  Church,  where  the 
Colossian,  where  the  Thessalonian,  the  letters  to  which  prove  how  cordially 
Christianity  had  been  received,  and  how  vigorously  it  flourished  ?  Where  are  the 
Seven  Churches  of  Asia,  respecting  which  we  are  assured  that  they  were  once 
strenuous  in  piety,  and  gave  promise  of  permanence  in  Christian  profession  and 
privilege?  Alas,  how  true  is  it  that  the  candlesticks  have  been  removed.  And 
never  let  it  be  thought  that  such  sentence  is  of  no  very  terrible  and  desolating 
character.  Come  any  evil  rather  than  the  unchurching  which  is  threatened  in  our 
text.  It  is  not  merely  that  Christianity  is  taken  away — though  who  shall  measure, 
who  imagine,  the  loss,  if  this  were  indeed  all  ? — but  it  is  that  God  must  frown  on  a 
land  from  which  He  hath  been  provoked  to  withdraw  His  gospel ;  and  that,  if  the 
frown  of  the  Almighty  rest  on  a  country,  the  sun  of  that  country's  greatness  goes 
rapidly  down,  and  the  dreariness  of  a  moral  midnight  fast  gathers  above  it  and 
around  it.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  gospel  removed  : — I.  That  a  nation  has  been 
UNCHUBCHED,  AND  THE  GOSPEL  HAS  BEEN  REMOVED.  1.  The  Jcws  are  an  eminent 
instance.    They  had  the  gospel  in  a  type  while  they  enjoyed  the  ceremonies,  they 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

had  the  gospel  unveiled  while  they  had  the  presence  of  Christ  among  them.  (1) 
They  were  a  people  that  had  the  greatest  titles.  They  were  called  by  His  name 
(Jer.  ii.  2,  3).  They  were  His  peculiar  treasure  ;  yet  He  hath  flung  this  treasure  out 
of  His  coffers.  (2)  The  privileges  they  enjoyed.  (3)  The  multitude  of  strange 
providences  they  had.  He  delivered  them  to  the  amazement  of  all  round  about 
them  ;  they  were  a  happy  people,  in  being  a  people  saved  by  the  Lord  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
29).  They  never  were  conquered,  but  God  raised  them  up  some  patrons.  Yet  not- 
withstanding all  these  providences,  whereby  God  so  miraculously  owned  them,  and 
all  the  dangers  from  whence  He  so  powerfully  delivered  them,  they  are  now  pulled 
up  by  the  root,  persecuted  by  man,  abandoned  by  God,  the  generation  of  His  wrath 
(Jer.  vii.  29).  No  spiritual  dew  falls  upon  these  mountains  of  Gilboa.  2.  The 
Seven  Churches  of  Asia,  to  whom  these  Epistles  are  written,  are  another  instance. 
How  do  their  places  know  them  no  more,  as  once  they  were  ?  Not  only  their  re- 
ligion, but  their  civil  politeness  is  exchanged  for  barbarism.  They  have  lost  their 
ancient  beauty  for  a  Turkish  deformity.  Mahomet's  horse  hath  succeeded  in  the 
place  of  the  Gospel-Dove.  The  triumphant  barmers  of  an  impostor  advanced  where 
the  standard  of  the  gospel  had  been  erected.     U.  That   the   kemoval   of   the 

GOSPEL   AND   UNCHUECHING   A  NATION   IS   THE    GREATEST    JUDGMENT.      Can   there   bs    a 

greater  judgment  than  to  have  the  "Word  of  God  removed,  to  want  a  prophet  to 
instruct  and  warn  ?  The  shutting  up  the  book  of  mercy  is  the  opening  the  book  of 
justice.  1.  The  gospel  is  the  choicest  mercy,  and  therefore  the  removal  of  it  the 
sharpest  misery.  The  gospel  is  so  much  the  best  of  blessings,  as  God  is  the  best  of 
Beings.  Without  this  we  should  sink  into  an  heathen  or  devilish  superstition.  2. 
It  is  made  worse  than  those  judgments  that  are  accounted  the  severest.  Plagues, 
■wars,  famine,  are  lighter  marks  of  Divine  anger  than  this.  God  may  take  notice  of 
a  people  under  the  smartest  afflictions,  but  when  He  takes  away  His  Word  He 
knows  a  people  no  longer.  We  may  hve  in  our  souls  by  the  mfluence  of  the  Word, 
when  we  have  not  bread  to  convey  strength  to  our  bodies  ;  but  how  must  the  soul 
languish  when  it  is  deprived  of  spiritual  food  to  nourish  her  (Isa.  xxx.  20)  ?  how 
doleful  would  it  be  to  have  the  ground  parched  by  the  sun,  the  sky  emptied  of 
clouds,  or  the  bottles  of  heaven  stopped  close  without  venting  a  drop  of  refreshing 
rain?  But  how  much  more  deplorable  is  this  judgment  than  the  withholding  the 
clouds  from  dropping  upon  our  earth,  or  the  sun  from  shining  upon  our  fruits  ?  3. 
When  the  gospel  departs  all  other  blessings  depart  with  it.  (1)  The  honour  and 
ornament  of  a  nation  departs.  (2)  The  strength  of  a  nation  departs.  The  ordi- 
nances of  God  are  the  towers  of  Sion.  The  Temple  was  not  only  a  place  of 
•worship,  but  a  bulwark  too.  When  the  gospel  of  peace  removes  eternal  peace  goes 
•with  it,  temporal  peace  flies  after  it ;  and  whatsoever  is  safe,  profitable,  prosperous, 
takes  wings  and  attends  it.  4.  God  hath  no  other  intention  in  the  removing  the 
gospel,  and  unchurching  a  nation,  but  the  utter  ruin  and  destruction  of  that  nation. 
Other  judgments  may  be  medicinal,  this  is  killing ;  other  judgments  are  but 
scourges,  this  is  a  deadly  wound.  5.  This  judgment  is  accompanied  with  spiritual 
judgments,  which  are  the  sorest.  The  pounding  of  the  jewel  is  far  worse,  and  of 
greater  loss  than  the  breaking  the  casket.  Use: — Doth  God  often  remove  the 
gospel  upon  provocations,  as  the  severest  judgment  he  can  inflict  upon  an  unworthy 
people  ?  Then — 1.  Be  afraid  of  this  judgment.  How  do  we  know  but  that  God 
hath  limited  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  the  standing  of  the  candlestick  in  this 
and  that  place  only  for  a  time;  and  when  that  is  expired,  it  may  be  carried  to 
another  place  ?  We  see  it  hath  been  so  with  others.  (1)  Is  not  our  profaneness  a 
just  ground  of  our  fear  ?  Have  not  many  that  have  been  lifted  up  to  heaven  by  the 
presence  of  the  gospel  walked  as  if  they  had  the  seal  of  hell  in  their  foreheads  ?  A 
fulness  of  iniquity  makes  the  harvest  ripe  and  fit  for  the  sickle  (Joel  iii.  13).  (2)  Is 
not  the  slighting  of  the  means  of  grace  a  just  ground  of  this  fear  ?  What  can  be 
expected,  when  children  throw  a  precious  commodity  in  the  dirt,  but  that  the 
parents  should  take  it  away,  and  lay  it  in  another  place,  and  lash  them  too  for  their 
vanity  ?  God  will  not  obtrude  the  gospel  long  against  men's  wills.  (3)  And  what 
shall  I  say  of  the  barrenness  of  the  Church  ?  When  the  ground  yields  but  a  faint 
increase,  and  answers  not  the  cost  and  labour  of  the  husbandman,  he  lays  it  fallow. 
The  abatement  of  the  powerful  workings  of  the  spirit  is  a  presage  of  a  removal  or 
dimming  the  light  in  the  candlestick.  (4)  And  may  not  the  errors  in  the  nation 
step  in  as  the  occasion  of  our  fears  ?  Not  little  petty  errors,  but  errors  about  the 
foundation.  (5)  What  should  I  speak  of  the  divisions  amongst  us?  These  pre- 
ceded the  ruin  of  the  Jews,  and  made  way  for  the  fall  of  the  Seven  Churches  of 
Asia.    We  may  justly  fear  God  will  take  away  that  light  which  we  quarrel  by, 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  125 

instead  of  walking  and  working  by.  2.  If  the  removal  of  the  gospel  be  so  great  a 
judgment  we  have  reason  to  bless  God  for  its  continuance  so  long  among  us.  3.  It 
should  teach  us  to  improve  the  gospel  while  we  enjoy  it.  The  time  of  the  gospel 
revelation  is  the  time  of  working.  Good  entertainment  and  good  improvement 
invites  the  gospel  to  stay  ;  ill-usage  drives  it  out  of  doors.  4.  Let  us  prevent  by 
repentance  and  prayer  the  removal  or  eclipse  of  the  gospel.  The  loss  of  your 
estates,  the  massacring  of  your  children,  the  chains  of  captivity,  are  a  thousand 
times  more  desirable  than  this  deplorable  calamity.  Estates  may  be  recovered,  new 
children  raised,  fetters  may  be  knocked  off,  new  houses  may  be  reared  upon  the 
ashes  of  the  consumed  ones,  the  possession  of  a  country  regained ;  but  it  is  seldom 
the  gospel  returns  when  carried  away  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  Let  us  therefore 
seek  to  Him,  chiefly  to  Him,  only  to  Him  ;  He  only  can  remove  the  candlestick  ;  He 
only  can  put  His  Hand  as  a  bar  upon  the  light.  {S.  Charnock.)  To  hlrn  that 
overcometli  will  I  g^ive  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life. — The  heavenly  Christ's  first 
promise  to  the  victors  : — I.  The  victor's  rewakd.  1.  As  for  the  substance,  it  is  simply 
that  all- comprehensive,  and  in  one  aspect  greatest  of  all  hopes,  the  promise  of  life. 
It  is  as  impossible  for  us  to  conceive  of  what  the  manner  of  future  existence  is  as  it 
is  to  predict,  from  looking  at  the  egg,  what  plumage  shall  deck  the  wings  of  the 
creature  that  shall,  in  due  time,  come  forth  from  it  and  soar  to  the  empyrean.  "  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  Only  this  we  know,  that  life  in  all  its 
meanings  shall  be  perfect.  Limitations  shall  drop  away;  weariness,  weakness, 
languor,  disgust,  which  often  creeps  over  us,  shall  have  no  place  there.  The 
eternal  life  of  heaven  is  one  in  kind  with  the  eternal  life  that  Christians  possess 
here.  If  we  are  to  have  the  life  beyond,  we  must  have  its  beginnings  to-day.  2. 
Turn  to  the  form  which  this  promise  assumes.  It  carries  us  back  to  the  beginning 
of  Scripture,  and  reminds  us  of  the  story  of  Eden,  and  the  tree  of  life  there. 
So  the  end  circles  round  to  the  begiiming,  and  the  purpose  of  God  shall  be 
fulfilled,  and  more  than  fulfilled,  and  all  the  weary  centuries,  with  their 
sin  and  crime  and  failures,  shall  be,  as  it  were,  in  a  parenthesis.  II. 
The  Giver  of  the  reward.  Jesus  Christ  steps  into  the  place  here  of  the 
absolute  disposer  of  all  human  affairs  and  settler  of  man's  destiny.  In 
another  place  in  Scripture  we  read  that  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life ;  here  the 
Giver  of  it  is  Jesus  Christ.  So  He  said  on  earth,  as  well  as  from  the  heavens.  He 
is  the  Judge.  He  knows  the  history  and  the  affairs  of  all  men.  He  gives  eternal 
life.  The  Giver  is  more  than  His  gift.  No  mere  humanitarian  ideas  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  mission  avail  to  explain  such  words  as  these  of  my  text.  HE.  The 
CONDITION  OF  RECEIVING.  "  To  him  that  overcometh."  Well,  then,  all  noble  life  in 
the  world  is  a  fight.  And  to  say  "  I  trust  in  Jesus  Christ"  is  not  enough,  unless 
that  trust  manifests  itself  in  strenuous  antagonism  to  evil,  and  realises  victory  over 
it.  "To  him  that  believeth"  the  promise  is  made  in  other  places,  but  we  must 
carry  with  that  promise  this  other,  "  to  him  that  overcometh  "  ;  and  remember 
that  no  man  who  cannot  say  *'  I  have  fought  a  good  fight "  will  ever  be  able  to  say 
with  truth,  "  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness."  What 
is  an  overcoming  life  ?  Many  a  man  goes  out  of  this  world  apparently  a  dead 
failure,  beaten ;  none  of  his  plans  having  prospered,  none  of  his  enterprises  having 
been  much  else  than  semi-failures.  And  yet  he  may  be  one  of  the  victors.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,  a  man  that  has  achieved  all  that  he  desired,  prospered  in  his 
business,  been  successful  in  his  love,  happy  in  his  family,  abundantly  blessed  with 
good,  and  crowned  with  universal  applause,  that  man  may  be  one  of  the  beaten 
ones.  For  he  conquers  the  world  who  uses  it  to  bring  him  nearer  to  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  the  world  conquers  him  whom  it  draws  away  from  God.  And  how  is  that 
victorious  life  to  be  achieved  ?  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith."  I  have  said  that  mere  trust  without  conflict  and  conquest  cannot  inherit  the 
crown,  but  I  also  say  that,  wherever  there  is  the  true  trust  there  will  be  conflict, 
and  wherever  there  is  the  trusting  conflict  there  will  be  victory.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  great  condition : — I.  Success  in  this  world  is  not  a  matter  of  course. 
Life  in  this  world  is  surrounded  by  dangers,  beset  by  enemies,  liable  to  failure. 
This  truth  has  its  illustration  in  all  spheres  of  life  ;  even  down  to  the  lowest.  The 
conflict  of  the  ages  is  miniatured  in  the  life  of  the  ephemera.  The  few  hours  of 
their  existence  are  full  of  little  dangers,  little  enemies,  possible  ills ;  and  so  with 
these  the  battle  of  life  goes  on.  Now  come  up  a  little  higher,  and  into  a  clearer 
region.  Every  species  of  vegetable  life  is  shut  off  from  its  highest  and  fullest  end 
by  the  line  of  the  enemy.  Every  grain  of  wheat  is  menaced  ;  so  is  every  stalk  of 
com,  every  springing  grass-blade,  every  flowering  shrub,  and  every  fruiting  tree 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

And  not  otherwise  is  it  in  the  animal  kingdom — in  the  region  of  organised  phy- 
sical life.  Of  birds  and  beasts  only  a  few  reach  the  end.  The  rest  perish  by  the 
way  ;  are  beaten  back  ;  are  overcome.  How  full  is  our  earth's  crust  with  the  dust 
of  infant  forms  !  And  even  if  they  continue,  why  continuance  is  often  not  health, 
not  strength,  not  beauty,  not  the  victory  of  physical  life.  But  I  widen  the  view. 
Within  the  body  hides  the  true  man,  who,  with  the  hand  of  his  free  choice,  reaches 
out  for  the  supreme  object  of  life ;  and,  by  the  voice  of  his  will,  summons  all  his 
powers  to  the  contest.  But  is  success  sure  to  such  a  one  ?  Why,  the  world  is  full 
of  men  who  have  failed  here.  Full  of  men  who  have  murdered  their  manhood  for 
gain,  and  then  failed  of  the  gain.  But  now  come  up  higher.  Introduce  moral 
quality,  and  how  still  farther  does  this  reduce  the  class  who  have  overcome !  Ever 
in  the  highest  regions  the  classes  are  smaller.  There  are  more  toadstools  than 
Yosemite  pines.  There  are  more  ants  than  elephants.  There  are  more  in  the 
schools  who  know  how  to  read  than  there  are  who  are  able  to  call  the  stars  by 
their  names,  or  to  paint  a  Madonna.  So  there  are  more  who  have  made  money 
than  there  are  w^ho  have  grown  manhood ;  more  who  have  gotten  office  than  there 
are  who  have  gotten  character.  II.  The  danger  to  each  human  life  is  speciaIj. 
That  which  is  a  temptation  and  a  snare  to  me  is  none  to  you.  The  rock  upon 
which  you  may  split  may  be  altogether  out  of  your  neighbour's  path.  He  may  not 
be  steering  in  that  direction.  As  with  the  body,  so  with  the  soul.  What  is  poison 
to  one  is  harmless  to  another.  Some  men  can  be  trusted  with  money.  It  is  not  a 
bait  for  them  ;  not  what  they  care  to  sell  their  souls  for.  While  others  never  can 
feel  the  money  of  others  passing  through  their  hands  without  an  involuntary 
itching  to  close  upon  it.  Then  there  is  alcohol ;  nausea  to  many  a  stomach.  No 
more  desired,  no  more  palatable,  than  croton  oil.  There  is  no  possible  danger  to 
such  from  this  quarter.  Then  right  by  their  side  are  others  who,  with  diseased 
brain  and  trembling  nerves  and  blood  on  fire,  would  jump  into  heU  itself  for  a 
draught  of  the  accursed  poison.  1.  Natural  constitution  rules  here.  I  do  not 
mean  in  such  a  sense  as  to  rid  any  man  of  responsibility.  No  matter  where  his 
blood  came  from,  when  at  last  it  runs  in  his  own  veins  a  man  must  feel  that  it  is 
his  own.  "  My  father  was  a  drunkard  before  me,  and  I  must  be  one."  This  is 
fatality,  contradicted  by  our  sense  of  freedom.  It  is  materialism,  contradicted  by 
our  own  knowledge  of  ourselves,  as  more  than  mere  matter.  It  is  reasoning  which 
no  man's  conscience  accepts,  and  with  which  no  man  can  go  to  the  bar  of  God. 
So  with  a  man's  mind.  It  is  his  own  at  last.  His  own  to  correct,  to  guide,  to 
inform.  And  if  a  man  finds  himself  with  a  sceptical  tendency,  it  is  his  duty  to 
overcome  here,  as  truly  as  in  the  region  of  physical  appetite.  2.  Providential 
circumstances  rule  here.  Joseph  was  thrown  into  Egypt,  and  into  the  presence  of 
great  temptation,  by  no  choice  of  his  own.  What  now  ?  Is  Joseph  thus  relieved 
from  responsibility  ?  By  no  means.  His  providential  circumstances  govern  as  to 
the  danger  which  he  must  overcome.  The  responsibility  is  still  his  own.  So  with 
us  all.  Your  great  spiritual  danger  may  lie  hidden  in  a  circumstance  which  you 
had  no  voice  in  choosing.  This  may  be  wealth,  or  it  may  be  poverty ;  your 
familiar  associations,  or  an  unavoidable  crisis  in  your  business  affairs.  But  this 
does  not  free  you  from  responsibility.  Your  obligation  is  still  found  in  the  word 
"  overcome."  You  must  overcome  the  temptation  which  is  brought  to  bear  upon 
your  integrity,  or  you  fall  guiltily,  and  shall  never  *•  eat  of  the  Tree  of  Life."  HI. 
It  is  possible  for  a  man,  for  ant  man,  to  ovekcomb.  His  crown  is  his  own,  and 
he  may  defy  any  hand  of  earth  or  hell  to  rob  him  of  it.  1.  This  truth  rests  upon 
the  sincerity  of  the  Saviour  of  men.  "  To  him  that  overcometh,"  says  He.  And, 
when  He  so  declares.  He  surely  does  not  mean  to  mock  men  by  grounding  their 
salvation  upon  an  impossible  condition.  2.  This  truth,  that  a  man  may  overcome, 
rests  upon  the  infinite  love  of  God.  It  is  not  possible  for  the  human  mind  to  con- 
ceive of  infinite  love  allowing  man  to  be  placed  in  a  condition  that  he  may  not 
overcome.  3.  This  truth  rests  upon  the  great  provision  of  salvation  which  God 
has  made  for  man.  This  salvation,  inaugurated  by  the  Great  Father's  love,  must 
reach  unto  the  end  of  making  the  salvation  of  every  man  to  whom  it  comes 
possible.  I  now  turn  to  the  applicatory  fulness  of  the  text.  1.  It  holds  up 
reUgion  before  us  in  its  true  greatness  and  worthiness.  Overcome.  This  is  the 
voice  with  which  Christ  speaks  to  men.  Overcome.  This  is  the  true  view  of 
religion ;  the  religion  which  thoughtful  men  need,  which  endangered  lives  need ; 
which  this  world,  so  full  of  shams,  needs.  2.  Again,  this  subject  calls  to  a  care- 
ful ordering  of  the  external  circumstances  of  our  lives,  so  far  as  these  are  in  our 
power.    If  your  fortune  depended  upon  your  lifting  a  certain  weight,  you  would 


CHAP,  u.]  REVELATION.  127 

not  first  place  your  feet  upon  bog  or  quicksand.  Yet,  in  the  moral  world,  how 
many  needlessly  expose  themselves  to  disadvantage  !  3.  This  subject  holds  up  the 
Church  and  all  the  means  of  grace  in  their  true  light.  They  are  so  many  helps  to 
man  in  his  great  struggle.  Let  us  not  think  of  the  Church  as  an  end  in  itself ;  as 
a  beautiful  and  dignified  institution  to  which  we  ought  to  contribute  our  quota  of 
respectable  hving.  But  rather  let  us  think  of  the  Church  as  our  servant ;  as  some- 
thing out  of  which  we  can  get  help.  So  of  the  prayer  hour  in  the  midst  of  the  busy 
week.  So  of  any  Christian  service,  and  of  every  Christian  duty.  {S.  S.  Mitchell,  D.D.) 
The  conflict  of  the  Christian  life : — I.  The  conflict  of  the  Christian  life.  The 
Christian  life  is  one  of  severe  moral  conflict.  Its  enemies  are  seen  and  unseen. 
They  are  malignant.  They  are  subtle.  They  necessitate  constant  vigilance  on  the 
part  of  the  good.  1.  It  is  a  conflict  with  evil  principles.  The  soul  of  the  good 
must  be  pure  in  its  feeling,  holy  in  its  dispositions,  loyal  to  Christ  in  its  affections, 
and  devout  in  its  contemplations.  2.  It  is  a  conflict  with  evil  men.  It  is  some- 
times hard  to  withstand  the  charming,  but  sinful,  attractions  of  a  friend,  who 
would  lead  us  into  the  very  camp  of  the  enemy.  3.  It  is  a  conflict  with  evil  spirits. 
They  watch  the  varying  attitudes  of  the  human  mind,  as  manifested  in  external 
conduct,  and  seek  each  moment  to  effect  the  moral  ruin  of  the  good.  n.  The 
viCTOBY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  1.  The  victory  is  present.  This  is  a  distinguish- 
ing feature  of  the  battle  of  the  soul.  It  feels  now  the  inspiration,  and  can  sing 
the  hymn  of  triumph,  though,  no  doubt,  when  the  last  enemy  has  been  conquered, 
which  is  death,  and  the  soul  joins  the  army  above,  its  triumph  will  then  be  more 
jubilant.  2.  The  victory  is  progressive.  Every  time  the  soul  is  victorious  in  its 
battle  it  gathers  new  energy,  and  is  more  prepared  for  the  conflict  of  the  future. 
3.  The  victory  is  glorious.  It  is  a  token  of  heroic  manhood.  It  is  strengthening. 
It  is  ennobling.  It  makes  the  soul  veteran  in  goodness.  III.  The  reward  of  the 
Christian  life.  1.  The  Christian  victor  shall  be  rewarded  with  eternal  life.  2. 
This  reward  will  be  Divinely  bestowed  and  richly  enjoyed.  Christ  is  Himself  the 
life,  which  He  will  bestow  upon  the  faitiiiui  victor.  The  life  will  be  such  that  the 
tjoul  will  be  able  to  appropriate.  Lessons:  1.  That  the  Christian  life  is  a  stern 
conflict.  2.  That  the  Christian  ha<?  many  aids  in  the  conflict.  3.  That  victory 
over  sin  is  possible  to  the  good.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Tlie  tree  of  life : — This 
first  of  the  sevenfold  promises  to  the  victors  carries  us  back  to  the  earliest  pages  of 
Scripture.  The  end  circles  round  to  the  beginning.  The  fruit  is  accessible  again, 
not  now,  indeed,  by  man's  reaching  out  his  own  hand  to  it,  but  as  a  gift  from  the 
Captain  under  and  by  whom  the  victors  fight.  This  recurrence  of  the  early  possi- 
bility as  a  finally-accomplished  reality  is  significant.  Whatever  Adam  threw  away 
Christ  brings  back.  "  There  shall  never  be  one  lost  good."  But  there  is  more  than 
that.  Paradise  is  better  than  Eden.  I.  The  gift.  In  the  Gospel  and  Epistles 
of  St.  John,  Life  and  its  antithesis,  Death,  are  two  of  his  key-notes.  In  these 
letters  to  the  Seven  Churches  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the  same  significant  word 
Life,  and  its  correlative.  Death,  is  one  of  the  main  links  of  connection  wuich,  with 
all  differences  of  form,  bind  together  the  Apocalypse  and  the  Gospels.  Now  I 
cannot  persuade  myself  that  by  this  great  word  the  writer  means  nothing  moie 
than  continuous  existence.  He  means  that,  but  he  means  something  more  than 
that ;  and  the  something  more  is  what  warrants  him  La  calling  continual  exis- 
tence life.  He  means,  in  fact,  the  whole  aggregate  of  blessednesses  which  makes  the 
state  of  men  whose  lives  are  passed  in  communion  with,  and  likeness  to,  God. 
This  is  his  conception  of  what  life  consists  in.  Wheresoever  a  heart  is  knit  to 
God,  there  is  the  germ  and  the  beginning  of  the  only  real  Life.  And  the  highest 
promise  that  can  be  given  for  the  blessedness  of  that  blessed  and  far-off  future  is, 
•'  I  will  give  him  to  eat  of  the  Tree  of  Life."  It  is  well  and  fitting  that  this  most 
comprehensive  and  general  promise  should  be  the  first  in  the  sevenfold  series. 
Those  which  follow  unveil  various  portions  of  its  contents,  and  show  us  various 
aspects  of  its  glory.  Then,  mark,  it  is  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself  which  He 
gives.  He  is  the  Life  of  our  lives,  the  Soul  of  our  souls,  the  Heaven  of  our  heaven ; 
and  in  Him  is  all  that  we  need.  Then,  note  how,  in  the  other  reference  in  this 
Book  to  that  Tree  of  Life,  we  have  set  forth,  very  beautifully,  the  infinite  variety 
and  unbroken  succession  of  the  blessednesses  that  result  to  those  who  partake  of  it. 
The  last  chapter  of  this  Revelation  tells  us  that  "  it  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits," 
and  that  "  every  month."  The  former  of  these  symbols  sets  forth  that  all  delights 
and  nutriments  which  spirit,  heart,  will,  intellect,  and  whatever  else  may  make  up 
the  immortal  man  can  require  are  to  be  found  there.  Whatsoever  is  pleasant  to 
behold,  or  sweet  to  taste,  is  all  in  Jesus  Christ.     And  the  other  symbol  of  "yield- 


123  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ing  fruit  every  month "  suggests  the  unbroken  succession  of  delights  and  blessed- 
nesses and  sustenances.     Sparkle  will  touch  sparkle  as  in  the  moon's  path  across 
the  sea,  making  a  broad  and  continuous  band  of  silvery  shimmer.     So  "  in  Thy 
presence  are  pleasures  for  evermore."     Then  note,  further,  that  this  Life  must 
begin  here  if  it  is  to  be  perfected  hereafter.   Here  we  must  begin  laying  hold  of 
that  Lord  in  whom  are  the  life  and  the  light  of  men,  if  we  are  ever  to  stand  by  His 
side,  and  receive  from  His  hand  fruits  from  the  Tree  of  Life.    They  are  sent  across 
the  sea  to  us  in  our  island  home,  though  it  be  planted  in  a  happier  and  sunnier 
clime,  and  we  dwell  here  amidst  frost  and  snow.     But  the  perfecting  will  be  when 
we  shall  go  to  it.     Fruit  tastes  best  if  fresh  plucked  from  the  tree.     II.  The  givbb. 
This  ascended  Christ  speaks  in  royal  fashion.     He  assumes  to  be  the  Bestower  of 
the  fruit  from  the  Tree  of  Life.     And  that  suggests  large  thoughts  about  Him.     I 
believe  that  in  all  senses  of  the  word  Life,  from  the  lowest  physical  up  to  the 
highest  spiritual,  immortal,  and  eternal,  the  revelation  of  the  New  Testament,  is 
that  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Son  of  the  Father,  and  the  Agent  of  all  creation  and 
of  all  preservation,  is  its  Giver  and  its  Source.     By  virtue  of  His  Divine  nature 
He  gives  physical  life  to  all  that  live.     In  Him  "  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light 
of  men."    But  it  is  not  His  Divine  nature  alone  which  has  made  it  possible  for 
Him  to  give  to  us  the  better  life,  of  which  my  text  speaks.     He  is  the  Source 
thereof,  because  He  Himself  has  experienced  the  opposite.     He  died  that  He  might 
be  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life ;  and  rising  from  the  grave,  by  the  power  of  His 
death,  and  the  merit  and  might  of  His  sacrifice.  He  has  become,  for  all  who  will 
trust  Him,  the  Source  of  that  life  which  standeth  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  is 
perfected  hereafter  in  immortal  felicity  and  blessedness.    Further,  there  is  involved 
in  this  representation  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Giver  of  Life,  the  thought  that, 
through  eternity,  all  who  live  that  blessed  being  in  the  heavens  shall  be  as  depen- 
dent upon  Him  for  every  moment  (if  we  can  speak  of  moments  in  the  timeless 
state)  of  their  continual  existence  as  we  are  here  below.     He  is  the  Fountain  who 
hath  life  in  Himself.     We  are  the  empty  vessels  that  are  filled  from  Him.    HI. 
The  becipients.    In  the  original  the  language  is  made  very  emphatic :  "To  him 
that  overcometh,  to  him  will  I  give."    And  that  emphasis  is  very  significant,  if  we 
remember  how  strongly  this  same  John,  especially  in  his  Gospel,  sets  forth  the 
thought  that  the  condition  of  receiving  life  here  and  hereafter  is  faith.  Faith  with- 
out fighting  is  nothing.    Fighting  without  faith,  indeed,  is  impossible ;  but  it  is 
not  enough  that  a  man  shall  exercise  an  idle  and  inoperative  trust,  unless  he  can 
show  his  faith  by  his  works.    It  is  not  the  same  whether  you,  calling  yourselves 
Christian  people,  live  in  the  daily  struggle  with  the  evil  that  besets  you,  or  indo- 
lently let  yourselves  be  carried  unresisting  along  by  the  stream.     It  is  the  victor 
that  is  crowned.     Then,  again,  observe  that  martial  metaphor.     "  To  him  that 
overcometh."    Then  the  highest  conception  of  a  noble  life  on  earth  is  conflict. 
God  has  set  us  here,  not  to  enjoy  ourselves,  but  to  wrestle  and  to  run  and  to  fight. 
Shame  on  us  if  we  choose  the  indolent,  self-indulgent,  luxurious,  and  fatal  course  f 
What  is  it  to  overcome  ?    The  sailor  who  trims  his  sails  and  sets  his  helm  so  that 
adverse  winds  and  opposing  currents  help  him  to  run  his  course  has  conquered, 
though  they  howl  about  his  ears  and  beat  upon  his  barque.     And  the  man  who 
does  not  let  the  world  hinder  him  .from  godly  obedience,  who  does  not  allow  it  to 
divert  him  from  the  path  of  duty,  who  does  not  let  its  dainties  spoil  his  appetite 
for  the  bread  of  heaven,  who  does  not  permit  its  near  and  flaunting  beauties  to 
affect  his  heart  so  that  he  sees  no  beauty  in  God  and   Christ,  who  does  not 
take  its  good  for  his  best— that  man  has  conquered  it.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  tree  of  life  : — I.  The   tree  of  life  as  exhibited  in  the  primitive  para- 
dise.     The    garden  of  Eden    is  not   to  be    regarded    merely    as    a    place    of 
delight  and  pleasure.     It  was   a   kind   of   natural   temple;   a  sacred  enclosure. 
In  this  consecrated  spot  was  planted  the  tree   of   life  ;    planted  that  its  fruit 
might  be  eaten,  and  not  prohibited  like   that  of  the  tree  of  knowledge.      Yel 
it  was  not  to  be  partaken  of  in  the  same  manner  as  the  fruit  of  the  other 
trees,  which  was  appointed  for  food,  since  this  tree  was  specially  distinguished 
from  them.    Not  without  reason  have  many  eminent  divines  considered  this  tree 
as  a  constant  pledge  to  Adam  of  a  higher  life ;  and  since  there  was  a  covenant  of 
works,  the  tenor  of  which  was,  ••  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live  "—and  as  we  know 
that  God  has  ever  connected  signs,  seals,  and  sacraments  with  His  covenants — 
analogy  may  lead  us  to  conclude  that  this  tree  was  the  matter  of  a  sacrament,  the 
eating  of  it  a  religious  act ;  and  that  it  was  called  «'  the  tree  of  life,"  because  it  was 
not  only  a  means  of  sustaining  the  immortality  of  the  body,  but  the  pledge  of 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  129 

spiritual  life  here,  and  of  a  still  higher  and  more  glorious  life  in  a  future  state,  to 
which  man  might  pass,  not,  indeed,  by  death,  but  by  translation.  II.  The  substi- 
tution OF  Christ  for  "  the  tree  of  life,"  to  give  hope  to  man  as  a  sinner.  We 
see  man,  the  sinner,  expelled  from  the  garden  of  Eden ;  all  hope  of  receiving  the 
pledge  of  mercy  and  kindness,  by  being  allowed  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  gone  ;  and 
the  way  to  that  tree  fearfully  guarded.  But  it  is  equally  certain  that  he  was  not 
absolutely  excluded  from  hope.  The  judge  passes  sentence,  but  the  judge  also 
gives  a  promise;  and  man  is  bidden  to  hope  in  another  object,  "  the  seed  of  the 
woman."  That  seed  was  henceforward  to  be  his  "  tree  of  life."  1.  This  presence  of 
God  was  always  approached  through  sacrifice.  2.  It  is  this  atonement  which 
always  keeps  the  way  to  God  open  and  safely  accessible.  3.  To  eat  and  live  is  the 
term  both  of  the  covenant  in  paradise  and  the  new  covenant  of  grace  ;  but  the 
subject  is  changed.  To  live  in  paradise,  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  hfe  was  eaten ; 
but  it  was  not  a  sacrifice.  It  was  a  pledge  of  life,  but  not  through  the  death  of  a 
victim.  There  was  then  life  without  death.  The  flesh  of  Christ  which  He  gives 
for  the  life  of  the  world,  and  which  we  eat  spiritually,  this  also  is  the  pledge  of  life, 
but  of  life  through  death.  Nor  is  the  act  of  eating  under  the  two  covenants  the 
same.  One  is  expressive  of  the  confidence  of  an  innocent  creature  in  the  goodness 
and  faithfulness  of  God  never  offended,  promising  life ;  the  other  of  faith,  properly 
speaking, — the  trust  of  a  guilty  creature,  of  one  who  feels  and  acknowledges  his 
guilt,  in  the  rich  and  sovereign  grace  of  God  offended,  and  exercised  through  Christ 
alone.  III.  The  tree  of  life,  "  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God."  1.  The 
residence  of  the  saints  in  another  and  a  blissful  state  is  called  paradise.  Could  we 
remove  from  this  world  death,  disease,  age,  infirmity,  hatred,  prejudice,  ignorance, 
sin,  the  separation  of  friends,  what  a  transformation  should  we  witness !  All  this,  and 
more,  is  done  in  the  heavenly  paradise  ;  and  upon  its  inhabitants  and  their  blessed- 
ness is  stamped  the  character  of  eternity.  2.  The  tree  of  life  is  there  ;  and  he  that 
overcometh  shall  eat  of  it.  This  is  a  figurative  representation  of  Christ.  He  is  there 
to  give  this  immortal  blessedness,  and  to  sustain  it,  and  thus  the  benefits  of  His 
death  run  on  for  ever.  The  tree  represents  Christ  to  remind  us  that  our  life  is  from 
Him,  and  the  whole  of  our  salvation  shall  be  eternally  ascribed  to  His  dying  love. 
{R.  Watson.)  Conquest  and  immortality  : — See  what  the  promise  is.  Man's  life 
seems  to  die  out  in  death ;  to  him  that  overcometh  the  world  there  shall  be  given 
a  vitality  that  goes  beyond  this  world.  It  is  in  virtue  of  man's  power  to  overcome 
this  world  that  he  lays  hold  upon  immortality.  The  reason  why  man,  in  spite  of 
every  discouragement,  in  spite  of  disease,  and  death,  and  the  grave,  has  so  inex- 
tinguishable a  belief  in  immortality  of  life  is  the  mastery  which  he  has  had  over  this 
life.  If  aU  men  had  been  slaves  of  circumstances,  mankind  never  could  have  beheved 
in  immortality.  It  is  because  man  has  proved  his  power  to  conquer  circumstances 
that  he  has  believed  ultimately  in  his  power  to  conquer  that  last  great  circumstance, 
and  believed  that  death  was  nothing  but  an  event,  an  experience  in  life.  To  him 
that  overcometh  it  is  given  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  to  know  himself  immortal. 
{Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  How  to  conquer  : — When  I  was  a  child  I  read  a  book  of 
Eastern  Tales'.  It  was  the  reading  of  the  same  book  that  stimulated  Dr.  Adam 
Clarke  to  study  Eastern  literature.  One  of  the  tales  was  to  this  effect :  In  a  certain 
place,  among  bleak  and  gloomy  mountains,  was  a  steep  and  narrow  pass,  at  the 
summit  of  which  a  spring  sent  forth  streams  of  Uving  waters.  By  the  margin  of 
the  spring,  nourished  by  its  immortal  rills,  stood  a  tree  which  bore  golden  fruit,  and 
as  the  breezes  blew  upon  the  trees  it  gave  forth  enchanting  music.  Whosoever  might 
force  his  way  up  the  difficult  ascent  should  have  these  delights  as  his  reward  ;  but 
if  he  halted  in  his  way,  or  attempted  to  turn  back,  he  died  upon  the  spot.  Thousands 
made  the  trial,  but  none  succeeded.  At  last  an  adventurous  youth  determined  to 
win  the  prize,  or  perish  in  the  effort.  He  asked  one  stationed  at  the  foot  what  was 
the  real  difficulty,  and  how  it  could  be  overcome.  He  was  assured  there  was  no 
danger  whatsoever,  but  that  as  he  went  along  he  would  be  assailed  by  hosts  of  voices 
assuming  every  kind  of  tone.  All  he  had  to  do  was  boldly  to  go  forward,  and  not 
regard  them.  Resolving  not  to  heed  the  voices,  he  nerved  himself  for  the  endeavour. 
The  moment  he  entered  the  valley  the  sounds  began.  It  was  as  if  the  very  rocks 
had  tongues.  Some  groaned  and  entreated  and  warned,  some  mocked  and  jeered. 
As  he  stumbled  on  knee-deep  among  the  reedy  shanks  and  shapeless  skulls  of  those 
who  had  perished  in  the  attempt,  a  voice,  seemingly  at  his  very  ear,  implored  him 
to  take  warning,  and  pause.  Sometimes  he  was  on  the  point  of  halting,  but  he  pressed 
his  fingers  to  his  ears  and  hurried  on.  As  he  neared  the  top  a  chorus  well-nigh 
gtunned  him  ;  but  he  pressed  his  fingers  the  closer  to  his  ears,  and  thus  gained  the 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Bummit.  Then  every  voice  that  had  assailed  him  broke  forth  in  loudest  plaudits. 
{F.  J.  Sharr.)  An  exhortation  and  encouragement  to  individual  Christians  : — It 
is  as  if  He  said,  No  matter  what  the  Church  of  Ephesus  may  be,  to  him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  give  a  special  blessing.  Jesus  says  that  to  every  member  of  His 
Church  still.  No  matter  what  the  Church  is,  it  does  not  take  away  your  individual 
responsibility.  If  the  Church  be  holy  and  active,  that  does  not  lessen  your 
responsibility  to  work.  If  the  Church  be  sinful  and  idle,  that  makes  your  responsibility 
all  the  greater.  The  Church  may  have  lost  its  first  love.  It  is  your  duty,  in  the  first 
instance  at  least,  not  to  leave  it,  but  to  try  to  make  it  better.  It  is  your  duty,  so  far  as 
in  you  lies,  to  overcome.  Overcome  evil  with  good,  overcome  strife  by  promoting 
a  spirit  of  peace,  overcome  slothfulness  by  giving  an  example  of  activity,  overcome 
fault-finding  by  showing  a  spirit  of  charity.  Overcome,  in  the  strength  of  Christ, 
the  sins  of  yourself,  the  sins  of  the  Church,  the  sins  of  the  world  around  you.  (C 
H.  Irwin,  M.A.)  But  this  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  works  of  the  Nicolai- 
tanes,  which  I  also  hate. — The  Nicolaitane  doctrine  hateful  to  Christ  and  His 
Church : — Here  are  two  things.  1.  An  exception  from  the  former  reproof,  "  But 
this  thou  hast."  2.  A  commendation,  "  that  thou  hatest  the  works  of  the  Nicolai- 
tanes.  In  the  exception,  note  how  careful  the  Spirit  of  God  is,  not  to  pass  over  any 
good  in  this  Church,  without  due  commendation.  Eeason :  1.  He  walketh  in  the 
midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks,  and  exactly  discerneth  their  works  and 
describeth  them.  2.  Iniquity  is  not  in  Him  to  call  good  evil  or  evil  good  (Isa.  xxxij. 
6).  He  justifies  not  the  ungodly  nor  condemns  the  innocent.  3.  His  pure  eyes  sever 
between  the  precious  and  the  vUe.  He  hath  a  fining  pot,  which  tries  gold  from  the 
dross ;  and  a  fan  in  His  hand,  which  in  the  same  floor  severeth  wheat  and  chaff. 
Use :  1.  To  teach  us  to  imitate  this  goodness  of  God  in  acknowledging  and 
encouraging  good  gifts  and  graces  wherever  they  be.  2.  Those  sin  against  this 
example  of  Christ  who  (as  flies  follow  festers)  fasten  upon  the  faults  of  men  and 
are  eloquent  in  disgracing  their  evils ;  some  perhaps  only  pretended  or  conceived, 
but  all  that  is  praiseworthy  they  bury  and  traduce.  3.  The  ministers  (the  angels 
of  the  Churches)  must  imitate  their  Lord  in  writing  to  the  angel  of  this  Church, 
namely,  so  warily  to  touch  upon  the  faults  of  professors,  as  not  to  throw  down 
their  profession  or  oppose  all  that  is  good  in  them.  A  wise  husbandman  will  rather 
spare  the  weeds  than  hurt  the  corn.  4.  Encourage  good  men  in  pursuing  what  is 
good;  for,  howsoever  they  may  reap  reproach  among  men,  yet  there  is  nothing 
commendable  in  them  which  shall  want  its  due  praise  before  God.  5.  To  keep  us 
in  humility.  Sometimes  we  may  be  commended  for  many  things,  as  was  this 
Church,  and  yet  be  in  great  danger  and  near  cutting  off.  Let  us,  therefore,  take 
notice  of  these  rules  of  wisdom.  Eirst,  let  no  man  content  himself  with  some  good 
things  unless  he  separate  from  all  evil,  both  in  affection  and  actual  endeavour. 
Secondly,  content  not  thyself  with  the  presence  of  some  good  things  unless  thou 
hast  attained  the  best  things  and  graces  which  only  shall  prevent  this  danger 
of  casting  off ;  such  as  are  faith,  love,  repentance,  humility,  and  the  fear  of 
God.  Thirdly,  content  not  thyself  with  many  acts  of  goodness,  but  labour  for 
sincerity,  else  many  seemly  and  good  things  will  prove  unsound  and  unfruitful  in 
the  end,  6.  Note  the  lively  power  of  the  Word  of  Christ.  As  His  eyes  are  pure 
and  sharp  to  discern  between  good  and  evil,  so  is  His  Word  as  piercing  and  descries 
in  the  soul  and  conscience  that  good  or  evil  which  other  men,  yea,  the  own  heart 
itself,  never  takes  notice  of  (Heb.  iv.  12).  Of  the  commendation  that  followeth, 
*'  Thou  hatest  the  works  of  the  Nicolaitanes."  This  commendation  is  for  a 
work  of  the  soul,  for  an  affection,  and  that  not  such  an  affection  as  whereby 
they  were  carried  unto  good,  but  such  an  affection  as  whereby  they  were 
averted  from  gross  evil.  The  good  commended  was  this  affection.  Where  observe 
the  abundant  patience  and  pity  of  the  Lord,  who  for  a  poor  affection,  and  that  not 
unto  good,  but  against  evil,  and  that  very  weak  and  cold  spareth  this  Church  and 
removeth  not  her  candlestick  as  she  had  deserved.  The  true  commendation  of  a 
people  or  person  is  from  true  inward  disposition  and  affection  (1  Cor.  iv.  5). 
Reason :  1.  The  just  judge  of  all  the  world  judgeth  by  the  surest  rule  of  trial, 
and  approveth  or  reprovteh  from  that  which  is  within,  and  that  which  is  hid  from 
men's  eyes.  2.  The  affections  and  desires  are  the  feet  which  move  the  soul,  and 
are  most  respected  of  God  as  being  chiefly  and  principally  commanded  in  the  law ; 
all  the  duties  of  the  first  table,  and  all  service  and  worship  of  our  Creator  being 
comprised  under  that  one  affection  of  love.  3.  The  chief  matter  of  praise  or  dis- 
praise, both  in  good  and  bad  men,  is  the  desire  and  affection,  because,  first,  action 
without  affection  is  but  as  a  body  without  a  soul,   as  a  painted  fire  without 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  131 

heat,  or  the  picture  of  a  man  without  life.  Secondly,  God  accepteth  the 
affection  more  than  the  action,  as  in  many  kings  of  Israel,  who  did  such  and 
such  good  things,  but  the  heart  and  soul  and  inward  affections  being  wanting, 
they  lost  their  commendation.  Thirdly,  for  evil  men :  they  are  not  so  bad 
in  action  as  in  affection  and  desire ;  they  have  more  evil  in  their  hearts 
than  in  their  hands.  Fourthly,  for  good  men :  their  goodness  is  not  in  perfection 
but  in  affection,  and  striving  to  perfection.  And  they  have  more  goodness  in 
their  hearts  than  in  their  hands,  as  there  is  more  water  in  the  fountain  than  in  the 
stream.  4.  It  is  affections  and  desires  that  formally  make  a  man  good  or  bad,  and 
lead  him  either  to  a  final  happy  or  unhappy  estate.  By  all  which  arguments  we 
have  cleared  the  conclusion,  that  the  true  commendation  of  a  people  or  person  is 
from  true  inward  disposition  and  affection.  Use  :  1.  To  discover  the  vain  practice 
of  many  professors  that  engross  knowledge  and  please  themselves  in  speculation, 
contemplation,  and  place  all  their  religion  in  hearing,  reading,  and  adding  to  their 
knowledge ;  but  look  not  to  their  affections  or  desires,  to  add  or  gain  anything  unto 
them,  as  if  God's  image  consisted  alone  in  knowledge  and  not  in  righteousness 
and  hohness.  2.  Hence  we  learn  which  is  the  most  commendable  ministry  and  most 
approved  of  God,  namely,  that  which  worketh  most  (not  upon  the  understanding, 
but)  upon  the  heart  and  affections,  to  warm  the  heart  and  make  it  burn  within 
a  man,  as  Christ's  speech  did  the  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus.  3.  To  show  who 
are  the  best  hearers  in  our  assemblies,  namely,  those  that  bring  best  desires  and 
affections  unto  these  sacred  ordinances  and  exercises  of  religion.  4.  If  the  Lord 
especially  commendeth  good  affections,  how  unlike  are  they  to  the  Lord,  that  pinch 
and  reproach  good  affections,  and  are  of  that  malignant  quality  that  no  good  desire 
or  affection  can  peep  or  appear  in  any  near  them,  but  they  nip  and  blast  it.  5.  All 
Christians  must  be  ambitious  to  seek  this  true  commendation  from  the  Lord,  that  He 
may  say  of  us.  But  this  thou  hast,  a  true  affection  and  sound  desire  of  grace.  In 
the  persons  that  hate  the  works  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  note  that  a  man  may  Uve  in  a 
deep  consumption  of  grace  for  a  time  and  yet  retain  the  hatred  of  some  foul  sins. 
Eeason :  1.  A  man  wanting  grace  may  hate  some  sins  ;  and  much  more  a  man  in 
decay  of  grace.  A  Jew  may  abhor  a  Samaritan,  and  yet  have  no  love  to  the  light 
and  truth  offering  itself  unto  him.  And  hardly  can  we  conceive  any  so  wicked,  but 
may  hate  some  sin.  2.  Carnal  policy  and  earthly  respects  may  ground  the  hatred 
of  some  sin,  when  neither  the  love  of  God  nor  the  hatred  of  sin  as  sin,  doth  ground 
it.  And  any  Ephesian  can  hate  a  Nicolaitane  if  his  works  will  not  stand  with  the 
light  of  nature,  or  credit  of  men,  or  name  of  profession.  3.  Where  the  love  of 
goodness  is  decayed,  no  marvel  if  hatred  or  evil  be  for  sinister  respects  ;  and  men 
may  hate  what  the  Lord  hateth,  though  not  because  the  Lord  hateth  it,  for  so  did 
this  Church.  And  no  hatred  of  evil  is  good,  but  that  which  floweth  from  the  love 
of  good.  Use  :  Here  is  a  rule  of  trial  of  our  hatred  of  evil.  As  is  our  love  of  good 
so  is  our  hatred  of  evil.  Fervent  love  stirs  up  earnest  hatred ;  little  love  of  good, 
little  hatred  of  evil ;  no  love  of  good,  no  hatred  of  evU.  We  must  not  hate  the 
persons  of  men,  but  their  evil  works.  Not  the  Nicolaitanes  but  the  works  of  the 
Nicolaitanes  (Psa.  ci.  3 ;  2  Sam.  xv.  31).  Keason:  1.  The  object  of  our  hatred 
must  be  works,  not  the  man,  because  we  must  hate  nothing  that  comes  from  God 
by  grace  or  nature.  God  made  the  man,  but  the  man  made  himself  sinful.  2.  We 
must  hate  no  man  without  a  cause.  For,  as  we  must  not  love  vices  for  persons,  so 
neither  may  we  hate  persons  for  vices,  nor  the  man  for  his  evil  manners.  3. 
All  just  hatred  floweth  from  the  love  of  God;  therefore  we  may  not  hate  the 
person  of  our  brother  (1  John  iv.  20).  4.  There  is  an  unwarrantable  hatred  which 
fasteneth  on  that  that  God  hateth  not.  This  is  a  hatred  of  malice,  not  of  zeal 
which  is  kindled  in  heaven.  But  we  know  not  the  state  of  the  persons  of  our 
brethren,  whether  they  belong  to  God  or  no,  but  their  works  are  hateful  to  God,  and 
condemned  in  His  law.  Use:  1.  We  must  not  hate  where  no  hateful  work 
appeareth  ;  and  where  it  doth  appear  we  must  hate  nothing  else.  2.  Seeing  much 
deceit  lieth  herein,  and  we  often  do  mistake  ourselves  thinking  we  do  well  in  hati  ig 
sins,  when,  indeed,  our  hatred  is  against  persons,  we  shall  do  well  to  examine  our 
hatred.  For  the  trial  whereof  take  these  rules.  (1)  Hasty  reproofs  issue  commonly 
more  from  the  hatred  of  persons  than  of  sins,  when  a  man  is  reproved  before  his 
offence  be  proved  (1  Cor.  v.  1).  (2)  When  our  own  causes  be  primarily  interested 
with  God's  cause,  we  may  suspect  ourselves  carried  rather  against  persons  than 
sins.  When  a  man  is  as  a  lamb,  mild  and  moderate  in  the  cause  of  God,  but  a 
hon  in  his  own  cause,  here  is  apparent  hatred  of  persons  more  than  sins.  (3)  The 
hatred  of  sin  in  another,  but  not  of  the  same  sins  in  ourselves,  is  the  hatred  of  the 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

person,  not  of  the  sin.  For  true  hatred  of  sin  hateth  it  in  himself  most  of  all.  No 
man  can  hate  that  sin  in  another  which  he  loveth  in  himself.  (4)  The  true  hatred 
of  sin  doth  restrain  from  sin  in  the  hatred,  and  casts  out  raging,  railing,  scorning, 
swearing,  reviUng,  or  abusing  of  the  person.  For,  where  any  of  these  discover 
themselves,  the  hatred  is  of  the  person,  not  of  the  sin.  Satan  is  not  cast  out  by 
Satan.  (5)  True  hatred  of  sin  goes  ever  with  love  and  pity  of  the  person.  Moses 
so  hates  the  sin  of  Israel  that  he  still  prayeth  for  their  persons.  (6)  According  to  the 
measure  of  true  hatred  of  thy  brother's  evil  is  thy  rejoicing  in  his  good.  Here  is  the 
reason  of  the  commendation :  because  they  hated  what  God  hated.  God  is  well  pleased 
when  our  affections  are  comfortable  to  His  ;  whence  are  those  many  precepts  and 
exhortations  (Matt.  xi.  29  ;  Luke  vi.  36  ;  1  Pet.  i.  15).  Keason:  1.  His  affections  flow 
from  His  righteous  will ;  He  loveth  good,  because  His  nature  is  goodness  itself,  and 
His  will  the  rule  of  all  goodness.  So  He  hateth  evil,  because  His  nature  and  will 
is  absolutely  contrary  unto  it.  And,  therefore,  because  His  will  must  be  our  will, 
our  affections  must  be  framed  to  His  also.  2.  He  is  an  unfailing  pattern  and  an 
unerring  example,  and  we  shall  be  sure  never  to  miss  in  the  proper  object  of  our 
love  or  hatred  if  we  love  what  He  loveth  and  hate  what  He  hateth.  3.  That  per- 
fection which  we  expect  in  heaven  we  must  begin  on  earth.  But  this  is  the  life  of 
heaven,  that  our  souls  shall  so  perfectly  cleave  unto  Him,  as  we  shall  be  like  Him, 
and  be  satisfied  with  His  image.  We  shall  never  love  nor  hate  but  what  He  loveth 
and  hateth.  And  to  this  life  we  must  frame  here  in  sincere  affection  and  endeavour. 
4.  If  one  affection  of  ours  resembling  His  prevail  so  much  with  Him,  as  we  see  in 
this  text,  how  much  more  if  all  our  affections  were  trained  to  His  ?  If  the  hatred 
of  gross  evils  bring  us  in  request  with  Him,  what  would  the  love  of  all  the  good- 
ness that  He  loveth.  Use  :  This  doctrine  affords  us  many  directions  concerning  our 
affections  which  are  quick  and  hardly  kept  in  order,  and  in  which  as  many  sins  lie 
in  the  dark  as  in  any  other  faculty.  I.  Concerning  the  matter  of  our  hatred. 
Whatsoever  we  love  or  hate  we  must  ask  ourselves  whether  God  loveth  or  hateth  it. 
If  God  love  it,  it  is  worthy  of  our  love.  If  God  express  hatred  against  anything 
we  must  take  heed  we  affect  it  not.  II.  Concerning  the  rule  of  our  hatred.  That 
which  we  may  lawfully  hate  we  must  inquire  whether  we  hate  it  because  God  hateth 
it.  For,  first,  heathen  can  hate  some  sins  for  the  inconveniences  they  bring  who 
hath  no  eye  to  God  in  them.  Secondly,  to  avoid  sin  because  men  punish  it,  or 
human  laws  condemn  it,  or  because  shame  attends  it  is  not  praiseworthy.  Thirdly, 
even  so  it  is  in  embracing  good.  To  love  religion  and  embrace  the  truth  because 
the  law  favours  it  and  the  kingdom  embraceth  it,  and  is  now  the  safest,  is  but  policy, 
and  an  atheist  can  do  it.  But  a  truly  religious  heart  therefore  embraceth  it,  because 
it  is  the  truth  of  God,  and  because  God  Himself  loveth,  honoureth,  and  promoteth 
it,  and  hath  commended  it  to  our  love  and  trust.  III.  Concerning  the  measure  of 
our  hatred.  Our  direction  is,  that  wheresoever  the  Lord  expresseth  the  greatest 
measure  of  hatred,  we  must  also  there  most  earnestly  hate.  For  our  affection  must 
even  in  the  measure  of  it  be  framed  to  God's.  The  manner  of  our  hatred.  1.  We 
must  try  the  intention  and  vehemency  of  our  affections.  The  Lord  doth  not  lightly 
hate  sin  or  barely  mislike  it,  but  pursues  it  with  an  hostile  hatred,  and  abhors  it  as 
the  most  hateful  thing  in  the  world,  even  so  we  must  not  only  simply  refuse  sin 
or  forbear  it,  but  bear  a  fervent  indignation  against  it,  esteeming  it  the  most  hateful 
and  hurtful  thing  in  the  world  (Psa.  cxix.  163).  2.  The  Lord  hateth  sin  generally 
and  universally ;  not  one,  or  two,  or  more  scandalous  sins,  but  all  sin  everywhere, 
both  all  kinds  and  all  acts  of  sin.  So  we  must  try  our  hatred  by  the  generality, 
whether  we  hate  all  the  ways  of  falsehood.  It  is  not  enough  to  hate  this  or  that 
sin,  but  the  heart  must  be  set  against  aU  that  is  called  sin.  3.  The  Lord  hateth  sin 
only  and  innocently ;  so  hateth  evil,  that  He  hateth  not  the  good  near  it  or  with  it ; 
no,  nor  will  not  hate  the  good  for  it.  He  will  be  sure  His  wrath  shall  fasten  on  the 
works  of  Nicolaitanes,  but  rejects  no  good  for  evil,  no  wheat  for  chaff,  no  gold  for 
dross.  So  we  may  not  hate  good  with  evil  or  for  evil.  4.  The  Lord  hateth  sin 
implacably ;  He  can  never  be  reconciled  unto  it,  but  goes  on  to  the  abolition  and 
destruction  of  it.  So  must  we  try  our  affection  against  sin,  whether  it  be  a  short 
fit  of  anger  or  an  extreme  just  hatred.  And  the  rule  of  trial  of  just  hatred  is,  that  of 
the  Jews  toward  their  wives,  "  If  thou  hatest  her  put  her  away  " ;  divorce  thy  sin  from 
thyself :  allow  it  no  room  qr  harbour.  One  thing  it  is  for  a  Jew  to  be  angry  at  his 
wife,  another  to  hate  her  to  divorce.  And  so  are  many  sometimes  angry  at  some 
sins  in  extremity,  and  will  curb  and  moderate  and  keep  them  in  some  compass ;  but 
they  put  them  not  away  altogether  because  they  hate  them  not.  6.  The  Lord  hates 
all  sin  perpetually  and  constantly.     His  wrath  is  so  kindled  against  it  that  it  can 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  133 

never  be  quenched,  but  burneth  to  the  bottom  of  hell.  So  if  our  hatred  "of  sin  be 
true  it  wUl  be  lasting  and  increasing.  We  see,  therefore,  what  an  advantage  it  is  to 
hold  our  affections  in  conformity  unto  the  Lord's,  and  a  piece  of  His  own  image  who, 
being  perfectly  good,  cannot  but  hate  that  which  is  perfectly  evil.  And  the  more  we 
grow  to  His  perfection  in  good  the  more  perfectly  must  we  hate  all  that  is  evil.  {T. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the 
Churches. — God^s  voice  to  the  Church : — I.  That  1)ivine  revelations  are  given  to 
THE  Christian  Church.  1.  They  are  revelations  of  the  truth  of  God.  2.  They  are 
revelations  of  the  condition  and  duty  of  the  Church.  They  are  practical  in 
tendency.  They  are  faithful.  They  are  definite.  They  are  plain.  They  are 
merciful.  3.  These  revelations  are  given  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  He  only  can  give 
men  to  see  the  beauty  of  truth  and  the  beauty  of  holiness.  II.  That  Divine 
revelations  should  be  attentively  heeded  by  the  Christian  Church.  1.  The 
Church  should  seek  to  understand  the  revelations  of  God.  These  revelations  of 
God  are  clear  to  the  devout  soul.  2.  The  Church  should  believe  the  revelations  of 
God.  They  are  precious.  They  are  Divine.  They  contemplate  important  issues. 
They  ought,  therefore,  to  awaken  the  warm  assent  of  the  Church.  3.  The  Church 
should  submit  to  the  revelations  of  God.  If  these  Asiatic  Churches  had  meekly 
yielded  to  the  messages  sent  to  them,  they  would  have  averted  the  retribution  that 
came  upon  them  so  woefully.  III.  That  Divine  revelations  are  frequently 
neglected  by  the  Christian  Church.  Lessons :  1.  That  God  speaks  to  the 
Church.  2.  That  the  Church  should  cultivate  its  hearing  faculty.  3.  That  the 
utility  and  destiny  of  the  Church  is  dependent  upon  the  heed  it  gives  to  the 
messages  of  God.  {J.  S.  Exell,  31. A.)  The  paradise  of  God. — Heaven,  a 
garden: — I.  Heaven  is  not  merely  a  state,  but  a  place.  Men  try  to  be  too 
sublimely  immaterial  when  they  deny  the  thought  of  locality  to  human  concep- 
tions of  heaven.  Dr.  Chalmers  says  we  "  make  it  a  lofty  aerial  region,  floating  in 
aether,  suspended  on  nothing."  Are  we  not  wrong  then?  For — 1.  Is  it  not  probable 
that  God  is  the  only  pure  Spirit?  2.  Do  not  all  humati  instincts  and  all  Scriptural 
revelations  point  to  a  place?  IT.  Heaven  is  a  place  of  surpassing  beauty. 
III.  Heaven  is  a  place  of  appropriate  labour,  TV.  Heaven  is  a  place  of  God's 
special  habitation.  It  is  a  most  sacred  reminiscence  of  paradise  that  the  Lord 
God  was  there  amid  the  trees  of  the  garden.  The  central  glory  of  heaven  is  the 
felt  presence  of  God.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Paradise : — 1.  First  of  all,  *it  is 
plain,  is  it  not,  from  the  persistent  use  of  this  word  "paradise,"  that  departed 
saints  already  find  the  consequences  of  the  fall  reversed,  and  the  old  primaeval 
blessedness  of  man  restored  to  them  in  Christ?  To  be  done  with  unfriendly 
estrangements  such  as  part  the  best  friends  here,  and  all  fear  of  change,  which 
haunteth  even  earthly  love ;  to  be  done  with  unrequited  labour,  done  with  evil 
speaking  and  ingratitude,  done  with  an  unquiet  mind  and  black  care  that  sits 
behind  the  rider ;  to  find  for  all  the  ills  of  this  life  only  refreshment  and  sweet 
repose,  to  find  peace  in  the  place  of  strife,  and  for  labour  rest,  and  progress  with 
contentment,  and  endless  youth  and  gain  of  knowledge  that  adds  no  sorrow,  and 
ever  perfect  love  and  charity — this  reversal  of  all  that  ancient  curse  which  sits 
upon  mankind,  this,  were  there  no  more  but  this,  how  good  were  it  I  how  good  to 
look  forward  to  I  how  blessed  to  possess !  2.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  made 
abundantly  evident  that  the  second  paradise  excels  the  first  in  this — that  its 
blessedness  is  secure  from  loss  or  change.  Not  only  is  sin  shut  out,  with  all  sin's 
fruits,  but  it  is  shut  out  for  ever.  Under  whatever  aspect  the  state  of  the  beatified 
dead  is  represented,  its  permanence  is  always  made  emphatic.  Is  it  the  home  of  a 
heavenly  Father?  Then  its  chambers  are  styled  "mansions,"  " abiding  places," 
as  the  word  signifies,  they  never  lose  their  tenants.  Is  it  like  Eden,  a  garden  of 
God  ?  Then  my  text  tells  you  that  the  tree  of  life  stands  open  there  to  all  the 
happy  dwellers,  and  the  Lamb  shall  guide  their  feet  to  fountains  of  immortal  life. 
Or  is  it  a  strong  city  as  well  as  a  garden  enclosed  ?  Then  the  conception  of  its 
imperishable  foundations  and  lofty  walls  is  that  it  stands  secure  at  the  centre  of 
the  Almighty  empire — a  capital  free  from  the  possibility  of  corruption,  dreading 
no  foe.  3.  But,  in  the  third  place,  a  careful  examination  of  all  the  intimations  in 
Scripture  leave  it,  I  think,  beyond  doubt  that  our  paradise  is  no  middle  ground  of 
temporary  exile,  like  the  Sheol  of  the  Hebrews,  but  includes  admission  to  the 
immediate  presence  and  vision  of  God.  One  thing  only  seems  needful  to  complete 
the  felicity  of  our  Christian  dead — that  is,  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  But 
though  that  be  wanting,  there  is,  nevertheless,  a  heavenly  paradise,  for  they  behold 
the  face  of  God  in   light  and  glory,  even  while  they  are  waiting  still  for  the 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

full  redemption  of  their  bodies.     In  all  the  higher  moods  of  earthly  experience 
after  what  do  you  find  the  pure  heart  of  God's  children  pant,  when  at  their  best,  if 
not  after  full  knowledge  of  Jesus,  full  fruition  of  His  wondrous  love,  full  likeness 
of  His  holiness,  full  devotion  to  His  service,  full  communion  with  His  person? 
These  deep  yearnings  of  saintly  hearts  on  earth,  think  how  they  are  to  be  gratified 
when,  every  veil  withdrawn,  these  saints  behold  Him  as  He  is,  and  are  satisfied 
with  His  hkeness.     Close  to  that  primal  fountain  of  spiritual  life,  of  light  and  joy 
and  energy  and  bliss,  low,  at  His  feet,  near  to  His  heart,  within  the  reach  of  His 
voice,  within  the  beaming  of  His  eyes,  there  must  be  the  Christian  heaven.     {J.  0. 
Dykes,   D.D.)        The  paradise  of  God : — Eden,  with  all  its  loveliness,  is  to  be 
surpassed.     It  was  but  a  faint  type  of  that  heavenly  paradise  which  is  opened  by 
Christ  to  all  believers.    Futurity  is  to  transcend  antiquity.     The  best  is  to  come  at 
the  last.     How  can  we  speak  of  that  heavenly  paradise  ?    Experience  cannot  help 
us.      And  imagination  grows  dumb  beneath  that   "weight  of  glory"   (2   Cor. 
iv.  17),  or  is  blinded  by  that  excess  of  light.     It  hath  not  entered  into  the  heart  of 
man  to  conceive  it.    Emblems  we  have,  but  they  are  nothing  more.    We  can  only 
know  the  Invisible  as  shadowed  by  the  things  that  do  appear.    What  various  and 
enchanting  hopes  start  at  such  words  as  these :  life,  a  feast,  a  temple,  a  city,  a 
kingdom,  a  Father's  house,  glory,  the  paradise  of  God.    Walking  in  permitted 
meditation  aijiid  that  heavenly  paradise,  behold — 1.  Beauty.    How  lovely  the  brief 
descriptive  touches  found  in  the  Divine  Word  1    Emblem  mingles  with  emblem 
and  glory  blossoms  into  glory.     Is  it  a  garden?    The  privileged  John  thus  de- 
scribes it  (chap.  xxii.  1-5 ;  vi.  16,  17).     Is  it  a  city  ?    It  is  "  prepared  as  a  bride 
adorned  for  her  husband"  (xxi.   2).     "Her  light  was  like  unto  a  stone  most 
precious,  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal"  (xxi.  11).     And  ths  foundations 
of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished,"  &c.  (xxi.  19-21).     These  are  emblems  of 
surpassing  loveliness.    Nothing  more  than  emblems  ?    Is  there  no  city  radiant  in 
splendour  ?    Is  there  no  garden  with  its  crystal  river  and  trees  of  unfading  beauty  ? 
Who  can  say?    Any  way,  if  only  emblems,  heaven  is  a  place  of  transcendent 
beauty.     2.  Knowledge  will  mark  the  inhabitants  of  the  paradise  of  God.    We 
shall  not  need  to  ask,  "  What  is  it  ?  "    We  shall  know  it  by  intuition,  and  not  by 
tedious  search.     There  to  see  will  be  to  understand.     No  mistake  will  be  made  by 
us.    And  the  Great  Teacher  will  instruct  us  by  parable  no  more.    Wide,  and  ever- 
widening,  wiU  be  that  sphere  of  knowledge.    But  how  little  aU  else  will  be  to  the 
knowledge  we  shall  then  possess  of  the  Divine  character  and  dealings.    3.  In  that 
heavenly  paradise  there  will  be  supreme  enjoyment.    Not  the  sensual  pleasures  of 
a  Mahometan  paradise,  but  the  highest  satisfaction  and  delight  of  our  quick  and 
ever-quickening  spiritual  powers.     (1)  The  joy  of  fellowship.    In  heaven  there  wiU 
be  no  sohtude  in  a  crowd.    Thought  will  be  interchanged.    Love  will  glow.    No 
distrust  will  cool  that  warmth  of  friendship.    And  more,  infinitely  more  than  all, 
we  shall  be  with  Christ.    It  will  be  more  than  vanished  paradise  come  again — 
more  than  a  restitution  of  all  things.     (2)  The  joy  of  holiness.    No  hindering 
defilement !    No  Hngering  spot !     (3)  The  joy  of  rest.     The  hurly-burly  done,  the 
last  stroke  struck,  the  last  foe  vanquished — oh,  how  blessed  the  everlasting  rest  I 
(4)  The  joy  of  service.    Who  can  tell  in  what  various  ways  we  shall  find  highest, 
purest  exhilaration  in  doing  God's  commandments?  (chap.  xxii.  3).     One  part  of 
the  service  will  be  worship  (Psa.  xvi.  11).    4.  And  yet  another  thought  in  the  paradise 
of  God — eternity.    No  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  is  there.     The  life  of 
probation  is  over.     In  that  paradise  is  no  decay,  no  old  age,  no  death  (1  Peter  i.  4). 
And  this  high  estate  of  glory,  this  paradise  of  eternal  bliss,  is  Christ's  purchase 
for  men,  Christ's  donation  to  man.     ((?.  T.  Coster.) 

Vers.  8-11,  Smyrna. — Smyrna — the  poor  Church  that  was  rich : — The  story  of 
Smyrna,  both  spiritual  and  material,  the  delineation  of  its  circumstances  and  of 
its  experience,  is  simple.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  achievements  of  the  Church ;  the 
significant  clause,  "  I  know  thy  works,"  which  meets  us  elsewhere,  is  wanting  here. 
No  complex  ethical  state  is  set  before  us.  The  history  of  Smyrna  is  compressed 
into  a  single  word,  "  tribulation  "  ;  it  had  one  solitary  call,  to  fidelity.  Of  Smyrna 
this  much  is  recorded — the  Church  was  persecuted  by  the  Jews.  The  life  of  the 
Church  had  been  one  of  tribulation,  and  in  its  tribulation  it  was  poor.  Of  the 
social  influence  which  conciliates  authorities  and  tempers  persecutions,  of  the 
comforts  which  lighten  trouble  and  solace  the  afflicted,  it  had  none.  And  the 
conflict  was  to  wax  sorer.  Eeproach  will  be  followed  by  imprisormient.  Out  of 
the  very  soreness  of  the  trouble  there  come  suggestions  that  carry  consolation  with 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  135 

them.  The  sufferings  of  this  insignificant  Church  have  a  dignity  all  their  own ; 
and  not  only  a  dignity,  they  have  an  importance  too.  As  it  had  been  with  Christ, 
BO  should  it  be  with  His  followers  in  Smyrna.  Unrelenting  hostility  was  to  be 
followed  by  eternal  victory.  "  Fear  not  the  things  which  thou  art  going  to  suffer. 
...  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life."  There 
is  something  very  suggestive  in  this  picture  of  the  Church  at  Smyrna,  in  the  fact 
that  it  lay  aside  from  the  various  movements — the  false  doctrines  and  the  worldly 
confusions — which  elsewhere  had  already  begun  to  perplex  the  Christian  life. 
To  us,  also,  there  have  come  manifold  complexions  of  social  and  religious  interest ; 
the  Christian  life  of  to-day  is  very  full.  Yes,  life  is  for  us  Christians  to-day  very 
full  of  meaning,  and  piety  is  very  rich.  The  effort  to  win  all  for  Christ  will  be 
very  arduous,  we  know ;  but  the  hope  is  inspiring,  the  victory  will  be  worth  the 
winning.  I.  The  Church  at  Smyrna  was  rich  because  it  had  Christ.  Observe 
the  sublimity  and  the  tenderness  of  the  titles  under  which  the  Lord  reveals  Him- 
self— "  the  first  and  the  last,"  "  He  who  died  and  lived  again."  The  former  of 
these  titles  is  taken  from  the  most  majestic,  the  most  exultant,  of  Old  Testament 
prophecies,  the  prophecy  of  Israel's  restoration.  One  of  the  most  touching,  most 
searching  things  Henry  Ward  Beecher  wrote  was  his  description  in  "  Norwood  "  of 
the  poor  woman,  wife  of  a  lazy,  drunken  husband,  rearing  seven  children  in  hunger 
and  weariness,  who  used  to  turn  to  these  chapters,  and  make  the  mystic  promises 
her  own.  "  0  thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  tempest,  and  not  comforted.  .  .  .  thy 
Maker  is  thy  husband ;  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  His  name."  She  called  her  daughter 
"Agate,"  because  she  read,  "I  will  make  thy  windows  of  agates."  She  did  not 
know  what  an  agate  was,  but  she  was  sure  it  must  be  something  beautiful,  and 
God's  windows  were  to  be  of  agates.  "  She  seized  the  happy  thought — ♦  I  will  call 
her  Agate.  Perhaps  the  Lord  will  make  her  like  a  window  to  my  darkness.' 
Thus  she  was  named."  There  is  an  equal  wealth  of  suggestion  in  the  second  of 
the  two  titles.  *'  The  First  and  the  Last "  was  persecuted  as  Smyrna  was.  It  is 
He  who  had  gone  on  to  death,  and  was  not  holden  of  death,  who  says — "  Be  thou 
faithful.  ...  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life."  They  who  are  in  such  a  fellow- 
ship cannot  be  poor.  n.  Their  very  poverty  makes  them  rich,  fob  it  gave 
firmness  to  their  grasp  and  reality  to  their  possession  of  Christ.  We  have 
many  various  tokens  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  Divine  grace ;  but  there  are  some 
among  us  who  never  knew  what  the  power  of  God  was  until,  absolutely  emptied  of 
self -trust,  they  cast  themselves  on  Him ;  who,  having  had  their  self-complacency 
shattered,  ventured  to  believe  that  the  true  riches  was  not  in  anything  they  had 
attained  or  were,  but  in  the  living  God.  The  riches  of  Smyrna  may  be  seen  from 
another  aspect.  In  Christ  and  their  own  dependence  on  Him  was  enough  for  their 
needs.  They  were  not  overtaxed ;  they  were  called  to  be  faithful,  and  they  were 
faithful.  Their  very  detachment  from  the  interests  in  which  other  Churches  were 
engrossed  made  them  the  more  able  to  abide  in  that  fidelity  which  was  their 
peculiar  vocation.  HI.  In  their  narrow  sphere  the  Christians  of  Smyrna 
HAD  enough  DiscrpLiNB  FOR  THE  ETERNAL  FUTXTRE.  We  think  sometimcs  of  the 
vast,  immeasurable  future  and  its  stupendous  possibilities.  And  we  think  that  the 
burden  is  laid  on  us,  in  a  few  short  years,  to  prepare  ourselves  for  it  all.  No 
wonder  that  thus  thinking  we  are  appalled,  and  that  we  forbode  new  disasters  in 
our  probation,  ending,  perhaps,  in  a  second  death.  But  we  are  wrong.  It  is  not 
what  we  take  with  us,  in  attainments  or  even  experience,  which  will  determine  our 
fitness  for  that  future,  but  the  men  we  are.  And  the  man  may  be  as  truly  fitted  to 
start  upon  "  his  adventure  brave  and  new  "  by  mastering  one  lesson,  as  by  ac- 
quainting himself  with  many;  by  being  faithful  unto  death,  and  so  laying 
eternal  hold  on  Christ,  as  by  laying  up  in  a  wide  and  varied  experience  a  good 
foundation  for  e.ernal  life.  Fidelity,  in  much  or  in  little,  has  all  the  promise  of 
fidehty  ;  its  reward  is  to  be  unmoved.  There  is  one  other  note  of  tenderness  to  be 
referred  to  in  this  message — the  Church  is  to  have  "  ten  days  of  tribulation."  Some 
of  the  commentators  tell  us  this  means  a  short  time,  and  others  that  the  time  is  to 
be  long.  All  depends  on  our  point  of  view.  To  Smyrna,  in  its  death  agony,  any 
protraction  of  the  trouble  would  seem  long  ;  in  the  Ught  of  eternity,  when  wearing 
"  the  crown  of  life,"  the  victors  would  think  it  short.  It  was  a  fixed  time,  definitely 
limited  by  "  the  First  and  Last " ;  and  any  fixed  time  will  one  day  seem  brief ;  they  who 
have  come  out  of  their  travail  think  of  the  anguish  no  more.  [A.  Mackennal,  D.D.) 
Letter  to  Smyrna  : — I.  Christ  reveals  Himself  to  His  people  according  to  theib 
MouAL  coNi^iTiON.  In  support  of  this  assertion  it  is  only  necessary  to  read  the 
Buperscriptions  of  the  letters  "  unto  the  seven  Churches  which  are  in  Asia."  By  the 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

title  or  representation  which  the  Son  of  Man  assumes,  we  may  anticipate  the  revela- 
tion in  which  He  is  about  to  appear.  In  this,  I  am  persuaded,  we  have  an  explanation 
of  the  varying  experience  of  the  Christian,  and  of  the  diversified  and  changeful  mission 
of  the  Church.  To  one  ma,n,  or  to  one  Church,  Christ  presents  Himself  bearing  "  the 
sharp  sword  with  two  edges  " ;  to  another,  with  eyes  blazing  with  penetrating  light; 
to  another,  as  holding  the  key  of  opportunity  ;  and  to  another,  as  grasping  infini- 
tude, and  girt  with  the  memorials  of  death  and  the  pledges  of  ascension.  It  is 
possible  to  have  all  these,  and  many  more,  visions  of  the  selfsame  Saviour.  Our 
apprehensions  of  His  identity  are  regulated  by  our  moral  conditions.  1.  As  our 
Saviour  is  the  First  and  the  Last,  all  things  must  be  under  His  dominion.  "  The 
First."  Who  can  reveal  the  mystery  of  these  words,  or  number  the  ages  we  must 
re-traverse  ere  we  can  behold  the  first  gleam  of  that  horizon  which  encircles  God 
as  an  aureole  of  unwaning  light  !  "  The  Last."  Another  mystery  !  This 
expression  bears  us  onward  until  the  surging  sea  of  life  is  for  ever  hushed,  until 
the  Divine  government  has  answered  all  the  purpose  of  Infinite  Wisdom.  Over  what 
cemeteries  we  must  pass,  I  know  not  ;  we  must  advance  until  the  Creator  exclaim 
from  His  throne,  as  the  Eedeemer  cried  from  the  Cross,  "  It  is  finished  !  "  2.  As 
our  Saviour  was  dead  and  is  aUve  again,  so  we,  who  are  now  enduring  the  fellow- 
ship of  His  sufferings,  shall  know  the  power  of  His  resurrection.  •'  I  was  dead."  The 
counsels  of  eternity  are  epitomised  in  this  declaration.  The  problem  over  which  the 
ages  bent  in  perplexity  is,  in  reality,  solved  by  this  fact.  "  Alive  again."  Let  me 
inquire  around  what  centre  the  Church  assembles.  Do  you  hasten  to  reply,  the 
Cross  ?  I  answer,  not  there  only.  The  Cross  first,  but  afterwards  the  grave  !  In 
the  centre  of  the  Church  is  an  empty  tomb,  and  to  a  doubting  world  the  Church  can 
ever  answer,  "  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay."  Arid,  "  seeing"  it,  what 
then  ?  Why,  from  the  sacred  rock  a  living  stream  breaks,  and  as  the  countless 
multitudes  drink,  they  exclaim,  "  These  are  the  waters  of  immortality."    II.  Cheist 

ASSUKES  His  PEOPLE  THAT  He  IS  INTIMATELY  ACQUAINTED  WITH  EVERT  FEATURE  OF  THEIB 

HISTORY.  "  I  know  thy  works,  and  tribulation,  and  poverty."  The  "  I  know  "  of 
love  is  the  smile  of  God.  Jesus  sees  our  sufferings,  is  present  in  the  cloud  of  our 
sorrow,  needs  not  to  be  told  what  the  soul  has  undergone,  but  breaks  in  upon  the 
gathering  darkness  with  words  which  bring  with  them  the  brightness  and  hope  of. 
morning,  "  I  know,  I  know."  The  fact  that  Jesus  knows  all  that  we  suffer  for  Him 
should  serve  three  purposes.  (1)  It  should  embolden  us  to  seek  His  help.  He  is 
within  whisper-reach  of  all  His  saints.  All  the  desires  of  the  heart  may  be  ex- 
pressed in  one  entreating  sigh — one  appealing  glance.  (2)  It  should  inspire  us 
with  invincible  courage.  As  the  presence  of  a  valorous  leader  stimulates  an  army, 
so  should  the  assured  guardianship  of  the  Son  of  God  inspire  every  soldier  of  the 
Cross.  (3)  It  should  clothe  us  with  profoundest  humility.  That  we  can  do  anything 
for  Jesus  is  a  fact  which  should  extinguish  all  fleshly  pride.  He  might  have  deprived 
the  Church  of  this  luxury  of  suffering  in  His  stead  ;  but  it  hath  pleased  Him,  in  the 
infinite  fulness  of  His  love,  to  permit  us  to  be  wounded  for  the  sake  of  His  name. 
Are  you  a  sufferer?  To  thee  Jesus  says,  "  I  know."  Is  not  that  enough?  The 
tear,  indeed,  falls  downwards,  but  the  sound  of  its  falling  flieth  upward  to  the  ear  of 
God.  in.  Christ  reveals  to  His  suffering  saints  the  fact  of  their  imperishable 
WEALTH.  Turn  your  attention  to  the  ninth  verse,  and  determine  which  is  its 
brightest  gem.  Look  at  the  parenthesis,  and  you  have  it !  How  like  the  effusion  of 
the  Infinite  mind  !  A  volume  in  a  sentence — heaven  in  a  parenthesis  !  It  flashes 
upon  one  so  unexpectedly.  It  is  a  garden  in  a  wilderness,  a  song  of  hope  mingling 
with  the  night- winds  of  despair.  Slowly  we  pass  over  the  dismal  words,  "  Thy 
works,  and  tribulation,  and  poverty,"  and  with  startling  suddenness  we  overpass  the 
separating  parenthesis,  and  then — then  !  Outside  of  it  we  have  cold,  shivering, 
desolate  "poverty"  ;  and  inside  '•  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that 
fadeth  not  away  "  1  Think  of  it  !  The  very  typography  is  suggestive  ;  only  a 
parenthesis  between  "  poverty"  and  "  rich"  !  And  is  it  not  so  even  in  reality  ? 
What  is  there  between  thee,  0  suffering  saint,  and  joys  immortal  ?  What  between 
thee  and  thy  soul's  Saviour  ?  Only  a  parenthesis — the  poor,  frail,  perishing 
parenthesis  of  the  dying  body.  No  more.  There  is  but  a  step  between  poverty  and 
wealth.  The  history  of  transition  is  condensed  into  one  sentence,  "  Absent  from 
the  body,  present  with  the  Lord."  Let  the  parenthesis  fall,  and  you  will  see  Him  as 
He  is.  When,  therefore,  we  estimate  the  wealth  of  a  good  man,  we  must  remember 
that  there  is  a  moral  as  well  as  a  material,  an  invisible  as  well  as  a  visible,  property. 
The  good  man  is  an  heir,  and  his  heirship  relates  to  possessions  which  no  human 
power  of  calculation  can  compute.      If  you  as  a  Church  ask  me  how   you  may 


CHAP.  11.]  REVELATION.  137 

ascertain  whether  you  are  "  rich,"  I  should  answer — (1)  Is  your  faith  strong  ?  (2) 
Are  your  labours  abundant  ?  (3)  Are  your  spiritual  children  numerous  ?  IV^ 
Christ  comforts  His  suffering  ones  bt  disarming  their  fears.  I  cannot  arbi- 
trate between  contending  critics  as  to  the  precise  signification  of  the  expression  I 
"  ten  days."  It  is  enough  for  me  to  secure  a  firm  foot  on  the  general  principle  which  i 
underlies  the  prediction.  That  general  principle  is,  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the 
suffering  of  the  Church.  Persecution  \p  an  affair  of  "  ten  days."  Diocletian  is  the  ' 
tyrant  of  a  vanishing  hour.  To-day  he  raves  in  madness,  to-morrow  his  last  yell  ' 
has  for  ever  expired.  "  Our  light  aflBiiction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment."  The 
apostle  triumphantly  contrasts  the  brevity  of  suffering  with  the  duration  of  glory. 
In  prospect  of  suffering,  Christ  says  to  His  people,  "  Fear  not."  But  why  this 
counsel  ?  Does  it  not  stiffen  the  heart  as  a  word  of  chilling  mockery  ?  0  Son  of 
God,  why  tell  the  people  not  "  to  fear  "  ?  It  is  because  He  knows  the  full  interpre- 
tation of  suffering.  Suffering  is  education.  Grief  is  discipline.  Let  me  further 
remind  you  that  those  sufferings  have  been  overcome.  Suffering  is  a  vanquished 
power.  '*  I  have  overcome  the  world."  We  have  fellowship  in  our  suffering,  a 
fellowship  that  is  mastery.  V.  Christ  soothes  and  nerves  His  suffering  saints 
BY  THE  PROMISE  OF  INFINITE  COMPENSATION.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I 
will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  Jesus  Christ  will  not  only  deliver  His  saints  from 
the  sphere  of  suffering  ;  He  will  introduce  them  into  the  sphere  of  eternal  rest  and 
joy.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  letter  to  the  Church  at  Smyrna : — I.  Its  temporal 
CONDITION.  The  letter  indicates  that  it  was  a  condition  of  great  trial.  It  refers 
to  "  tribulation,"  "  poverty,"  "  prison."  1.  Its  present  trial.  There  was  "  tribula- 
tion." This  is  a  term  which  represents  trials  of  all  kinds.  But  the  special 
trial  mentioned  is  "poverty."  "I  know  thy  poverty."  Christ  notices  the 
secular  condition  of  Churches.  (1)  Though  their  city  was  rich,  they  were 
poor.  (2)  Though  they  were  distinguished  by  great  spiritual  excellence — for  Christ 
Himself  said,  •'  Thou  art  rich,"  that  is,  spiritually  rich — they  were  secularly  poor. 
In  this  world  man's  secular  condition  is  not  always  determined  by  his  moral 
character.  Character,  and  not  condition,  is  everything  to  man.  As  compared  to 
this,  poverty  is  nothing.  It  is  the  man  that  gives  worth  to  the  condition,  not  the 
condition  to  the  man.  The  gospel  is  for  man  as  man,  and  the  less  man  is 
artificialised  the  more  open  is  he  to  its  influence.  2.  Its  prospective  trial.  The 
letter  indicates  that  great  persecution  awaited  them.  Several  things  are  referred  to 
as  to  the  coming  persecution.  (1)  Its  instruments.  Jews  by  birth  but  not  by 
character,  not  circumcised  in  the  heart.  The  old  religion  has  ever  hated  the  new. 
How  can  it  be  otherwise  ?  for  the  new  examines  the  character,  history,  and  pre- 
tensions of  the  old,  and  refuses  submission  to  its  authority  and  influence.  (2)  Its 
instigator.  "  The  devil."  He  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience — inspires 
them,  raises  their  antagonism  to  the  cause  of  purity,  freedom,  and  happiness.  (3) 
Its  form.  "  Cast  into  prison."  Incarceration  in  some  respects  is  worse  than 
martyrdom.  Better  die  than  to  live  without  light,  freedom,  fellowship.  (4)  Its 
duration.  "  Ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  days."  11.  Its  spebitual  obligation. 
The  letter  inculcates  two  duties.  1.  Courage.  "  Fear  none  of  these  things."  Why 
fear  ?  "  Thou  art  rich  "  in  faith  and  hope  ;  in  Divine  promise,  succour,  and  fellow- 
ship ;  therefore,  fear  not  !  2.  Fidelity.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death."  When 
Christ  left  the  world,  He  put  His  disciples  in  possession  not  of  money,  or  land,  or 
titles,  or  honours.  These  He  had  not  to  bestow.  But  He  gave  them  His  ideas.  His 
purposes,  His  character,  incomparably  the  most  precious  things.  He  did  not  write 
these  things  in  books,  and  leave  them  in  libraries.  He  trusted  them  to  living  souls, 
and  said,  take  care  of  them.  What  a  rare  thing  it  is,  alas  !  to  find  a  man  worthy 
of  truth — worthy  of  the  quantity  and  quality  of  truth  which  has  been  put  into  his 
possession.  Notice  here  two  things — (1)  The  extent  of  this  faithfulness.  "  Unto 
death."  Fidelity  must  not  give  way  at  any  future  point  of  life.  No  event  can 
justify  its  suspension  for  a  moment.  It  must  stand  even  the  fiery  test  of  martyrdom. 
(2)  The  reward  of  faithfulness.  "  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  Let  thy  faith- 
fulness be  strong  enough  to  die  for  Me.  (Caleb  Morris.)  The  address  to  Smyrna : 
— I.  The  preliminaries.  1.  The  party  addressed,  '*  The  angel  of  the  Church  in 
Smyrna."  Of  the  time  and  manner  in  which  a  Church  was  planted  in  this  city 
no  authentic  information  remains.  It  is  probable,  from  its  contiguity  and  com- 
mercial relations  with  Ephesus,  that  the  gospel  first  reached  it  through  that 
channel.  We  do  not  find  it  visited  by  any  of  the  apostles,  or  mentioned  in  their 
epistles.  Some  private  Christians,  who  were  merchants,  or  who  had  been  led  to 
settle  in  that  city,  after  receiving  the  light  of  the  gospel  elsewhere,  may  have  formed 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn.  [chap.  n. 

the  nucleus  of  a  Church,  which,  toward  the  close  of  the  first  century,  had  become 
eminent  for  its  purity  and  extent.  2.  The  title  wh^ch  the  Saviour  assumes  to  this 
Church.  "  The  First  and  the  Last,  which  was  dead  and  is  alive."  Though  equally 
belonging  to  the  whole,  one  part  of  Christ's  character  and  office  is  revealed  more  to 
one  Church  than  another.  He  is  more  to  some  Christians  than  others,  though  He  is 
All  things  to  all.  The  Church  at  Ephesus  needed  to  be  reminded  that  His  watchful 
«ye  was  upon  them,  to  stimulate  them  to  recall  their  first  love,  and  to  do  their  first 
works ;  but  the  Church  at  Smyrna,  which  was  more  pure,  and  yet  had  to  pass 
ihrough  fiery  trials,  needed  most  of  all  to  dwell  upon  the  unchangeableness  of  His 
power  and  love.  11.  The  address  to  the  Church  in  Smyrna.  1.  The  recognition  of 
its  present  state  :  "  I  know  thy  works,"  &c.  There  were  genuine  Christians  amongst 
ithem,  and  there  were  Jewish  pretenders.  These  were  viewed  differently  by  Him 
■whose  "  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."  He  knows  who  are  right-hearted,  and  He 
knows  who  are  insincere.  He  observes  particularly  those  who  rely  by  faith  upon 
His  merits  alone  for  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  and  those  who  confide  in  their  own 
observance  of  moral  duties,  and  ceremonial  institutions.  Let  us  attend,  now,  to  the 
allusion  made  to  the  party  by  which  the  Church  at  Smyrna  was  principally  opposed. 
The  address  is  not  to  them,  but  to  the  Church  respecting  them ;  to  sanction  its  views, 
and  to  guide  its  proceedings  in  future.  "  And  I  know  the  blasphemy,"  &c.  They 
were  Jews,  who  magnified  the  ceremonies  of  the  law  above  the  grace  of  the  gospel ; 
and  looked  upon  Christianity  as  heretical,  except  as  far  as  it  could  be  amalgamated 
with  their  institutions,  and  made  subservient  to  their  interests.  The  synagogue 
was  far  above  the  conventicle  in  their  esteem.  They  boasted  of  their  privileges,  as 
Jews,  and  cherished  the  old  conceit  of  being  the  favourites  of  heaven,  and  heirs  of 
the  promises,  on  account  of  their  natural  descent  from  Abraham.  How  dangerous 
are  all  systems  and  forms  of  religion  which  cherish  and  confirm  the  self -righteous- 
ness of  human  nature  1  How  much  worse  than  none  at  all  I  The  weapons  of  religion 
are  transferred,  by  these  means,  into  the  hands  of  its  adversaries.  There  might  have 
been  a  few  in  the  Church  at  Smyrna  who,  fijiding  these  Jews  had  some  truth  on 
their  side,  were  inclined  to  think  more  favourably  of  them  than  they  deserved.  The 
boldness  with  which  they  averred  the  superiority  of  their  station,  and  their  long 
prescriptive  rights,  would  naturally  have  its  influence  upon  a  certain  class  of  minds ; 
and  those  especially  who  had  counted  all  they  could  have  gained  by  Judaism  as 
loss  for  Christ  might  still  have  looked  with  some  hesitation  upon  the  safety  and 
propriety  of  the  step  they  had  taken.  For  some  such  reason  the  Kedeemer  sees  fit 
to  express  His  opinion  concerning  them.  This  He  does  in  most  decisive  terms.  He 
accuses  them  of  blasphemy,  a  crime  which  the  Jews  were  taught  to  hold  in  the 
greatest  detestation,  and  to  punish  with  the  most  summary  and  humiliating  death.  He 
denies  that  in  any  sense  in  which  they  could  boast  they  are  Jews.  Then  what  are 
they?  They  are,  he  says,  "  the  synagogue  of  Satan."  Li  the  sense  in  which  they 
are  not  Jews,  that  is,  in  a  religious  and  spiritual  point  of  view,  they  were  the  syna- 
gogue of  Satan.  Strong  terms  are  employed  to  inspire  His  people  with  horror  at 
hypocrisy  and  formality.  2.  An  intimation  of  approaching  trials.  "  Behold 
the  devU  is  about  to  east  some  of  you  into  prison."  Human  agents  were  em- 
ployed to  seize  upon  some  of  the  Christians  in  Smyrna,  and  to  cast  them  into 
prison,  but  it  was  at  the  instigation  of  the  devil.  If  this  rendered  their  guilt 
less,  in  reference  to  that  particular  transaction,  it  rendered  it  greater  in  having  sold 
themselves  into  the  hands  of  such  a  master.  It  is  one  great  proof  that  Christianity 
is  the  true  reUgion,  that  against  this  alone  the  demon  of  persecution  has  been 
excited.  It  is  the  only  religion  that  Satan  cannot  turn  to  his  own  interests,  the  only 
kingdom  that  is  opposed  to  his  own,  and  consequently  against  this  his  whole  rage 
and  energies  are  employed.  3.  Exhortations  to  unwavering  fidelity,  in  reference  to 
this  approaching  season  of  persecution.  One  relates  to  its  anticipation,  and  another 
to  its  endurance.  First,  '*  Fear  not."  When  such  an  exhortation  is  given  by  God  to 
man,  who  has  reason  to  fear  everything  from  Him,  it  implies  the  entire  work  of 
reconciliation.  It  is  a  promise  also  of  all  the  support  and  consolation  which  the 
approaching  trial  may  demand.  The  other  admonition  is,  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  This  intimates,  that  for  the  profession 
of  the  truth  they  would  be  exposed  to  death.  They  are  not  to  temporise  or  pre- 
varicate through  fear,  but  continue  stedfast  and  inflexible  unto  death.  HI. 
The  general  APPLiCATioN  of  the  address  to  this  particular  Church.  "  He  that 
overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second  death."  The  original  word  for  " hurt" 
assists  the  interpretation  of  the  whole  sentence.  It  is  a  judicial  term,  signifying 
that  he  shall  not  be  wrongfully  adjudged  to  the  second  death,  as  he  has  been  to 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  139 

temporal  death.  He  has  been  unjustly  treated  and  injured  in  the  first  death,  but: 
no  injury  or  injustice  shall  be  done  him  with  respect  to  the  second  death.  Natural) 
death  is  overcome  by  submission,  not  by  resistance.  When  by  faith  in  Christ  we 
overcome  the  fear  of  it,  we  overcome  the  reality.  K  our  faith  conquers  the  first 
death,  it  will  conquer  the  second.  (G.  Rogers.)  The  words  of  Christ  to  the 
congregation  at  Smyrna  : — I.  Wealth  in  poverty.  1.  Secular  wealth  is  of  con- 
tingent value  ;  spiritual  is  of  absolute  worth.  2.  Spiritual  wealth  is  essentially 
virtuous ;  not  so  secular.  3.  Spiritual  wealth  is  essentially  a  blessing  ;  secular 
often  a  bane.  4.  Spiritual  wealth  is  inalienable ;  secular  is  not.  5.  Spiritual  wealth 
commands  moral  respect ;  not  so  secular.  II.  Fiends  in  religion.  Satan  has  ever 
had  much  to  do  with  religion.  Religion — not  godliness — is  at  once  his  shrine  and 
his  instrument.  It  was  reUgion  that  put  to  death  the  Son  of  God  Himself.  HI. , 
Saints  in  persecution.  1.  It  was  religious.  2.  Severe.  3.  Testing.  4.  Short. 
IV.  Duty  in  trial.  1.  Courage.  2.  Faithfulness.  3.  Perseverance.  4.  Eeflective- 
ness.      V.  Victory  in    death.     (D.    Thomas,   D.D.)  The    Church    in   great 

tribulation : — I.  The  trial  to  which  this  Church  was  subjected.  1.  The 
persecution  of  inveterate  enemies.  2.  Temporal  poverty.  3.  The  bigotry 
and  reproach  of  embittered  co-religionists.  4.  The  anticipation  of  future 
afflictions  and  imprisonment.  (1)  The  nature  of  this  future  suffering.  In 
the  hands  of  enemies.  (2)  The  instigator.  Satan  is  the  primary  agent  of  aU 
persecution.  (^)  The  duration.  Determined  by  God,  Brief  at  the  longest.  (4) 
The  design.  The  moral  elevation  of  the  pure.  U.  The  wealth  by  which  this 
Church  was  characterised.  1.  The  worth  of  a  Church  cannot  always  be  estimated 
by  its  temporal  circumstances.  2.  The  worth  of  a  Church  cannot  always  be 
estimated  by  the  opinions  of  men  regarding  it.  3.  Moral  considerations  alone 
determine  the  true  value  of  the  Church.  HI.  The  fidelity  to  which  this  Church 
WAS  EXHORTED.  1.  This  cxhortatiou  indicates  danger.  2.  This  exhortation  requires 
steadfastness.  Lessons  ;  1.  That  the  Church  of  Christ  is  often  exposed  to  many  trials 
and  fierce  persecutions.  2.  That  the  Church  of  Christ  is  often  persecuted  by  men  who 
ought  to  know  better.  3.  That  sectarian  strife  is  the  occasion  of  much  persecution. 
4.  That  the  consolations  of  heaven  are  richly  given  to  a  tried  Church.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A .) 
Christ's  message  to  the  tempted  and  tried  : — "  You  have  a  passion  for  people  who  are 
pelted,  Dan,"  said  Sir  Hugo  Mallinger.  "I'm  sorry  for  them  too;  but  so  far  aa 
company  goes,  if  is  a  bad  ground  of  selection."  Our  Saviour  has  a  specially  tender 
word  to  say  to  the  pelted,  and  He  speaks  it  here.  I.  Surrenders  that  enrich  ;  or 
THE  GAIN  OF  LOSS  FOR  Christ.  We  mean  that  which  Augustine  felt,  when  he  said  in 
speaking  of  his  conversion,  •'  How  sweet  did  it  at  once  become  to  me  to  want  the 
sweetness  of  these  toys  I  And  what  I  feared  to  be  parted  from  was  now  a  joy  to 
part  with  1 "  What  constitutes  the  true  wealth  of  Churches  ?  The  number  of 
moneyed  men  who  are  in  the  congregation  ?  Nay,  not  so ;  but  they  become  wealthy 
by  accounting  aU  that  they  possess  as  a  solemn  trust,  and  by  employing  every  talent 
which  they  possess  for  the  purpose  which  the  Saviour  had  in  view  when  He  gave  it 
to  them.  These  Christians  had  not  only  endured  the  loss  of  aU  things,  but  they 
had  been  called  upon  to  undergo  even  further  ignominy,  for  they  had  been  com- 
pelled to  endure  reviling  and  slander.  To  comfort  them,  calumny  is  noted  in  its 
relation  to  God.  Perhaps  the  very  virtues  of  these  patient  inoffensive  people  had 
been  misrepresented.  What  had  Christ  to  say  about  this  form  of  iniquity  ?  He 
styles  it  blasphemy  ;  for  Christ  always  calls  things  by  their  right  names.  Calumny 
against  the  saints  is  really  blasphemy  against  God,  for  He  has  taken  the  comfort 
and  good  name  of  His  people  under  His  especial  care,  quite  as  much  as  He  has 
assumed  the  responsibility  of  their  eternal  salvation.  "  It  is  our  maxim,"  said 
Justin  Martyr,  "  that  we  can  suffer  harm  from  none,  unless  we  be  convicted  as  doers 
of  evil,  or  proved  to  be  wicked  ;  you  may  indeed  slay  us,  but  hurt  us  you  cannot." 
Sublime  words  truly,  from  a  man  who  expressed  his  own  reasonable  conviction  of 
the  consequences  of  his  faith  when  he  said,  "  I  also  expect  to  be  entrapped  .  .  .  and 
to  be  affixed  to  the  stake."  We  are  invulnerable  if  we  are  true  to  our  Saviour,  for 
no  weapon  which  is  formed  against  us  can  really  prosper.  Our  battle  is  chiefly 
won  by  resistance ;  let  us  but  wait,  and  we  shall  wear  out  the  energies  of  our  enemy 
and  of  his  helpers.  H.  Stout  hearts  for  stormy  times  :  the  courage  that  con- 
quers CIRCUMSTANCES.  "  Fear  not,"  saith  Christ,  and  still  continue  to  fear  not. 
The  "  unto  death  "  is  first  and  mainly  intensive.  It  marks  the  sublime  quality,  and 
not  the  continuance  of  our  faith.  Although  you  are  robbed,  suffer  injustice,  and 
are  cruelly  slandered,  yet  fear  not.  Continue  steadfastly  in  your  duty,  and  be  pre- 
pared to  die  rather  than  yield  up  what  is  committed  unto  you.    Poverty,  sickness, 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  loss  of  good  name,  bereavement,  even  death  itself  :  Christ  knows  them  all,  for 
He  has  Himself  endured  them,  and  so  He  says  from  experience,  "  Fear  them  not !  " 
Let  us  say  about  all  the  hard  facts  and  enemies  of  our  lives  what  Andrew  Fuller 
said  during  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  "  We  do  not 
fear  them.  "We  will  play  the  man  and  fight  for  the  cause  of  our  God,  and  Jehovah 
do  that  which  pleases  Him."  1.  The  omniscience  of  Christ  is  a  ground  of  courage, 
for  the  author  of  the  mischief  is  known.  If  God's  enemy  be  the  prime  mover  in 
our  sorrows,  we  may  safely  anticipate  especial  grace  to  interfere  upon  our  behalf. 
It  is  also  no  small  comfort  for  us  to  know  that  the  author  of  our  misery  is  known 
to  God,  who  wni  one  day  tread  Satan  under  our  feet.  2.  And  another  source  of 
holy  courage  is  the  Divine  control  of  evil,  which  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  suffer- 
ing is  limited  by  Divine  wisdom.  It  is  true  that  ten  days  are  a  dreary  time  while 
the  tribulation  endures,  but  they  form,  after  all,  a  very  insignificant  portion  of  our 
lives.  Is  it  not  a  comfort  to  know  that  there  are  no  contingencies  in  our  lives  that 
Christ  has  not  provided  for,  that  if,  for  reasons  which  wiU  be  made  clear  some  day. 
He  determines  that  ten  days'  suffering  is  needful  for  us,  or  for  others,  not  more  than 
ten  days  will  be  allotted  to  us.  We  must  endure  all  that  period,  but  not  an  hour 
longer  than  He  deems  requisite,  for  Christ  is  the  judge  of  our  sorrows  and  the  giver 
of  our  affliction.  3.  Another  motive  to  courage  is  the  fact  that  God  does  always 
actually  triumph,  and  that,  however  unwillingly,  the  worst  does  the  best  for  those 
who  love  Him.  These  Christians  were  to  be  tried,  and  some  of  them  would  be 
killed.  It  is  hard  to  part  with  life,  even  with  all  the  alleviations  of  the  gospel. 
But  these  men  were  likely  to  die  amidst  cruel  mocking,  and  with  none  of  the  con- 
solations which  minister  to  our  loved  ones  when  they  pass  away  from  us.  Christ 
may  require  even  this  sacrifice  of  our  inclinations  of  us ;  at  any  rate,  He  expects 
that  if  He  should  demand  it,  that  we  should  be  ready  to  yield  at  once  to  His 
requirement.  Nor  should  it  be  hard  for  us  to  do  so,  for  death  will  only  accomplish 
Christ's  bidding.  Let  us  then  say  to  each  other,  as  Annie  Bronte  said  to  her  sister, 
"  Take  courage ;  take  courage."  And  the  more  so  because  courage  is  no  virtue  in 
those  who  are  blessed  by  the  love  of  Christ;  it  is  only  natural.  HI.  And  He 
who  exhorts  us  to  be  brave  furnishes  us  with  strong  antidotes  for  sore  evils  ; 

THERE  ARE   SOME   THINGS   THAT   WE    SHOULD   NEVER  FORGET.       1.    In  the  first  place,  We 

should  ever  keep  in  mind  the  fact  that  Christ  has  the  last  word  in  every  conversation, 
and  the  completing  touch  in  every  work.  "  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last,"  He  says. 
"  I  was  the  first  in  raising  yoit,  and  I  wUl  be  the  last  in  preserving  you.  I  began 
the  conflict,  and  I  will  terminate  the  fight."  A  declaration  also  of  our  Lord's  dignity, 
and  a  proof  that  He  judges  persons  and  events.  2.  Another  antidote  to  fear  will  be 
found  in  Christ's  person  and  offices,  which  area  source  of  unfailing  strength.  Death 
has  not  made  an  end  of  Christ ;  even  such  agony  as  He  endured  has  not  changed 
Him.  He  knows  therefore  from  His  own  experience  what  the  pangs  of  death  are. 
"  Died  He,  or  in  Him  did  death  die  ?  "  Augustine  asks.  "  What  a  death  that  gave 
death  its  deathblow  1 "  And  to  the  victor  who  will  seek  to  conquer  his  own  timidity, 
and  will  persevere  to  the  end,  the  Saviour  promises  a  crown  of  life.  Kingly  life, 
the  dignities  and  happiness  of  heaven,  are  here  promised  to  those  who  will  be 
faithful.  As  against  the  loss  of  a  life  which  is  burdened  with  care  at  the  best,  and 
is  often  embittered  by  failure  and  sin,  our  Saviour  promises  a  better  life,  which  is  to 
come.  Over  the  entrance  of  Thornbury  Castle  there  is  a  scroll  upon  which  is 
inscribed  " Doresenevant."  This  is  an  old  French  word  which  signifies  "Hence- 
forward," or  "  Hereafter."  The  builder  was  a  Duke  of  Buckingham,  who  thus 
expressed  his  sanguine  hopes  with  regard  to  the  English  crown.  We  may  truly  say 
"Hereafter,"  and  the  watchword  should  nerve  us  to  endure  the  period  of  waiting 
for  our  kingdom,  because  one  day  we  too  shall  be  crowned.  {J.  J.  Ellis.)  The  First 
and  the  Last,  which  was  dead,  and  is  alive. — ChrisVs  designation  of  Himself: — What 
is  meant  by  Christ  being  "  the  First  and  the  Last "  ?  The  words  are  quoted  from  Isa. 
xliv.  6,  7,  where  God  supports  His  claim  as  the  declarer  of  truth  on  the  fact  that  He 
was  before  all,  and  continues  through  all,  standing  alone  as  acquainted  with  all. 
When  our  Lord  uses  this  phrase  for  Himself,  He  makes  Himself  the  EternalJehovah. 
He  uses  a  title  which  belongs  only  to  the  Most  High  God.  And  yet  in  close  connec- 
tion with  the  title  which  best  marks  His  Deity  is  the  title  which  best  marks  His 
humanity — "  which  was  dead,  and  lived  again."  The  Cross  is  seen  on  the  back- 
ground of  the  Divine.  The  suffering  Man  is  one  with  the  saving  God.  The  two 
titles  together  form  a  compendium  of  the  great  salvation,  and  lift  the  mind  to  the 
contemplation  of  the  grand  scheme  of  the  Divine  mercy  and  love,  as  against  any 
earthly  trial  of  whatever  kind.     {H.  Crosby.)         But  thou  art  xich.—S:pintual 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION,  141 

riches  : — It  often  happens  that  people  do  not  know  how  rich  they  are.  So  it 
appears  to  have  been  with  the  Smyrnian  Church.  Let  us  consider  some  of  the 
elements  of  these  spiritual  riches  possessed  by  this  Church  with  which  Jesus  has  no 
fault  to  find.  I.  It  was  rich  in  faith  (James  ii.  5).  Do  you  know  why  faith 
enriches  its  possessor  ?  It  is  because  he  is  justified  by  faith.  There  is  not  a  more 
impoverishing  thing  than  a  consciousness  of  sin.  II.  This  Church  was  rich 
TOWARD  God  (Luke  xii.  21).  This  phrase  is  used  by  our  Saviour  in  contrast  with 
laying  up  treasure  for  one's  self.  Wealth,  when  well  gotten,  is  a  trust  from  God, 
and  ought  to  be  administered  for  Him.  But  this  Church  was  not  rich,  and  had  no 
opportunities  to  speak  of  laying  the  treasures  of  earth  upon  God's  altar ;  and  yet 
it  was  rich  toward  God ;  for  the  principle  of  complete  consecration  was  well 
honoured  in  the  observance  of  the  brethren.  III.  This  Church  was  "  rich  in  good 
WORKS  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  18).  Good  works  are  the  current  coin  of  the  heavenly  kingdom ; 
happy  he  who  has  his  spiritual  coffers  full  of  them.  And  as  all  the  coin  of  the 
realm  must  have  its  origin  in  the  royal  mint,  so  all  good  works  to  be  genuine  must 
spring  from  faith  in  God,  and  bear  the  image  and  superscription  of  King  Jesus. 
IV.  The  power  of  making  others  rich  was  another  source  of  spiritual  wealth  to 
this  Church.  He  is  truly  wealthy  who  can  describe  himself,  Uke  Paul,  "  as  poor, 
yet  making  many  rich."    {J.  Cameron.)        The  riches  of  the  poor.    I.  The  poor 

ARE  RICH  ;  FOR  THEY  HAVE  THE  MOST  VALUABLE  POSSESSIONS  AND  ENJOYMENTS  OP 
THE    RICH,    AND   WANT    ONLY   THOSE    WHICH    ARE    OF    LESS    VALUE.       Gaiety    and    cheCI- 

fulness,  in  infancy  and  childhood,  gladden  the  offspring  of  the  peasant  as  well 
as  the  offspring  of  the  prince.  The  sleep  of  the  labouring  man  is  as  sweet  as 
his  who  has  acquu-ed  or  inherited  the  largest  fortune.  The  mind  of  the  servant 
may  be  more   contented    and    serene  than    that    of   the   master,     n.  Mantt   of 

THE   POOR,    YEA,    ALL   OF   THEM   WHO    HAVE    OBTAINED    PRECIOUS    FAITH,    EVEN    IN   THIS 

LIFE  POSSESS  AND  ENJOY  THE  BEST  RICHES.  1.  They  possess  a  title  and  claim 
to  all  things.      To  Jesus,  the  heir  of  all  things,  they  are  united  by  faith  and  love. 

2.  They  possess  an  interest  in  Him  who  is  the  fountain  of  all  blessedness  and  the 
possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  Be  it  so  that  they  cannot  say  this  house  or  these 
lands  are  ours,  they  have  ground  to  say,  this  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever. 

3.  They  have  a  charter  which  cannot  be  revoked ;  and  which  secures  their  possession 
of  all  that  is  good  for  them  (2  Pet,  i.  4 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  10,  Ixxxiv.  11, 
cxxxii.  15 ;  Isa.  liv.  17 ;  Zech.  ix.  8 ;  1  Cor.  x.  14).  4.  True  Christians,  through 
the  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  and  the  influence  of  faith  purifying  the  heart, 
are  enriched  with  a  temper  of  mind,  and  with  dispositions  wluch  are  the  seeds  of 
true  happiness.  Keligion  consecrates  the  understanding,  the  will,  and  the 
affections,  to  the  best  and  noblest  purposes  ;  and  opens  the  purest  sources  of  trans- 
porting delight.  5.  True  Christians  are  rich  in  the  well-grounded  prospect  of  a 
state  beyond  the  grave,  where  every  source  of  sorrow  shall  be  dried  up  and  ev6ry 
spring  of  joy  opened.  IH.  The  poor  are  rich,  for  they  have  the  means  of  ACQuiRiNa 
AND  SECURING  THE  MOST  SUBSTANTIAL  AND  DURABLE  RICHES.  They  have  large,  free, 
and  generous  offers  of  all  that  is  needful  to  make  them  happy.  To  the  pool 
the  gospel  is  preached ;  and  thus  a  price  is  put  into  their  hands  to  get  wisdom. 
{John  Erskine,  D.D.)  Poor  hut  pure  .-—Sweet-smelling  Smyrna,  the  poorest 
but  purest  of  the  seven.  (<J.  Trapp.)  Poor  and  rich  : — There  are  both  poor  rich- 
men  and  rich  poor-men  in  God's  sight.  {Abp.  Trench.)  Poor  yet  rich : — There 
is  no  proportion  between  wealth  and  happiness  nor  between  wealth  and  nobleness. 
The  fairest  Ufe  that  ever  lived  on  earth  was  that  of  a  poor  man,  and  with  all  its 
beauty  it  moved  within  the  limit  of  narrow  resources.  The  loveliest  blossoms  do 
not  grow  on  plants  that  plunge  their  greedy  roots  into  the  fattest  soil.  A  Uttle  light 
earth  in  the  crack  of  a  hard  rock  will  do.  We  need  enough  for  the  physical  being 
to  root  itself  in;  we  need  no  more.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Fear  none  of  those 
things  which  thou  shalt  suffer. — Suffering  Christians  : — L  Suffering  is  the  lot 
OF  Christians  in  this  world.  No  situation  in  life,  however  desirable — no  circum- 
stances, however  auspicious — no  degree  of  consistency  and  utility  of  moral  character, 
can  exempt  any  individual  from  trouble  and  sorrow.  Perfect  freedom  from  trouble 
and  sorrow  will  never  be  experienced  on  this  side  the  kingdom  of  glory.  II.  Many 
OF  THE  sufferings  OF  CHRISTIANS  ARE  PRODUCED  BY  THE  AGENCY  OF  Satan.  Perse- 
cutors of  the  Lord's  people  are  agents  of  the  devil,  and  if  left  under  his  power,  they 
will  eternally  share  with  him  in  punishment.  That  which  the  devil  effects  in 
malice,  with  a  view  to  their  ruin,  the  Saviour  permits  in  mercy,  with  a  view  tc 
their  advantage.  The  faith  and  the  patience  of  suffering  saints  confound  Satan, 
encourage  the  Church,  and  glorify  Christ.    The  time  when  Christians  are  to  be 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

tried,  and  also  the  nature,  and  the  degree,  and  the  duration  of  their  trials,  are  wisely 
and  mercifully  determined  by  the  Kedeemer.      III.  Christians  have  no  cause  to 

FEAB  IN  THE  PROSPECT  OF  SUFFERINGS.        IV.    CHRISTIANS  ARE  ENCOURAGED  TO  FIDELITT 
BY    THE    PROMISE     OF   FINAL   VICTORY  AND    ETERNAL   FELICITY.         (/.     Hyatt.)  Sin 

and  suffering  : — Take  more  pains  to  keep  yourselves  from  sin  than  from  suffering. 
{T.  Brooks.)  Trial  and  strength  proportionate ;— God  sees  fit  to  try  us  all.  When 
you  are  going  through  some  large  works,  you  wiU  see  a  crane  or  teagle  on  which 
are  such  words  as  these,  "  To  lift  five  tons,"  and  so  on.  Now,  nobody  would  expect 
to  weigh  ten  tons  on  a  teagle  which  is  capable  of  sustaining  only  five.  Neither  will 
God  permit  you  to  be  tried  beyond  your  capacity.  {W.  Birch.)  Be  thou  faithful 
unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life. — An  appeal  with  promise : — I.  There 
is  recognition  in  this  message  of  man's  unique  place  and  power  in  God's  creation. 
That  the  crowned  Christ  should  speak  to  man  at  all  from  His  throne  above  suggests 
human  dignity.  But  the  inference  is  enlarged  and  certified  when  we  consider  the 
character  of  the  speech.  Not  to  the  grandest  of  His  countless  worlds  does  God  say, 
•'Be  thou  faithful."  He  speaks,  audit  is  done.  Everything  yields  to  His  touch, 
takes  fashion  from  His  wiU,  obeys  with  precision  His  impulse.  But  not  as  to  EEis 
works  does  God  relate  Himself  to  men.  With  them  He  reasons  and  pleads,  for 
them  He  sacrifices  and  waits.  The  difference  is  neither  accidental  nor  arbitrary. 
We  are  God's  children,  not  His  creatures,  nor  merely  His  subjects.  Hence  in  His 
dealings  with  men  the  Creator  becomes  the  Father,  the  Sovereign  the  Saviour,  the 
Supreme  Authority  the  most  impassioned  Eeasoner.  Higher  than  the  angels,  and 
centred  in  the  thought  of  eternity,  man  is  God's  chUd,  God's  care,  God's  desire.  If 
this  account  of  us  adds  value  and  dignity  to  human  life,  it  confers  a  more  solemn 
responsibility  and  calls  for  a  worthier  and  more  constant  recognition.  The  re- 
demption of  life,  whether  among  rich  or  poor,  can  find  its  impetus  in  no  lower 
motive  than  a  recognition  of  man's  sacredness  as  a  son  of  God  and  a  child  of  eter- 
nity. Only  as  we  see  each  other  in  the  light  of  God  can  we  live  together  in  relations 
of  perfect  justice  and  peace.  When  the  divinity  of  every  man  has  been  realised 
through  the  humanity  of  the  God-Man,  life  will  reach  its  true  grandeur  and  sim- 
plicity. Alike  upon  individual  character  and  upon  the  social  organism  the  effect 
will  be  as  of  a  new  creation.  The  vices  which  have  flourished  upon  a  degraded 
conception  of  human  nature,  the  wrongs  which  have  grown  up  on  the  basis  of  mere 
political  and  economic  relations,  will  wither  away  in  the  atmosphere  of  diviner 
thought — old  things  shall  pass  away,  behold,  all  things  will  become  new  !  And  it 
is  religion — the  religion  of  Jesus  the  Christ — which  alone  is  adequate,  alike  by  its 
revelation  of  God  and  its  consequent  doctrine  of  man,  to  elevate  thought,  to 
humanise  motive,  to  deify  life.  11.  The  form  into  which  our  text  is  cast  is  not  with- 
out significance.  It  is  a  simple  exhortation  coupled  with  an  attractive  promise. 
*'  Be  thou  faithful "  is  not  a  lecture,  but  an  appeal,  and  it  is  addressed  to  the  latent 
energies  of  our  emotional  nature.  The  Scriptures  are  full  of  similar  exhortations, 
and  the  implication  cleajly  is  that  knowledge  is  not  a  self-acting  motor,  that  man  is 
not  a  self-impelling  power.  He  requires  to  be  aroused  from  slumber,  to  be  stirred 
into  activity,  to  be  moved  as  well  as  taught.  Religion  takes  note  of  that  necessity. 
It  is  more  than  truth :  it  is  impulse.  Bringing  to  man's  aid  a  new  world  of  motives, 
it  completes  its  teaching  by  persuasion  and  appeal.  To  our  gospel  man  appears  not 
as  a  poor  ignoramus  groping  his  way  to  more  knowledge  in  order  to  nobler  life,  but 
as  a  wayward  sinner  needing  to  be  aroused,  forgiven,  assisted.  He  is  wrongheaded 
because  wronghearted.  It  is  in  view  of  this  condition  that  the  gospel  makes  its  appeal 
to  each  one  of  us.  Bringing  into  our  impoverished  life  a  new  and  glorious  world  of 
knowledge,  and  offering  for  oUr  acceptance  resources  of  power  not  derivable  from 
ourselves,  it  directs  its  penetrative  appeals  to  the  arousing  of  holy  desire  and  purpose 
in  our  hearts.  It  is  a  reiterated  and  urgent  invitation  to  men  who  know  they  are 
wrong,  but  who  are  slow  to  seek  and  strive  after  the  right.  Its  characteristic  words 
are  _"  come,"  "  look,"  "  believe,"  "  take,"  "  follow,"  "  hold  fast,"  "  be  faithful."  And 
until  we  make  personal  response  to  these  calls  we  stand  in  a  false  relation  to  the 
Christ  and  His  Gospel.  HI.  In  the  spiritual  order  of  life  something  comes  before 
FAITHFULNESS.  "Be  thou  faithful"  suggests  an  antecedent  vow  or  covenant  to 
which  allegiance  is  urged.  Conversion  goes  before  consecration,  and  both  before 
faithfulness.  The  text  has  no  message  for  a  man  until  he  has  taken  the  first  of 
these  steps.  Have  you  yet  taken  it  ?  One  point,  touching  the  matter,  requires  to 
be  re-emphasised.  The  new  life  does  not  grow,  as  plants  grow,  by  mere  unconscious 
absorption  of  vital  elements.  And  the  reason  is  because  men  are  not  plants,  but 
free  intelligences,  who  are  here  for  the  very  purpose  of  exercising  their  freedom  and 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  143 

determining  their  own  destiny.  An  act  of  decision  is  therefore  of  the  very  essence 
of  the  problem  involved  in  human  liberty  and  Divine  grace.  But  it  must  be  there  in 
every  life.  Free  men,  who  are  here  for  the  purpose  of  using  their  liberty,  must  and 
do  make  choice.  Life's  issues  are  not  determined  by  hap  or  accident.  Every  man's 
destiny  awaits  his  own  decision.  All  that  God  can  do  He  has  done.  The  issues  de- 
pend now  upon  us.  We  are  surrounded  with  helps  to  the  fulfilment  of  life's  true 
issues.  Have  we  made  our  decision  ?  Are  we  intelligently  and  heartily  on  the 
Lord's  side  ?  That  is  the  supreme  question.  Until  it  is  answered  we  have  done  our 
duty  neither  to  Christ  nor  to  ourselves.  We  cannot  be  Christ's  men  without  know- 
ing it.  May  God  give  us  grace  to  face  that  question — and  that  question  only — till 
■we  have  reached  a  definite  decision  and  made  a  personal  surrender  I  lY.  But  while 
the  text  recalls  the  antecedent  necessity  of  decision,  it  throws  an  equal  emphasis 
upon  THE  DUTY  OF  CONTINUANCE.  Here  it  speaks  to  men  and  women  who  have 
taken  a  stand  in  respect  of  Christian  faith  and  service.  It  is  a  call  to  that  loftiest 
and  most  difficult  duty  of  daily  constancy  in  effort  and  devotion.  Constancy  is  a 
finer  discipline  than  ecstasy.  Faithfulness  is  more  and  better  than  originality. 
••  Go  on,"  Christ  seems  to  say ;  "  do  not  fret  as  though  you  were  forgotten,  but 
endure  as  those  who  will  be  surely  rewarded :  look  not  down  and  around  at  the 
difficulties  of  your  lot,  but  look  on  and  up  to  the  powers  and  issues  of  your  disciple- 
ship  :  be  not  dismayed  at  the  variations  of  feeling,  but  stand  loyal  to  the  resolutions 
of  obedience :  Heaven  is  around  you,  God  is  above  and  within — be  not  deceived  by 
the  scepticism  of  the  eye,  but  informed  by  the  vision  of  faith,  and  your  victory  will 
be  your  reward."  The  quiet  and  faithful  worker,  who  undertakes  a  task  and  keeps 
at  it  with  noble  pertinacity,  may  not  be  so  prominent,  but  is  incomparably  more 
fruitful  in  the  Christian  Church.  Eestless  activity  may  only  be  busy  idleness. 
Emotion  is  not  obedience.  "Be  thou  faithful,"  and  thou  shalt  be  peaceful  and 
strong.  V.  The  text,  so  full  of  wise  counsel,  closes  with  a  promise  :  "  I  will  give 
thee  a  crown  of  life."  The  promise  points  far  forward  to  that  blessed  day  when  we 
shall  stand  among  the  victors  on  the  other  side  of  death.  Life,  life  full  and  strong* 
and  perfect,  shall  then  be  ours.  We  can  only  dimly  anticipate  the  glory  of  such  a 
crown.  Now  and  again  we  seem  to  get  glimpses  of  it,  but  the  glory  is  swiftly  hidden 
lest  it  should  blind  us  to  earth  and  time  and  duty.  But  behind  the  cloud  of  years 
and  beyond  the  horizon  of  discipline  this  promise  clearly  points  to  a  full  and  perfect 
life.  Faithfulness  is  ever  winning  and  ever  wearing  the  crown.  Life  is  every  day 
putting  on  a  new  crown.  The  judgment  seat  of  God  is  set  every  morning,  and  His 
rewards  are  bestowed  upon  the  faithful  soul.  What  life,  what  love,  what  joy,  does 
God  give  day  by  day  to  men  who  Hve  simple,  sincere,  unselfish,  pious  lives !  The 
best  is  kept  in  store,  but  brief  foretastes  are  granted  while  we  suffer  and  strive. 
{Charles  A.  Berry.)  The  law  of  fidelity  and  its  Divine  reward  : — I.  The  law  of 
fidelity.  1.  Fidelity  is  a  virtue  of  universally  acknowledged  importance  and  worth. 
2.  Fidelity  is  a  social  virtue  based  upon  the  universal  law  of  love.  3.  Fidelity  is  a  duty 
man,  as  man,  owes  to  his  Creator.  4.  The  degree  of  love  is  the  measure  of  fidelity. 
5.  Fidelity  to  Christ  involves  fidelity  to  the  great  truths  of  the  Cross.  6.  Fidelity  to 
the  Cross  involves  fealty  to  every  true  friend  of  the  Cross.  7.  Faithfulness  to  Christ 
involves  continued  and  life-long  fidelity.  11.  The  Divine  reward  of  this  life- 
LONQ  fidelity.  Thosc  who  are  faithful  unto  death  will  be  crowned  with  life — that 
is  to  say,  life  in  its  sublime  and  subliming  form.  Our  life  here  is  more  death  than 
life.  Here  we  have  the  minimum  of  bliss,  there  the  maximum  of  happiness ;  here 
the  minimum  of  power,  there  the  maximum  of  might.  {William  McKay.)  Chris- 
tian faithfulness  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  appeal :  "  Be  faithful."  Faithfulness  is — 
(1)  Due  to  Christ ;  (2)  Possible  to  aU ;  (3)  All-pervasive.  H.  The  range  of  the 
appeal:  "Be  thou  faithful  unto  death."  Faith  should  be — (1)  Superior  to  circum- 
stances— "Tribulation";  "Death."  (2)  Independent  of  others:  "thou."  (3)  Of 
life-long  duration  :  "  unto  death."  ni.  The  enforcement  of  the  appeal :  "  I  wUl 
give  thee,"  &c.  There  is  another  sphere  of  life,  with  reality  and  splendour  of 
reward,  and  the  reward  itself  wUl  be — (1)  Appropriate,  in  character ;  Faithfulness 
crowned;  "death" — "  Ufe."  (2)  Personal,  in  enjoyment  :  "I  will  give  thee."  (3) 
Certain,  in  attainment ;  because  (a)  gratuitous  in  its  vouchsafement :  "  give  ;  "  and 
(6)  definite  in  its  promise  :  "I  will."  {Homilist.)  Fidelity  to  Christ  enforced : — I. 
A  SOLEMN  exhortation.  1.  Christians  are  urged  to  fidelity  in  their  professions  of 
personal  attachment  to  the  Saviour.  2.  The  exhortation  calls  on  Christians  to  be 
faithful  in  their  adherence  to  all  the  doctrines  of  Revelation.  3.  To  be  faithful  in 
maintaining  the  royal  authority  of  the  Saviour,  and  His  Headship  over  His  Church. 
4.  To  be  faithful  in  paying  your  solemn  vows.    II.  The  gracious  assurance.     1. 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

The  gift — "  A  crown  of  life."  A  crown  is  the  highest  object  of  earthly  ambition 
and  the  possession  of  it  the  loftiest  pinnacle  of  worldly  glory — to  obtain  it,  no  toils, 
struggles,  or  sacrifices  are  deemed  too  great.  But  between  this  crown  of  life  and  all 
the  glory  and  honour  of  this  earth  there  is  no  comparison.  It  is  a  crown  of  life, 
and  this  is  indicative  of  the  pure,  lofty,  and  endless  enjoyments  to  which  it  intro- 
iduces.  2.  The  glorious  giver.  It  is  Christ  who  is  to  bestow  the  crown  of  life. 
Those  who  are  to  wear  it  have  not  won  it  by  their  own  prowess,  obtained  it  by 
their  own  merit,  or  inherited  it  by  their  natural  birth.  It  is  given  freely  by 
Him  by  whose  blood  it  was  secured,  and  by  whose  munificence  it  is  bestowed. 
3.  The  solemn  period  at  which  this  crown  shall  be  bestowed.  The  text  directs 
forward  our  expectations  to  the  solemn  period  of  dissolution  when  this  reward 
ishall  be  obtained.  This  advantage  is  pecuUar  to  Christianity.  At  death  the 
conquering  hero  lays  down  his  crown,  and  leaves  all  his  worldly  glory  behind 
ihim.  But  at  death  the  Christian  triumphs.  Then  he  puts  off  his  armour 
and  receives  his  crown.  His  conflicts  terminate,  his  enemies  are  for  ever 
defeated,    and    death  is   swallowed    up   in   victory.      {A.    Harvey.)  Faithful 

unto  death : — The  original  means  not  simply,  "  Be  thou,"  but  rather,  "  Become 
thou  " ;  as  showing  that  it  is  a  thing  which  we  are  not ;  but  which  continually 
we  must,  from  time  to  time,  make  ourselves,  by  a  holy  effort.  "Become  thou 
faithful  unto  death."  To  be  "  faithful  "  is  to  be  "  full  of  faith,"  i.e.,  full  of  the 
realisation  of  things  unseen.  For  the  only  way  to  secure  "faithfulness"  in  any- 
thing is  to  carry  with  us  a  constant  presence  and  a  deep  sense  of  the  invisible. 
And  you  must  be  careful  that  you  have  caught  the  exact  sense  of  "unto  death." 
It  relates  not  so  much  to  the  measure  of  the  duration  of  the  time  as  to  the  degree 
of  the  power  of  the  endurance — "  to  the  death-point."  You  will  set  about  your 
endeavour  to  be  "  faithful,"  with  the  greater  pleasantness  and  the  more  assurance 
of  success  if  you  carry  with  you  the  recollection  that  it  was  the  characterising 
grace  of  our  Master.  St.  Paul  has  drawn  for  us  the  striking  comparison  that 
Moses  indeed  was  "  faithful  in  all  His  house,"  but  that  the  glory  of  the  faithfulness 
of  Christ  exceeded  the  glory  of  the  faithfulness  of  Moses  as  much  as  the  builder  of 
a  house  is  better  than  the  building.  Of  the  many  voices  with  which  your  motto 
will  speak  to  you,  let  me  now  anticipate  only  a  very  few.  And,  ^^t,  your  "  faith- 
fulness "  to  God.  For  remember  that  no  other  relation  can  ever  be  quite  right 
while  that  is  wrong.  The  upward  will  rule  all  the  rest.  First,  as  an  act  of  justice, 
take  honouring  views  of  the  Father.  Never  question  that  you  are  His  child — 
though  the  unworthiest ;  and  believe  God's  love,  even  when  you  have  grieved  Him 
to  the  very  quick,  and  when  He  is  chastening  you  the  most  sorely.  Secondly,  keep 
short  accounts  with  God.  Never  leave  more  than  a  day's  debt  to  So^^nsettled. 
Thirdly,  be  "  faithful "  to  God  in  teUing  Him  everything.  Be  "  faitkful  "  in  your 
confidences,  have  no  secrets,  open  to  God  the  whole  heart.  The  mortification  will 
be  severe,  but  you  cannot  be  "  faithful "  in  prayer  unless  the  prayer  be  "  unto 
death,"  to  the  death  of  your  dearest  sin.  These  voices  let  your  motto  speak  to  you 
in  your  own  room.  Next,  be  faithful  to  yourself.  First,  to  your  pledges  in  baptism, 
in  confirmation,  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  many  a  sorrow.  Deal  honourably  with 
your  own  pledges,  acknowledging  the  responsibility  and  facing  the  duty.  And, 
secondly,  to  your  conscience.  A  man  wiU  never  go  very  far  wrong  who  really 
listens  to  and  follows  his  conscience.  Thirdly,  be  "faithful"  to  your  Church. 
Faults,  no  doubt,  our  Church  has.  There  has  been  too  much  admixture  with  the 
world  since  that  day  when  she  came  pure  out  of  her  Master's  hand  that  she  should 
not  have  contracted  some  earthly  alloy.  But  she  is  the  fairest  Church  upon  earth 
and  the  freest  from  blemish,  the  purest  thing  out  of  heaven.  And  she  is  the  Church 
of  your  fathers,  of  your  baptism,  of  the  hoUest  associations  of  your  life,  and  of 
your  best  hours.  Be  "  faithful "  to  her.  Follow  her  teaching.  Obey  her  laws. 
Love  her  services.  Beverence  her  simphcity.  Bow  to  her  judgments.  Strive  for 
her  increase.  Pray  for  her  unity.  It  would  be  far  too  large  a  field  if  I  were  to 
attempt  to  enter  now,  in  any  detail,  upon  the  "  faithfulness  "  of  daily  duties. 
Whatever  you  have  to  do,  do  not  be  so  anxious  to  do  it  well,  cleverly,  effectually, 
as  to  do  it  "  faithfully."  The  rest  may  not  be  in  your  power — this  is.  Every 
man  can  be  "faithful."  Your  chief  danger  will  be,  not  that  you  be  unfaithful  one 
day  or  two,  but  that  you  will  become  weary  and  grow  slack.  Therefore  read  the 
precept  with  emphasis,  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  all  the  year  round — 
"  faithful  unto  death,"  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Christian  faithfulness  and  its 
reward : — I.  Chbistian  faithfulness  implies — 1.  Sincerity,  in  opposition  to 
hypocrisy.     2.  FideUty,  in  opposition  to  fraud  or  peculation.     3.  Diligence,  in 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION,  145 

opposition  to  indolence.  4.  Courage  in  the  time  of  danger  or  suffering.  5.  Perse- 
verance, n.  The  reward  of  Christian  faithfulness.  1.  The  firstfruits  of 
that  glorious  harvest,  which  is  included  in  the  future  reward,  are  enjoyed  upon 
earth.  (1)  There  is  a  present  reward  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  testimony  of  a  good 
conscience.  (2)  The  consciousness  of  the  approbation  of  God  is  worth  a  thousand 
worlds  to  a  man  in  the  present  life.  (3)  And  there  is,  then,  the  great  luxury 
of  doing  good,  relieving  misery.  2.  The  Lord  not  only  gives  us  grace  and 
strength  and  support  and  comfort  in  our  work,  but  He  has  reserved  for  us 
♦'  a    crown    of    life."      (T.    Entwistle.)  Faithful    unto    death : — I.    A    great 

trust.       II.    A    SOLEMN    INJUNCTION    CONCERNING    THIS    TRUST.       1.    Be    SCrioUS    that 

you  may  be  faithful.  From  the  Christian  standpoint  what  a  thing  is  Ufe ! 
What  solemn  mystery  broods  over  it !  What  passionate  interests  it  holds  !  If  we 
consider  all  this  we  cannot  be  frivolous.  2.  Be  firm  that  you  may  be  faithful.  A 
great  part  of  practical  faithfulness  consists  in  resistance.  3.  Be  ready  that  you 
may  be  faithful.  Say  "Yes"  before  your  fears  have  time  to  shape  "No."  Say 
"  No  "  before  your  inclinations  have  time  to  whisper  "  Yes."  Stand  out  declared, 
before  friends  or  enemies  have  cause  to  think  you  are  yielding  to  the  point  where 
the  assault  is  made.  4.  Be  tender,  gracious,  and  loving,  that  you  may  be  faithful. 
The  Master  whom  we  serve  is  the  Saviour,  whose  pity  never  sleeps.  Thus  in  the 
Christian  faithfulness  there  is  a  combination  of  things  which  seem  opposite — 
hardness  hke  that  of  the  adamant,  and  softness  like  that  of  the  air.  5.  Be 
patient,  that  you  may  be  faithful.  III.  A  decisive  day.  It  is  the  day  of  death. 
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death."  Better  is  this  end  of  life  than  the  beginning. 
IV.  A  GREAT  REWARD.  "  I  will  givc  thcc  a  crowH  of  life."  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  duty  and  the  reward  of  Christian  fidelity  : — I.  The  command.  1.  Christian 
faithfulness  relates  to  the  testimony  God  has  given  in  His  Word.  Other  knowledge 
may  be  useful,  but  this  is  the  direct  communication  from  God,  acquainting  us  with 
His  rich  compassion  towards  us  in  not  sparing  His  own  Son.  This  system  of 
revealed  truth  we  are  to  make  the  subject  of  habitual  study  and  the  source  of 
our  chief  consolation — it  is  to  be  the  director  of  our  conduct.  Fidelity  to  the 
truth  of  God  requires  that  we  make  an  open,  though  an  humble,  confession  of  it. 
To  this,  its  intrinsic  excellence,  its  vital  importance,  its  adaptation  to  all  the  wants 
and  miseries  of  men,  entitle  it.  2.  Christian  fidelity  relates  to  the  claims  of  the 
Saviour  to  our  obedience.  His  benignity  and  excellence  render  Him  worthy  of  the 
love  and  homage  of  all  created  beings  ;  but  He  has  won  to  Himself  a  title  to  the 
gratitude  and  obedience  of  mankind,  by  assuming  the  character  of  Kedeemer,  by 
suffering  as  their  Surety.  When  the  enemy  would  persuade  us  to  turn  away  from 
Him,  when  temptation  would  lure  us  away  from  the  Captain  of  our  salvation ; 
when  the  indolence  and  remissness  to  spiritual  exercises,  natural  to  man,  would 
often  be  a  hindrance  to  our  fidelity,  let  us  hear  His  animating  voice,  saying,  "  Be 
thou  faithful  unto  death  and  I  wiU  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  3.  We  are  to  be 
faithful  in  the  exercise  and  in  the  improvement  of  the  talents  entrusted  to  our 
charge.  4.  We  are  to  be  faithful  in  exercising  the  courage  which  the  Christian 
warfare  requires.  The  allusion  in  the  text  is  to  military  life,  and  to  the  obedience 
due  from  a  soldier  to  his  general,  leader,  and  commander.  He  must  never,  through 
treachery  or  cowardice,  desert  the  banner  he  has  sworn  to  defend,  nor  refuse  to  follow 
the  order  of  his  general.  5.  Christian  fidelity  is  to  be  continued  unto  death.   11.  The 

PROMISE  OF  GRACIOUS  REWARD  EXPRESSED  IN  THE  TEXT — "  I  will  give  thcC  a  CrOWH  of  life." 

{D.  Dewar,  D.D.)  Christian  faithfulness : — I.  A  personal  faithfuIjNess.  "  Thou." 
1.  Individual  attention  to,  and  steadfastness  in,  our  own  particular  work.  The 
mode  and  circumstances  of  the  testimony  different.  Philip's  part  different  from 
Sephen's,  Paul's  from  Peter's,  and  so  forth.  But  individual  faithfulness  the  common 
characteristic  of  all  true  witnesses.  2.  Personal  also  in  respect  of  the  one  object 
of  faith.  He  served  not  merely  "  a  cause,"  but  the  Lord,  his  own  loved  and  adored 
Master  in  heaven.  II.  A  permanent  faithfulness.  The  faith  is  persistent  unto 
the  end,  through  all  sufferings,  opposition,  temptation,  death  itself.  Not  *'  fits  and 
starts,"  but  a  steady,  onward  course  (2  Tim.  iv.  7 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58).  HI,  A  per- 
fected faithfulness.  The  faithfulness  is  perfected  at  last,  and  this  perfection  is 
"  the  crown  of  life."  (Bp.  W.  S.  Smith.)  Christian  fidelity  and  its  reward  : — 
I.  Christian  fidelity.  1.  The  Christian  must  be  faithful  to  the  claim  of  the 
Supreme  Being  upon  the  devotion  of  his  soul  and  the  service  of  his  life.  2.  The 
Christian  must  be  faithful  to  the  requirements  of  truth  and  to  the  inner  experiences 
and  convictions  of  the  soul.  3.  The  Christian  must  be  faithful  to  the  needs  of 
pien  around  him,  and  their  relation  to  the  redemptive  mission  of  Christ.    4.  The 

10  - 


'^ 


146    .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Christian  must  be  faithful  notwithstanding  the  dangers  of  the  Christian  life.     II. 
Its  reward.     1.  The  reward  of  Christian  fidelity  will  be  ennobling  in  its  character. 
2.  The  reward  of  Christian  fidelity  will  be  given  by  Christ.     Lessons :  1.  Are  we 
faithful  to  the  claims  of  God  ?    2.  The  solemn  motive  to  fidelity.     3.  The  glorious 
reward  of  fidelity.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)         Cross  and  crown  : — I.  Christian  con- 
secration.     1.  It  must    be  thorough — "Faithful."      This  implies — (1)   Adverse 
circumstances.     (2)  Strong  conviction.     (3)  Besolute  will.     (4)  Persevering  effort. 
(5)  Dauntless  courage.    2.  It  must  be  personal — "  Thou."    Each  one  has  his  own 
power,  sphere,  and  responsibility  for  service.     3.  It  must  be  life-long.    Necessary 
for — (1)   Thorough  discipline  of  character.     (2)  Required  usefulness  to  society. 
(3)   Complete  devotedness  to  God.     II.  Christian  compensation.     1.  Glorious — 
"  Crown."    2.  Enduring — "  Life."    Eternal — real  "  life  "  to  enjoy  it.     3.  Certain 
— "Will."      4.   Personal  —  "Thee."      6.   Unmeritorious  —  "Give."      6.  Divinely 
bestowed — "I."     Conclusion:   1.  Effort,  not  enjoyment,  is  the  object  in  life.     2. 
Be  true  to  Christ  above  all  others.     3.  Jesus  rewards  effort,  not  prosperity.     4. 
Death  the  great  transformation  scene.     Cross  to  crown.    5.  Heaven  a  world  of 
conquerors.    All  crowned.     6.  Draw  upon  future  glories  to  encourage  in  present 
trials.     (J5.  D.  Johns.)        A  crown  of  life : — The  finest  heroism  is  that  of  ordinary 
life.     Steadfastness  in  hard  times  is  a  far  nobler  manifestation  of  moral  strength 
than  the  most  dashing  valour  which  souls  display  under  the  joyous  impulse  of 
great  success.    For  instance,  the  greatness  of  General  Washington  is  shown  by  the 
magnificent  hopefulness  and  steadiness  with  which  he  held  his  poor  little  army 
together  through  long  months  of  retreat  and  suffering,  far  more  than  by  his  con- 
summate ability  in  the  guidance  of  actual  battle.     Many  persons  after  they  have 
done  well  in  an  enterprise  think  they  have  received  no  reward  unless  they  have 
obtained  fame  or  riches.    Yet  comparatively  few  do  receive  such  rewards  as  these, 
and  we  hear  a  continual  outcry  that  justice  does  not  rule  between  God  and  man. 
Is  it  just  that  the  world's  multitude  of  sufferers  includes  not  merely  the  idle,  inefla- 
cient,  and  vicious,  but  in  large  numbers  those  to  whom  poverty  clings  in  spite 
of  their  devoted  labours,  and  those  who  are  kept  down  by  constant  illness  or 
other  unavoidable  weakness  ?    Why  has  God  denied  to  all  the  ihultitudes  of  the 
unfortunate  all  adequate  reward  to  their  efforts  ?     The  sufficient  answer  to  these 
doubting  questions  is  the  pointing  out  of  the  fact  that  those  who  ask  them  have  set 
up  a  wrong  standard  of  rewards,  and  so  have  overlooked  the  most  important  things 
God  is  doing  in  human  souls.    Who  told  you,  my  doubting  friend,  that  the  only 
just  reward  for  writing  a  noble  book  is  immediate  fame,  or  that  wealth  ought 
always  to  be  showered  upon  the  most  diligent  workers  ?     God  is  not  a  magnified 
committee  of  award,  who  examines  the  records  of  earth,  and  metes  out  to  men  as 
rewards  for  good  conduct  the  things  they  most  desu-e  to  possess.    Abundant 
resources,  delightful  pleasures,  gratifying  honours,  enrich  some  lives  and  fail  to 
reach  others  by  causes  that  are  not  intended,  in  my  belief,  to  make  of  them 
arbitrary  rewards.     They  fall  to  the  share  of  evil  men  and  good  alike,  and  are 
missed  by  myriads  of  the  most  virtuous  persons.    Divine  rewards  must  therefore 
be  a  different  sort  of  thing ;  and,  inasmuch  as  God  can  do  no  wrong,  we  ought  to 
be  able  to  discover  His  marks  of  approval  in  every  life  we  know  to  be  a  noble  one. 
This  search  inevitably  becomes  a  religious  one.     Our  trust  in  God  is  our  chief 
guide ;  and  by  this  we  are  led  to  see  that  the  deepening  of  life  itself  is  the  Divine 
reward  to  all  excellent  deeds  or  hopes.    Jesus  gave  the  noblest  utterance  to  His 
mission  when  He  said,  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might 
have  it  more  abundantly."     They  who  are  faithful,  pure  in  heart,  noble,  do  receive 
at  once  more  abundant  life ;  and  life  is  but  one  thing  before  or  after  death.     There 
is  something  which  no  evil  heart  can  enjoy,  but  which  no  righteous  soul  ever  for  an 
instant  fails  to  receive  as  the  immediate  reward  of  his  good  qualities.    That 
gracious  reward  is  life  with  its  uncounted  possibilities,  to  be  your  deepest  joy  at  the 
present  time  and  your  eternal  field  for  high  surprise.     The  ancient  Greeks  gave  a 
crown  of  wild  olive  to  the  victors  in  their  athletic  or  poetic  contests,  and  the  modem 
world  gives  crowns  of  wealth  and  conspicuous  leadership  to  those  who  win  in  ita 
competitions.    But  there  is  a  lovelier  crown  than  these.    The  many  souls  that 
seem  to  lose  in  their  competitions  with  others  are  in  reality  gaining  much  of  per- 
manent value  while  they  strive  with  noble  aims.     To  all  who  work  thus,  whether 
they  seem  to  win  or  not,  there  is  given  life  as  a  crown.    Be  faithful  unto  death ; 
and  you  receive  that  crown — simply  life.    The  hero  makes  his  greatest  sacrifice  at 
the  place  of  perilous  duty,  loses  all  his  joys  and  treasures  because  honour  bids  him 
die,  only  to  awake  and  find  that  life  is  still  his,  but  brighter,  dearer,  than  ever, 


CHAP.  IT.]  REVELATION.  147 

because  now  ennobled  by  his  faithful  heroism.  Once  a  mere  existence  full  of 
mingled  joy  and  sorrow,  life  has  now  been  by  his  own  act  transformed  into  a  crown, 
a  reward  sufficient  for  all  goodness.  It  may  well  be  that  heaven  is  simply  the 
discovery  by  an  immortal  soul  of  the  Divine  joy  it  is  to  be  alive.  If  so,  then,  surely, 
life  can  be  transformed  into  a  crown,  a  measureless  joy,  at  any  moment  by  any 
sterling  act  of  worthiness  in  the  midst  of  the  trials  that  make  goodness  difficult. 
To  be  faithful  unto  death  is  required  but  once  of  any  man  ;  but  to  be  faithful  up  to 
the  full  requirement  of  every  situation  is  demanded  of  us  all  at  every  moment,  so 
that  we  can  at  any  instant  discover  the  real  sublimity  of  this  life  of  ours.  Life 
may  seem  nothing  rare  to  one  who  idly,  selfishly,  squanders  its  precious  hours ;  but 
to  every  diligent  man  life  is  a  treasure  beyond  estimation,  and  such  natures  find  in 
the  opportunities  of  each  new  day  the  ample  reward  for  faithfulness  in  the  day 
before.  The  true  scholar's  reward  does  not  lie  in  the  fame  he  may  or  may  not 
receive  for  his  book,  nor  in  the  financial  returns  it  secures.  His  joy  is  in  the  doing 
of  the  work  itself,  in  the  eager  search  for  truth,  in  the  knowledge  he  is  acquiring, 
in  the  actual  labour  of  his  Uterary  art.  The  artist  Turner  cared  so  little  for  public 
praise  and  for  the  selling  of  his  famous  works,  that  when  he  died  there  were  in  his 
possession  hundreds  of  his  paintings,  which  by  a  little  worldly  wisdom  he  might 
have  turned  into  gold.  His  joy  was  in  the  art  itself,  in  the  painting  of  pictures ; 
that  is,  in  life  rather  than  in  common  rewards.  Life  was  his  crown,  as  is  that  of 
every  worker  who  honours  his  occupation.  The  Divineness  of  this  crown  of  life  is 
made  evident  by  its  universaUty.  Every  good  deed,  every  pure  thought,  broadens 
into  finer  life.  If  any  man  of  an  earnest  mind  understands  what  earnestness  is 
worth,  he  has  already  the  one  Divine  reward  of  earnestness,  and  need  not  care  to  be 
popularly  known  as  an  example  of  zeal.  See  life  in  this  light,  and,  so  far  as  you 
are  concerned,  the  sting  is  taken  away  from  all  your  failures  and  difficulties.  The 
deepening,  broadening,  enriching,  of  your  nature  is  your  reward  for  your  faith- 
fulness through  your  long  years  of  toil,  hardship,  loss,  and  grief.  We  know  that 
restricted  resources  call  out  a  man's  own  mental  resources,  and  that  a  Robinson 
Crusoe  with  only  a  jack-knife  to  depend  upon  accomplishes  more  with  it  than 
another  can  with  a  whole  kit  of  tools.  We  know  that  the  gravest  anxieties  of 
business  or  private  life  give  rise  to  our  firmest  courage,  our  grandest  moral  strength. 
We  know  how  the  trials  and  bitter,  searching  things  of  life  take  hold  of  careless 
youths  and  silly  girls,  and  change  their  mood  from  vanity  to  beauty  and  strength, 
as  the  flames  that  burn  out  the  iron's  impurities  and  give  forth  the  royal  steel.  In 
all  such  moral  developments  we  see  the  gift  of  larger  life  coming  to  those  that  have 
earned  it  by  desert ;  and,  what  is  of  most  immediate  interest  to  us,  we  see  it  coming 
without  weary  delay  while  yet  the  fierce  struggle  goes  on.  The  most  signifi- 
cant thing  in  the  matter  is  that  the  crown  of  life — that  is,  life  in  its  aspect  of 
moral  success  and  self-rehance — does  not  come  to  any  one  class  of  men  more 
than  to  others.  It  comes  in  the  very  midst  of  anxiety,  poverty,  and  physical 
weakness ;  and  it  blossoms  forth  also  in  souls  that  have  easier  careers. 
The  only  places  where  it  does  not  appear  are  the  wastes  of  vice  and  selfish- 
ness. No  wicked  person  can  know  the  depths  of  life  until  he  changes  his 
course,  and  begins  by  moral  struggle  to  develop  his  soul.  {C.  E.  St.  John.) 
The  crown  of  life : — A  crown  without  cares,  co-rivals,  envy,  end.  {J.  Trap}}.) 
A  crown  for  the  faithful : — I.  Cheist's  chakge  to  all  His  followers.  1.  "Be 
faithful"  to  your  soul,  in  seeking  its  prosperity.  2.  "Be  faithful"  to  Christ,  in 
your  profession  of  His  name.  3.  "  Be  faithful "  to  the  gospel,  in  attachment  to  its 
doctrines.  The  gospel  is  the  legacy  of  Christ  to  all  His  followers ;  dearer  to  us 
ought  it  to  be  than  Uberty  or  life.  4.  "  Be  faithful  "  to  the  world,  in  your  interest 
for  its  conversion.  You  are  "  the  salt,"  to  preserve  the  world  from  putrefaction ; 
you  are  the  cities  which,  for  unity,  beauty,  and  security,  are  to  be  admired  as 
patterns ;  you  are  lights,  to  "  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  glorify  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven."  5.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death."  This  faithfulness  is  to 
continue,  then,  during  life ;  there  is  to  be  no  cessation.  11.  The.  glorious  reward 
He  gives  to  all  who  obey  it.  1.  Its  nature.  This  "  crown  "  is  to  set  forth  the 
unspeakable  glories  of  the  upper  world  by  objects  that  are  familiar  to  our  senses. 
Is  a  crown,  for  instance,  emblematic  of  royalty  ?  This  happiness,  then,  is  to  be  a 
residence  with  the  King  of  kings.  He  shall  rule,  and  you  shall  reign.  Is  a  crown 
symbolic  of  victory?  There  we  shall  be  conquerors — "more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us."  Many,  like  Nelson,  conquer,  but  die  in  the  conflict — 
do  not  live  to  enjoy  their  conquest ;  but  you  are  led  in  triumph  to  the  obtaining  of 
the  conquest  by  your  great  Master.    2.  Its  superiority.    It  is  "a  crown  of  life." 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Four  things  constitute  life — that  is,  happiness — on  earth :  health,  plenty,  friend- 
ship, knowledge.  These  are  reserved  in  perfection  for  paradise.  3.  Its  bestowal.  It 
is  a  gift  of  grace.  Man's  merit  did  not  buy  this  glory.  Grace  first  brings  the  mind 
into  the  way,  grace  strengthens  the  soul  to  persevere,  and  grace  puts  the  crown  of 
glory  upon  the  head.  4.  Its  certafnty.  Every  one  that  cleaves  to  Him,  every  one 
that  serves  Him,  every  one  that  loves  Him,  shall  have  this  crown.  There  is  no 
venture  here,  no  speculation  here ;  the  virtue  of  the  atonement,  the  oath  of  God, 
the  experience  of  all  His  children,  the  dying  testimony  of  those  who  have  passed 
away  to  that  far  better  world,  all  confirm  the  truth — "  Where  I  am,  there  shall  also 
My  servant  be."  Conclusion:  1.  Since  so  much  depends  on  faithfulness  to  Christ, 
diligently  use  those  means  which  are  sanctified  to  preserve  it.  One  of  the  first 
means  to  obtain  these  blessings  is,  crave  Divine  keeping.  He  is  well  kept  whom 
God  keeps,  and  he  only.  2.  Preserve  intimacy  with  Jesus  Christ.  Unfaithfulness 
commences  in  absence.  3.  And  shall  I  say,  avoid  the  company  of  Christ's  enemies  ? 
4.  And  choose  decided  friends  of  Christ  as  your  companions:  not  half-hearted 
persons,  that  you  cannot  tell  whether  there  is  any  religion  in  or  no.  (J.  Sherman.) 
Faithfulness  : — A  faithful  person  you  can  always  trust ;  he  is  ever  the  same,  behind 
your  back  as  before  your  face.  There  are  three  things  about  faithfulness  which 
show  how  important  it  is,  and  how  earnestly  we  should  learn  and  practise  it.  I.  It 
IS  so  USEFUL.  Look  at  the  mariner's  compass.  It  is  a  small,  flat  piece  of  steel, 
called  a  needle.  This  is  placed  on  the  fine  point  of  a  piece  of  iron,  which  is 
fastened  in  an  upright  position  inside  of  a  little  box.  It  is  free  to  turn  in  any 
direction  ;  but  God  has  given  that  little  needle  the  power  of  always  turning  to  the 
north.  We  do  not  know  what  this  power  in  the  needle  is  which  makes  it  turn  to 
the  north.  People  call  it  magnetism.  No  one  can  tell  what  this  magnetism  is,  but 
we  believe  in  it.  The  wonderful  power  of  this  little  needle  makes  it  one  of  the  most 
useful  things  in  the  world.  When  sailors  go  to  sea,  and  lose  sight  of  land,  this 
needle  is  all  they  have  to  depend  upon  to  guide  them  across  the  trackless  ocean. 
There  are  hundreds  of  vessels  out  at  sea  now  that  could  never  find  their  way  back 
to  port  if  it  were  not  for  the  strange  power  of  this  needle.  And  faithfulness  is  to 
us  just  what  the  magnetism  of  that  needle  is  to  the  compass.  It  guides  us  to  use- 
fulness. Faithfulness  will  make  us  honest  and  true ;  it  will  lead  us  to  do  what  we 
know  to  be  right.  And  then  we  can  always  be  trusted.  II.  It  is  so  beautiful. 
God  has  given  us  the  power  to  delight  in  beautiful  things  ;  and  in  His  great  good- 
ness God  has  filled  the  world  about  us  with  beautiful  things  in  order  that  we  may 
find  pleasure  in  looking  at  them.  How  beautiful  the  sun  is  as  it  rises  and  sets  in 
floods  of  golden  glories!  How  beautiful  is  the  moon  as  it  moves  through  the 
heavens  so  calmly  bright !  How  beautiful  the  stars  are  as  they  shine  in  the  dark 
s^y !  And  how  beautiful  the  flowers  are  in  all  the  loveliness  of  their  varied  forms 
and  colours !  We  thank  God  for  all  these  beautiful  things  because  of  the  pleasure 
they  give  and  the  good  they  do  us ;  and  when  painters  make  beautiful  pictures,  and 
sculptors  chisel  out  beautiful  figures  in  marble,  we  thank  them  too,  because  we  love 
to  look  upon  the  beautiful  things  they  make.  It  gives  us  pleasure,  and  does  us  good, 
to  see  things  that  are  beautiful.  It  is  a  pleasing  thing  to  see  a  boy  or  girl,  a  man 
or  woman,  who  is  trying  to  be  faithful  and  do  what  is  right.  III.  It  is  so  honour- 
able. The  highest  honour  we  can  gain  is  to  do  that  which  God  and  good  people 
approve,  and  which  will  lead  them  to  love  us  and  think  well  of  us.  "  Well  done, 
thou  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  And  so, 
when  we  are  doing  the  things  that  faithfulness  requires  of  us,  we  may  be  sui'e  that 
we  are  doing  honourable  things.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  He  that  overcometh  shall 
not  1)6  hurt  of  the  second  death. — The  second  death  and  how  to  escape  it : — I. 
This  language  implies  that  there  is  a  death  prior  to  the  second  here  named. 
The  first  death  is  severe,  is  penal,  but  is  often  rendered  glorious  by  the  power  of  the 
grace  of  God.  11.  That  the  second  death  is  more  dreadful  than  the  first. 
The  first  death  is  but  the  taking  away  of  the  man  from  the  scene  of  this  world, 
from  the  activities  of  time ;  whereas  the  second  death  removes  the  soul  eternally 
from  the  presence  of  God,  from  the  joy  of  heaven,  and  casts  it  into  the  dark  regions 
of  the  lost.  HI.  The  second  death  mat  be  escaped  by  continued  and  triumphant 
MORAL  goodness.  A  purc  soul  will  never  be  banished  from  the  presence  of  God. 
His  presence  is  immortality  and  spiritual  delight.  Lessons  :  1.  Let  us  endeavour 
so  to  live  that  we  may  escape  the  second  death.  2.  Let  us  remember  that  phy- 
sical death  is  not  the  end  of  being  ;  there  is  yet  a  death  beyond — a  death  in  life. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  victor's  immunity  from  the  second  death: — Two  of  the 
seven  Churches — viz.,  Smyrna,  to  which  our  text  is  addressed,  and  Philadelphia — 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  149 

offered  nothing,  to  the  pure  eyes  of  Christ,  that  needed  rebuke.  The  same  two,  and 
these  only,  were  warned  to  expect  persecution.  The  higher  the  tone  of  Christian  life 
in  the  Church  the  more  likely  it  is  to  attract  dislike,  and,  if  circumstances  permit, 
hostility.  Hence  the  whole  gist  of  this  letter  is  to  encourage  to  steadfastness.  That 
purpose  determined  at  once  the  aspect  of  Christ  which  is  presented  in  the  beginning, 
and  the  aspect  of  future  blessedness  which  is  held  forth  at  the  close.  The  aspect  of 
Christ  is — "  these  things  saith  the  first  and  last,  which  was  dead  and  is  alive."  A 
fitting  thought  to  encourage  the  men  who  were  to  be  called  upon  to  die  for  Him.  I. 
The  Christian  motive  contained  in  the  victor's  immunity  from  a  great  evil.  Now, 
that  solemn  and  thrilling  expression,  "  the  second  death,"  is  peculiar  to  this  book 
of  the  Apocalypse.  The  name  is  peculiar ;  the  thing  is  common  to  all  the  New 
Testament  writers.  Here  it  comes  with  especial  appropriateness,  in  contrast  with 
the  physical  death  which  threatened  to  be  inflicted  upon  some  members  of  the 
Smyrnean  Church.  There  is  something  at  the  back  of  physical  death  which  can 
lay  its  grip  upon  the  soul  that  is  already  separated  from  the  body;  something 
running  on  the  same  lines  somehow,  and  worthy  to  bear  that  name  of  terror  and 
disintegration.  "  The  second  death."  What  can  it  be  ?  Not  the  cessation  of  con- 
scious existence ;  that  is  never  the  meaning  of  death.  The  deepest  meaning  of 
death  is  separation  from  Him  who  is  the  fountain  of  life,  and  in  a  very  deep  sense 
is  the  only  life  of  the  universe.  Separation  from  God ;  that  is  death,  that  touches 
the  surface,  is  but  a  faint  shadow  and  parable.  And  the  second  death,  like  a 
second  tier  of  mountains,  rises  behind  and  above  it,  sterner  and  colder  than  the 
lower  hills  of  the  foreground.  Like  some  sea-creatures,  cast  high  and  dry  on  the 
beach,  and  gasping  out  its  pained  being,  the  men  that  are  separated  from  God  die 
whilst  they  live,  and  live  a  living  death.  The  second  is  the  comparative  degree  of 
which  the  first  is  the  positive.  "  To  eat  of  the  Tree  of  Life  "  ;  to  have  power  over 
the  nations ;  to  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron ;  to  blaze  with  the  brightness  of  the 
morning  star  ;  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna :  to  bear  the  new  name  known  only  to 
those  who  receive  it ;  to  have  that  name  confessed  before  the  Father  and  His 
angels ;  to  be  a  pillar  in  the  Temple  of  the  Lord ;  to  go  no  more  out ;  and  to  sit 
with  Christ  in  His  throne.  These  are  the  positive  promises,  along  with  which  this 
barely  negative  one  is  linked,  and  is  worthy  to  be  linked :  "  He  shall  not  be  hurt  of 
the  second  death."  If  this  immunity  from  that  fate  is  fit  to  stand  in  line  with 
these  glimpses  of  an  inconceivable  glory,  how  solemn  must  be  the  fate,  and  how 
real  the  danger  of  our  falling  into  it !  Further,  note  that  such  immunity  is  regarded 
here  as  the  toect  outcome  of  the  victor's  conduct  and  character.  Transient  deeds 
consolidate  into  permanent  character.  Beds  of  sandstone  rock  thousands  of  feet 
thick  are  the  sediments  dropped  from  vanished  seas  or  borne  down  by  long  dried-up 
rivers.  The  actions  which  we  often  so  unthinkingly  perform,  whatever  may  be  the 
width  and  the  permanency  of  their  affects  external  to  us,  react  upon  ourselves,  and 
tend  to  make  our  permanent  bent  or  twist  or  character.  The  chalk  cliffs  of  Dover 
are  skeletons  of  millions  upon  millions  of  tiny  organisms,  and  our  little  lives  are 
built  up  by  the  recurrence  of  transient  deeds  which  leave  their  permanent  marks 
upon  us.  They  make  character,  and  character  yonder  determines  position.  The 
little  life  here  determines  the  sweep  of  the  great  ones  that  lie  yonder.  The  victor 
wears  his  past  conduct  and  character,  if  I  may  so  say,  as  a  fireproof  garment,  and 
if  he  entered  the  very  furnace  heated  seven  times  hotter  than  before  there  would 
be  no  smell  of  the  fire  upon  him.  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the 
second  death."  H.  Now,  note,  the  Christian  motive  contained  in  the  victor's 
RECEPTION  OF  A  GREAT  GOOD.  '*  I  will  givc  him  a  crowu  of  life."  I  need  not  remind 
you,  I  suppose,  that  this  metaphor  of  "  the  crown  "  is  found  in  other  instructively 
various  places  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  life  considered  from  a  special  point  of 
view  that  is  set  forth  here.  It  is  kingly  life.  Of  course,  that  notion  of  regality 
and  dominion  as  the  prerogative  of  the  redeemed  and  glorified  servants  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  for  ever  cropping  up  in  this  book  of  the  Eevelation.  And  you 
remember  how  ou»  Lord  has  set  an  example  of  setting  it  forth  when  He  said,  "  I 
will  give  thee  authority  over  ten  cities."  The  rule  over  ourselves,  over  circum- 
stances, the  deliverance  from  the  tyranny  of  the  external,  the  deliverance  from  the 
slavery  of  the  body  and  its  lusts  and  passions,  these  are  all  included.  The  man 
that  can  will  rightly,  and  can  do  completely  as  he  rightly  wills,  that  man  is  a  king. 
But  there  is  more  than  that.  There  is  the  participation  in  wondrous,  and  for  u3 
inconceivable,  ways,  in  the  majesty  and  regality  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords.  But  remember  that  this  conception  of  a  kingly  life  is  to  be  interpreted 
according  to  Christ's  own  teaching  of  that  wherein  loyalty  in  His  kingdom  consists. 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

For  heaven,  as  for  earth,  the  token  of  dominion  is  service,  and  the  use  of  power  ia 
beneficial.  That  life  is  a  triumphant  life.  The  crown  was  laid  on  the  head  of  the 
victor  in  the  games.  If  we  do  our  work,  and  fight  our  fight  down  here  as  we  ought, 
we  shall  enter  into  the  great  city  not  unnoticed,  not  unwelcomed,  but  with  the  praise 
of  the  King  and  the  paeans  of  His  attendants.  "  I  wiU  confess  his  name  before 
My  Father  and  the  holy  angels."  That  life  is  a  festal  life.  Eoyalty,  triumph,  festal 
goodness,  all  fused  together,  are  incomplete,  but  they  are  not  useless  symbols ;  may 
we  experience  their  fulfilment!  Hope  is  surely  a  perfectly  legitimate  motive  to 
appeal  to.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12-17.  Pergamos. — Pergamum — the  incomplete  Church: — Pergamum  is  the 
incomplete  Church :  valiant  and  earnest,  it  is  oblivious  of  the  new  demand  made 
upon  it :  it  is  indifferent  to  subtle  inward  influences,  which  are  corrupting  its 
teachers,  and  endangering  the  spiritual  life  of  its  members.  Its  earnest  devotion 
is  put  in  the  forefront — "  I  know  where  thou  dwellest,  where  Satan's  throne  is ;  and 
thou  art  holding  fast  My  name."  Out  of  that  acknowledgment  comes  the  rebuke 
of  their  fault :  they  who  have  done  so  much  can  do  more ;  they  can  repent  of  their 
laxity,  be  faithful  amid  the  requirements  of  to-day.  The  Church  is  in  danger  from 
erroneous  thinking  as  well  as  from  apostasy,  and  faithful  leaders  must  not  trifle 
with  that  danger.  "  Thou  hast  there  some  that  hold  to  the  teaching  of  Balaam  " ; 
thou  hast  them,  and  thou  retainest  them.  Heretics  inculcating  immorality  are 
tolerated.  The  pastor  is  not  doing  his  duty;  those  are  being  cherished  whose 
teaching  the  Lord  hates.  The  heretics  are  in  imminent  danger ;  the  Lord  will 
correct  by  judgments  the  Church  that  allows  itself  to  be  careless.  "  Kepent  there- 
fore ;  or  else  I  come  to  thee  quickly,  and  I  make  war  against  them  with  the  sword 
of  My  mouth."  There  are  two  or  three  general  lessons  coming  out  of  this  descrip- 
tion :  1.  The  first  is,  that  a  Church  cannot  live  on  its  past.  The  memory  of 
Antipas  was  not  enough  for  Pergamum,  nor  even  the  share  of  the  Church  in 
Antipas's  martyr  spirit  and  martyr  crown.  A  revived  historical  consciousness  is 
one  of  the  most  marked  features  in  the  life  of  to-day :  it  has  lent  new  interest  to 
our  studies,  and  given  dignity  to  our  social  sense.  But  it  has  brought  dangers  with 
it ;  our  appreciation  of  the  past  may  weaken  our  feeling  of  personal  responsibility 
and  of  present  needs.  2.  A  second  lesson  is,  that  a  Church  cannot  live  on  a  single 
virtue.  If  days  like  those  of  Antipas  had  come  back,  doubtless  Pergamum  would 
have  been  faithful  as  before ;  but  as  the  times  were  different,  new  graces  were  called 
for.  Christian  character  is  like  the  tree  of  life  which  John  saw  in  the  city  of  God, 
"  bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  yielding  its  fruit  every  month  ;  and  the  leaves  of 
the  tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations."  3.  A  third  lesson  may  be  read  from 
the  story  of  Pergamum  to  the  Churches  of  to-day :  earnestness  is  not  everything  in 
ethical  and  spiritual  life.  The  easy  demeanour  which  marked  English  society  in 
the  middle  of  this  century  has  given  place  to  a  quickened  moral  intensity  which  ia 
full  of  promise.  But  some  ominous  symptoms  have  also  appeared.  One  man  feela 
earnest,  and  straightway  he  does  something  eccentric ;  another  feels  earnest,  and  he 
indulges  in  outrageous  speech ;  a  third  is  reckless  in  conduct,  pleading  as  his 
excuse  when  evil  results  follow  that  he  was  so  deeply  moved.  Earnestness  is  a  good 
foundation  for  a  virtuous  life,  but  it  is  not  in  itself  a  virtue ;  it  may  be  of  the 
temperament  rather  than  of  the  character ;  without  earnestness  there  is  no 
stability,  but  a  man  may  be  very  earnest  and  very  defective.  The  special  fault  of 
Pergamum  was  indifference  to  the  error  of  the  Nicolaitans.  What  the  error  was 
we  see  clearly  enough  in  ver.  14 — Balaam  "  taught  Balak  to  cast  a  stumbling- 
block  before  the  children  of  Israel,  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  commit 
fornication."  There  was  a  determined  effort  on  the  part  of  some  false  teachers 
among  the  Churches  in  Asia  at  this  time  to  break  down  the  wise  restrictions  of  the 
Council  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  declare  both  these  practices  lawful,  even  commendable. 
We  see  the  prevalence  of  this  error  in  Ephesus  and  Thyatira  as  well  as  in  Perga- 
mum. But  the  development  of  it  was  not  the  same  in  the  various  Churches.  In 
Thyatira  it  was  associated  with  the  ecstatic  utterances  of  a  woman,  and  a  reign  of 
false  sentiment  was  setting  in.  In  Pergamum,  as  we  gather  from  the  reference  to 
Balaam,  there  was  a  deliberate  trading  on  the  lusts  of  the  people.  This  connection 
of  heresy  with  covetousness  is  distinctly  asserted  in  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter 
and  in  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  "  Balaam,  the  son  of  Beor,  loved  the  hire  of  wrong- 
doing"; the  I*  ungodly  men,  who  were  turning  the  grace  of  God  into  lascivious- 
ness,"  "ran  riotously  in  the  error  of  Balaam  for  hire."  Browning  has  shown  us, 
in  "Mr.  Sludge  the  Medium,"  how  subtly  covetousness  and  untruthfulness  are 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  151 

intertwined ;  and  how  the  self-deceiving  impostor  may  become  the  cynical  trader 
on  human  weaknesses.  More  than  one  revelation  of  the  inner  life  of  circles — 
"  spiritualistic,"  "  cesthetic,"  "  theosophic,"  and  circles  for  improving  the  relations 
of  the  sexes — has  been  made  in  our  own  time,  showing  how  pruriency  and  greed 
and  contempt  for  the  credulous  may  all  unite  under  the  pretence  of  larger  intuitions 
and  more  advanced  knowledge  than  belong  to  the  simple  believer.  We  can  under- 
stand what  may  have  conduced  to  the  spread  of  Nicolaitan  teaching  among  simple 
persons  who  were  very  far  from  falling  under  the  condemnation  of  Balaam.  (1) 
The  teaching  appealed  to  their  curiosity,  their  longing  after  hidden  knowledge,  and 
flattered  them  with  a  promise  of  a  freemasonry  of  thought.  The  desire  to  penetrate 
into  the  realities  which  lie  behind  received  forms  of  truth,  to  draw  clear  distinctions 
between  the  abiding  and  the  temporary  in  morals,  is  not  wrong  ;  it  may  come  from 
a  noble  purpose  and  minister  to  human  advancement.  But  it  may  also  be  very 
ignoble.  If  we  be  impelled  by  lust  after  what  is  forbidden,  or  an  idle  inquisitiveness 
concerning  what  is  concealed,  we  are  making  ourselves  ready  to  fall  a  prey  to  men 
who  live  upon  the  credulous.  (2)  The  teaching  appealed  to  their  love  of  freedom; 
and  here,  too,  we  may  make  modern  applications.  The  man  of  science  investigates 
all  things ;  nothing  is  regarded  by  him  as  a  forbidden  subject  of  inquiry ;  he  knows 
that  all  knowledge  may  be  turned  to  high  uses  ;  and  his  mind  is  clean.  But  those 
who  are  tickled  by  a  desire  to  know  what  is  secret  are  sure  to  be  defiled.  The 
democrat  who  wants  all  to  be  able  to  do  their  best  is  followed  by  the  man  who  is 
thinking  only  that  he  has  as  many  rights  as  others ;  the  woman  who  knows  she 
has  powers  which  she  can  use,  and  demands  the  liberty  to  use  them,  by  her  who 
clamours  for  the  latchkey.  The  one  motive  is  as  debasing  as  the  other  is  noble. 
(3)  A  few  words  in  the  longer  recension  of  Ignatius's  letter  to  the  Philadelphians 
furnish  a  third  reason  for  the  spread  of  Nicolaitan  error.  One  of  the  characteristic 
doctrines  of  the  Nicolaitans  is  there  said  to  be,  that  pleasure  was  set  forth  as  the 
end  of  the  blessed  life — a  doctrine  which  might  too  easily  beguUe  simple  souls  who 
believed  that  joy  was  an  essential  element  in  the  nature  of  God  and  one  of  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit.  The  subtlety  of  this  error,  the  baseness  of  applying  one  of  the 
loftiest  truths  of  the  sacrificial  life  to  sanction  revelry  and  fornication,  may  well 
have  provoked  the  Lord's  reference  to  the  two-edged  sword  here,  and  His  words  to 
the  Church  at  Ephesus,  "  which  deeds  I  hate."  There  can  be  nothing  in  common 
between  the  preachers  of  self-indulgence  and  Him  who  "  pleased  not  Himself." 
The  mystic  words  of  promise  to  him  that  overcometh — "  to  him  will  I  give  of  the 
hidden  manna,"  &c. — have  reference  to  the  pretence  of  esoteric  teaching  by  which 
many  innocent  and  gracious  souls  are  led  astray.  There  is  a  wisdom  which  is 
revealed  to  the  initiated,  a  higher  doctrine  which  is  ever  appearing  under  every 
simple  setting  forth  of  truth.  It  is  found  by  the  obedient,  by  those  who  revere  law, 
and  control  passion,  and  are  content  with  a  simple  following  of  Christ.  "  The 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  He  will  show  them  His 
covenant."  All  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  ways  of  initiation  into  the  Divine 
mysteries.  The  "hidden  manna"  falls  day  by  day  about  the  tents  of  those  who 
are  content  to  follow  Christ  without  ambition,  in  prudent  simplicity  and  pious 
order.  The  "  new  name  "  which  Christ  gives  to  each  one  who  overcomes  is  not  to 
be  known  except  by  him  who  receives  it ;  that  is  to  say,  the  deepest  things  of 
personal  spiritual  life  are  not  for  public  preaching.  {A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  Christ's 
message  to  the  timid  : — I.  Goon  in  the  wobst  places  ;  ob,  the  bestbaint  of  cibcum- 
STANCES.  "  I  know  where  thou  dweUest,"  says  Christ,  "  even  where  Satan's  seat 
is."  I  know,  in  the  sense  of  making  allowances  for  all  thine  hindrances,  and  of 
understanding  thy  peculiar  needs.  1.  We  learn  from  this  message  how  bad  some 
places  can  be,  and  are.  Satan's  throne  was  at  Pergamum,  "  an  expression,"  says 
Andreas,  "  which  denotes  that  there  were  more  idols  in  Pergamum  than  in  all 
Asia."  There  are  even  districts  in  so-called  Christian  England,  aye,  and  some 
homes,  which  are  simply  Satan's  thrones.  We  have,  indeed,  no  right  to  thrust 
ourselves  into  any  peril ;  but  if  by  the  call  of  Providence  we  are  compelled  to  live 
where  Satan's  seat  is,  we  may  expect  that  God  will  do  for  us  what  He  has  done 
over  and  over  again.  2.  We  learn  also  from  this  message  how  much  some  people 
can  bear ;  that  is,  without  apostasy  and  collapse.  Possibly  Antipas  was  some 
ordinary  Christian  who  had,  to  the  surprise  of  his  fellow-believers,  been  selected 
for  the  honour  of  martyrdom.  Whoever  he  was,  Christ  knew  all  about  him,  and 
dates  time  by  his  death.  Do  they  say  in  heaven.  In  the  days  when  So-and-so  did 
this,  or  endured  that?  Are  the  martyrdoms  of  earth,  then,  so  interesting  to  the 
sainta  who  are  in  heaven  that  they  constitute  the  calendar  of  the  blessed  ?    May 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

we  so  live  and  die  that  we  may  become  conspicuous  and  known  in  the  great  com- 
pany of  the  blessed!  And  how  sweetly  the  Saviour  here  says  of  Antipas,  "My 
martyr "  1  thus  appropriating  and  owning  the  witness.  Antipas  belonged  to  the 
Church,  it  is  true,  but  he  also  belonged  to  Christ,  and  his  Master  is  not  ashamed  to 
acknowledge  him.  II.  Allot  of  faithful  service  ;  or  the  perils  of  timiditt. 
It  was  said  of  John  Knox  that  he  never  feared  the  face  of  man ;  the  fear  of  men 
had  kept  the  Christians  in  Pergamum  silent.  Perhaps  they  feared  the  consequences 
of  fidelity  ;  certainly  it  required  much  courage  on  their  part  to  rebuke  the  besetting 
sin  of  their  times.  What  good  will  it  do  ?  one  might  inquire.  Whereas  they  should 
have  remembered  that  Christ  hated  this  iniquity,  and  that  therefore  His  servants 
should  hate  and  reprove  it  also.  Love  is  the  soul  of  the  gospel,  but  right  is  also  its 
conscience  and  ruler.  For  after  all,  in  spite  of  our  weakness,  purity  is  affected  by 
testimony.  Christ  presents  Himself  to  the  silent  as  the  terrible  witness  for  the 
truth.  Out  of  His  mouth  proceeds  a  sharp  two-edged  sword,  which  represents  the 
combative  and  sin-destroying  influence  of  truth.  The  promises  to  the  victor  who 
shall '  overcome  his  timidity  are  very  remarkable.  There  are,  we  are  told,  special 
dehghts  for  faithful  witnesses,  both  now  and  hereafter.  "  What  have  I  gained  after 
fifty  years  of  toil  for  the  friendless  ?  "  asked  Lord  Shaftesbury.  And  he  replied  to 
his  own  question,  thus — "  Peace  of  mind,  and  nothing  else  1 "  But  peace  of  mind 
is  no  sUght  boon ;  it  is  worth  risking  a  little  ridicule  for,  if  we  may  but  thereby 
obtain  a  good  conscience  and  the  favour  of  Christ.  {J.  J.  Ellis.)  The  address 
to  Pergamos : — I.  The  introduction.  We  have  no  account  of  the  origin  of  the 
Church  in  this  city.  The  only  instance  in  which  it  occurs  in  Scripture  is  in  this 
address.  Ecclesiastical  history  is  almost  entirely  silent  respecting  it.  It  has  been 
supposed  that  Paul,  during  his  extensive  labours  in  this  part  of  the  world,  must 
have  visited  a  place  of  such  importance,  but  this  is  mere  conjecture.  Who  "  the 
angel  of  the  Church  in  Pergamos"  was  we  know  not.  Eusebius,  who  wrote  at 
Ceesarea  about  three  hundred  years  afterwards,  informs  us  that  his  name  was 
Corpus,  and  that  he  suffered  martyrdom.  Such,  at  least,  was  the  uncertain  voice 
of  tradition  at  that  time.  The  sharp  sword  with  two  edges  is  "  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God."  This  cuts  two  ways.  It  is  capable  both  of  a 
direct  and  a  back  stroke.  The  former  is  for  conviction,  the  latter  for  destruction. 
With  one  edge  Christ  fights  for  us,  with  the  other  against  us.  The  Church  of 
Pergamos  is  threatened  that  unless  it  repents  the  sharp  sword  with  two  edges  wUl 
be  turned  against  it.  11.  The  commendation.  1.  He  commends  their  zeal.  "  I 
know  thy  works."  All  their  works  for  Christ  were  registered  on  high.  This,  how- 
ever, did  not  render  their  deficiency  in  other  duties  less  criminal.  The  most 
perfect  performance  of  all  Christian  duties  but  one  will  not  atone  for  the  neglect  of 
that  one  :  it  would  only  cause  that  one  to  stand  out  in  a  more  aggravated  light.  2. 
It  is  commended  for  its  fidelity  in  seasons  of  persecution  :  "  Thou  holdest  fast  My 
name,  and  hast  not  denied  My  faith  "  ;  and  during  one  period  in  particular,  "  even 
in  those  days  wherein  Antipas  was  My  faithful  martyr,  who  was  slain  among  you." 
When  persecution  raged  with  greatest  violence,  they  had  maintained  the  greatest 
constancy.  3.  In  commending  this  Church,  the  Saviour  graciously  concedes  the 
unfavourable  position  in  which  it  was  placed.  The  character  given  of  Pergamos  is 
that  it  was  "  the  throne  of  Satan,"  and  •'  where  Satan  dwells."  This  city  exceeded 
all  others  at  that  time  in  wickedness.  Let  us  see  how  this  accords  with  the 
testimony  of  history  concerning  it.  Its  foundation,  as  a  place  of  iniportance,  was 
laid  in  treachery,  avarice,  and  usurpation.  One  of  Alexander's  generals,  who  after 
the  death  of  their  leader  sought  to  obtain  a  part  of  his  empire  by  the  sword,  having 
overrun  this  part  of  Asia,  deposited  the  rich  spoils  he  had  acquired  by  war  ia 
Pergamos,  and  entrusted  them  with  one  of  his  private  attendants,  while  he  rushed 
forward  to  new  conquests.  The  servant  seized  the  treasures,  made  himself  master 
of  the  place,  raised  it  to  the  metropolis  of  an  independent  empire;  and  after 
reigning  twenty  years,  transmitted  it  to  his  heirs,  who  retained  it  for  a  hundred  and 
fifty  years  afterwards.  The  last  of  these  kings  having  no  descendants,  bequeathed 
the  kingdom  to  the  senate  of  Eome.  This  was  probably  done  to  prevent  the  con- 
fusion and  ruin  that  would  have  ensued  from  the  number  of  pretenders  at  his  death. 
An  usurper  arose,  which  compelled  the  Komans  to  enforce  their  claim  by  conquest. 
The  Koman  general  prevailed,  by  the  barbarous  device  of  poisoning  the  fountains 
and  channels  that  supplied  the  city  with  water.  Pergamos  was  a  rich  booty  to  the 
Komans,  but  they  paid  dear  for  their  conquest.  The  exuberance  in  dress,  houses, 
furniture,  and  provisions  was  beyond  aU  that  they  had  seen  before.  Excess  of 
luxury  was  accompanied  with  an  equal  excess  of   vice.    It  was  here  thai  tho 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION,  153 

Romans  were  introduced  to  Asiatic  grandeur  and  Asiatic  voluptuousness  at  the 
same  time.  The  simplicity  of  Eoman  manners  from  this  period  began  to  decline. 
The  habits  of  the  metropoUs  of  the  world  were  changed.  The  effeminacy  of  the 
East  triumphed  over  the  manliness  of  the  West.  The  prof useness  and  profligacy  of 
Asia  spread  through  the  imperial  city,  and  over  its  vast  empire,  which  all  its 
historians  agree  were  first  imported  from  Pergamos.  This  was  about  a  century 
before  the  Christian  era.  The  continual  intercourse  with  strangers  at  its  port,  from 
all  parts  of  the  Koman  world,  who  came  to  do  homage  to  its  luxury  and  sensuality, 
inflamed  still  more  the  moral  condition  of  Pergamos.  It  was  just  as  Pergamos  had 
arrived  by  these  means  to  the  height  of  its  pride  and  corruption  that  a  Christian 
Church  arose  in  that  city.  The  Saviour  does  not  enjoin  His  disciples  in  this  city 
to  abandon  it  on  account  of  its  great  wickedness,  but  commends  them  for  remain- 
ing firm.  There  i^  no  one,  perhaps,  who  does  not  suppose  that  he  could  find  a 
position  less  painful  and  discouraging  than  his  own.  There  are  reasons  for  his 
being  called  by  grace,  in  the  situation  he  occupies.  It  may  be  in  mercy  to  others, 
as  well  as  to  himself.  A  testimony  by  this  means  is  given  before  aU  of  that  gospel 
which  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  All  the  grace  that  is  required  to  glorify 
the  Kedeemer  in  the  sphere  we  occupy  is  ensured  by  the  fact  of  His  having  called 
us  in  that  sphere.  III.  The  bepboof.  "  But  1  have  a  few  things  against  thee." 
They  are  only  two,  but  they  are  both  of  a  serious  nature.  The  one  is  compliance 
"with  idolatrous  practices,  the  other  the  encouragement  they  had  given  to  heretical 
sentiments.  1.  The  former  is  thus  stated,  "  Thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the 
doctrine  of  Balaam."  The  professed  deity  of  the  place  was  iSsculapius,  a  cele- 
brated physician,  who  had  resided  in  this  city.  Where  there  is  most  luxury  there 
is  most  disease,  and  most  encouragement  is  given  to  the  healing  art.  Those  who 
were  converted  to  Christianity  in  Pergamos  abandoned,  of  course,  the  worship  of 
iEsculapius,  refused  to  join  in  its  festivities,  and  rejected  with  abhorrence  the  flesh 
that  had  been  offered  on  his  shrine.  There  were  some,  however,  at  this  time,  in 
connection  with  the  Church,  who  not  only  united  in  these  feasts,  and  the  conse- 
quences that  ensued,  but  endeavoured  to  draw  others  into  the  same  snare.  By 
sympathising  with  idolatry,  and  exposing  themselves  to  its  demoralising  influence, 
they  threw  the  same  kind  of  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  Christians  as  Balaam 
did  before  the  children  of  Israel.  Whoever  endeavours  to  beguile  a  Christian  into 
conformity  with  worldliness  and  sin,  or  by  any  means  throws  a  stumbling-block 
before  him  to  turn  him  aside,  or  causes  him  so  to  fall  that  he  becomes  an  occasion 
of  scandal  to  his  profession — for  that  is  the  precise  meaning  of  the  term  here 
employed — holds  the  doctrine  of  Balaam.  2.  The  other  subject  of  reprobation  in 
this  Church  is  the  encouragement  it  had  given  to  heretical  sentiments.  IV.  The 
ADMONITION.  "  Repent."  This  single  word  expresses  the  whole  requirement  of 
God,  and  consequently  the  whole  duty  of  man,  in  reference  to  every  deviation  from 
the  right  path.  It  is  that  which  is  first  and  instantly  demanded,  and  which,  if 
genuine,  leads  to  all  the  rest.  V.  The  thbeatening.  •'  Or  else  I  will  come  unto 
thee  quickly,"  &o.  VI.  The  application.  "  To  him  that  overcometh."  The 
present  is  regarded  as  a  time  of  severe  conflict.  Faith  must  be  tried,  and  that  only 
which  is  triumphant  will  be  rewarded.  Those  who  overcome  in  a  place  like 
Pergamos,  where  Satan  has  his  throne,  shall  have  a  double  reward.  The  one  is 
"  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,"  and  the  other  "  to  have  a  white  stone  given  him, 
and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that 
receiveth  it."  Part  of  this  description  appears,  at  first  view,  to  apply  to  the  present 
and  part  to  the  future  state.  Faith  in  this  life  is  its  own  reward.  The  faith  by 
which  we  overcome  every  temptation  and  difficulty  derives  its  strength  from  feeding 
on  the  heavenly  manna.  The  flesh  of  Christ  is  its  meat,  and  His  blood  its  drink 
indeed.  He  who  has  this  faith  has  the  white  stone  of  innocence  in  his  possession, 
which  enables  him  to  look  forward  to  the  great  day  of  account  with  joy,  and 
fortifies  him  against  all  the  accusations  of  his  foes  and  of  the  law.  The  con- 
sciousness of  a  vital  union  between  Christ  and  our  souls  is  the  great  secret  in  the 
Christian's  breast.  It  were  vain  to  attempt  to  explain  it  to  others.  What  to  him  is 
the  evidence  of  consciousness,  to  another  is  but  the  evidence  of  a  single  testimony 
from  human  Hps.  Nor  can  grace  in  the  heart  of  one  infaUibly  detect  its  existence 
in  the  heart  of  another.  Each  carries  the  secret  of  his  sincerity  in  his  own  breast. 
The  whole  passage,  however,  is  intended,  without  doubt,  to  express  the  peculiar 
character  of  their  joy  in  heaven.  The  same  life  which  the  Christian  now  lives  by 
faith  in  the  Son  of  God  he  will  then  live  by  open  and  sensible  communion.  The 
BMima  on  which  he  feeds  is  the  same  both  in  earth  and  in  heaven.     In  the 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

one  case  the  manna  descends  to  him,  in  the  other  he  ascends  to  its  hidden 
stores.     This  hidden  manna  for  the  supply  of  every  desire,  with   an    inward 
consciousness  of  the  most  unbounded  liberty  of  access,  constitutes  the  peculiar 
privilege    to    which    the    promise    under    consideration    refers.      (G.    Rogers.) 
Tlie  words  of  Christ  to  the  congregation  at  Pergamos : — I.  A  tone  of  authority. 
1.  Christ's  truth  is  authoritative.    2.  Christ's  truth  is  mighty.    II.  A  discrimination 
■OF  CHARACTER,     1.  Christ  is  fully  acquainted  with  circumstances  under  which  all 
moral  character  is  formed.     2.-  Christ  describes  exactly  the  moral  position  in  which 
the  Church  lived.     3.  The  eye  of  Christ  recognises  every  part  of  a  man's  character, 
whether  good  or  bad.    III.  A  reformative  demand.     1.  Repentance  is  moral  refor- 
mation.    2.  Eepentance  is  an  urgent  necessity.     IV.  A  promise  of  blessedness. 
1.  The  choicest  nourishment.    2.  The  highest  distinction.     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)      The 
Church  faithful  to  the  truth  but  defective  in  discipline  : — I.  This  Church  was  faith- 
ful IN  ITS  adherence  TO  THE  TRUTH.     1.  It  held  fast  the  name  of  Christ,  and 
reposed  a  sincere  confidence   in  Him.     2.   It  was  faithful,  notwithstanding  the 
unfavourable  circumstances  in  which  it  was  placed.     3.  It  was  faithful,  notwith- 
standing the  martyrdom  of  one  of  its  prominent  members.    11.  This  Church  was 
DEFECTIVE  IN  THE  DISCIPLINE  BY  WHICH  IT  WAS  GOVERNED.     1.  Defective  discipline 
consists  in  allowing  men  of  depraved  conduct  and  unhallowed  creed  to  enter  and 
remain  in  the  Church.     2.  This  defective  discipline,  unless  repented  of,  will  invite 
the  judgment  of  Christ,  severe  and  irreparable.     3.  This  defective  discipline  often 
mars  the  beauty  and  usefulness  of  an  otherwise  excellent  Church.     Lessons :  1. 
At  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances  to  be  faithful  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.     2.  To  be  anxious  to  sustain  the  Church  of  Christ  where  it  is  most  needed 
brave  and  pure.     3.  That  the  office-bearers  in  the  Church  should  be  careful  as  to 
its  government.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)        A  Church  with  a  serious  defect : — I.  The 
WICKEDNESS  OF  THE  CITY.     1.  No  slight  importance  is  attached  by  the  horticulturist 
as  to  the  soil  in  which  he  seeks  to  rear  his  plants.    Arctic  zones  and  sandy  deserts 
give  little  promise  of  success.     2.  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  highest  importance  whether 
our  homes  are  well  ventilated  and  are  free  from  malarial  and  sewer  poisons  ?    3. 
In  a  spiritual  point  of  view,  healthful  surroundings  should  be  carefully  sought.    11. 
The  excellent   features   in   the  character  of  this  Church.      1.   Unflinching 
firmness  in  upholding  Christ's  name — "  Thou  holdest  My  name,"  &c.    2.  Unflinch- 
ing firmness  to  Christ's  cause — "  Hast  not  denied  My  faith,"  &c.    3.  Unflinching 
firmness  under  severe  trials.     (1)  There  is  nothing  more  valuable  in  human  cha- 
racter than  unswerving  adherence  to  Christ,  especially  when  persecuted  for  Christ's 
sake.     {2)  Nothing  more  detrimental  to  true  growth  than  unstability.     (3)  The 
great  lack  of  our  day  is  moral  backbone — power  to  stand  for  Christ  amid  the 
difficulties  of  life.    III.  Serious  defects  in  the  character  of  this  Church.     1. 
"  Thou  holdest  the  doctrine  of  Balaam !  "    How  many  a  young  Christian  has  been 
led  away  from  Christ  and  His  cause  by  being  tempted  to  attend  an  evening  party, 
where  a  taste  for  worldly  pleasure  was  again  awakened,  which  ultimately  destroyed 
all  relish  for  spiritual  things  !    And  are  there  not  Churches  in  our  land,  nay,  in 
our  city,  who  are  seducing  their  own  members  away  from  Christ  by  providing  for 
them  worldly  amusements,  on  the  plea  that  if  they  do  not  provide  amusement  they 
will  go  elsewhere  to  enjoy  them  ?    What  is  this  but  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  who 
taught  Balak  to  cast  a  stumbling-block  before  the  children  of  Israel?    2.  "  So  hast 
thou  also  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  which  thing  I  hate  " 
(ver.  15).     (1)  What  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes  was  cannot  be  fully  deter- 
mined.    (2)  The  testimony  of  the  Fathers  is  that  it  was  something  akin  to  the 
doctrine  of  Balaam.     (3)  It  was,  at  all  events,  that  which  the  Lord  hated.     (4)  And 
it  was  very  evident  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  holds  pastors  and  Churches  to  a 
strict  account  for  what  they  allow  to  be  taught  and  practised  by  their  members. 
IV.  Our  Lord's  solemn  warning.     1.  We  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  real  thing 
here  advised.     (1)  To  repent  in  Scripture  language  is  "  to  change  one's  mind  "  ; 
and  this  means  a  change  which  affects  the  life.     (2)  The  real  life  is  ever  the 
expression  of  the  mind's  sentiment.     (3)  There  can  be  no  true  conversion  without 
repentance,  as  there  can  be  no  true  regeneration  without  faith ;  and  the  only  real 
evidence  of  both  is  a  life  of  holiness.     2.  We  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  judicial 
element  in  Christ's  dealings  with  His  people.     (1)  "  I  will  fight  against  them."     (2) 
A  Church  of  Christ  cannot  go  counter  to  the  expressly  revealed  will  of  its  great 
Head  without  suffering  for  it.     (3)  This  is  no  less  true  in  respect  to  every  individual 
Christian.    3.  We  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  the  words  of  Christ  are 
the  source  of  our  weal  and  woe.    (1)  If  He  says,  "  Come  ye  blessed,"  &c.,  who  can 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  155 

rob  us  of  the  joy  ?  (2)  But  if  He  says,  "  Depart  from  Me,"  who  can  prevent  our 
doom  ?  (3)  "  My  words,"  says  Christ,  ••  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life."  V. 
OuB  Lord's  earnest  counsel.  1.  The  meaning  evidently  is  this  :  "  Let  every  one 
who  hears  this  heed  it !  "  (1)  Let  there  be  no  listlessness.  (2)  Let  there  be  no 
indifference.  (3^  Let  there  be  no  worldliness  to  neutralise  the  effect  of  the  Word. 
2.  Oh,  how  mucn  need  there  is  to-day  of  this  counsel  1  (1)  While  listening  to  the 
blessed  Word  of  God  how  many  there  are  who  scarcely  realise  what  is  said.  (2) 
How  many  who  pay  attention  forget  what  they  have  heard !  (3)  And  many  who 
truly  desire  and  pray  for  grace  to  be  obedient  to  the  Word  find  themselves  so 
involved  in  the  cares  of  the  world  that  they  constantly  come  short  of  their  fervent 
desire.  3.  How  may  it  be  done  ?  (1)  We  must  cultivate  the  habit  of  submission 
to  God's  Word.  (2)  We  must  become  more  familiar  with  God's  Word.  (3)  We 
must  be  much  in  prayer  while  the  Word  is  expounded.  (4)  And  we  must  take  the 
Word  to  ourselves.  VI.  Our  Lord's  most  gracious  promises.  (D.  C.  Hughes, 
M.A.)  Adherence  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel: — I.  The  excellence  of  the  truth. 
What  was  the  truth  that  the  Church  atPergamos  hMd  fast?  Was  it  worth  holding? 
Did  it  refer  to  politics,  philosophy,  literature,  or  science  ?  There  was  considerable 
political  zeal  at  Pergamos  ;  learning,  too,  flourished  there.  It  was  the  boast  of  the 
town  that  it  encouraged  literary  and  scientific  men.  Notwithstanding  this,  not  a 
word  is  said  in  this  letter  commendatory  of  their  holding  fast  to  anything  save  the 
truth.  Science,  learning,  art,  are  good,  but  not  the  good.  There  is  a  deep  signifi- 
cance in  Christ  commending  the  educated  and  scientific  Pergamians  for  holding 
fast  His  truth.  What  was  His  truth?  "My  name"  and  "My  faith."  It  is  a 
saving  name.  "  There  is  none  other  name,"  &c.  It  is  a  pardoning  name.  "  In 
His  name  remission  of  sins  shall  be  preached,"  &c.  It  is  a  royal  name.  "  At  the 
name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow,"  &c.  It  is  a  soul-collecting  name.  "  Wherever 
two  or  three  ,are  gathered  together  in  My  name,"  &c.  II.  The  memory  of  the 
MARTYRS.  Martyrdom  is  a  motive  for  holy  truth.  The  martyrdoms  of  our  land 
are  the  most  radiant  events  in  its  historic  page.  They  are  the  most  creative  things 
in  the  chronicles  of  our  country.  1.  The  triumph  of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh,  the 
majesty  and  force  of  mind.  2.  The  invincibility  of  the  mind  when  it  goes  with 
truth.  3.  God-sustaining  grace.  HI.  The  perils  that  surround  us.  There  is 
something  beautiful  in  what  Christ  says,  "I  know  where  thou  dwellest."  This 
may  be  regarded — 1.  As  the  language  of  alarm.  I  know  the  perilous  circumstances 
which  surround  thee — beware  !  2.  As  the  language  of  duty.  "  I  know  where  thou 
dweUest,  where  Satan  dwelleth,"  therefore  be  on  thy  guard  and  work  earnestly  for 
the  truth.  3.  As  the  language  of  encouragement.  I  know  all  thy  temptations  and 
thy  difficulties ;  I  know  human  life  ;  I  know  what  it  is  to  live  in  a  corrupt  world. 
•'  I  know  where  thou  dwellest."  If  sin  is  around  you  My  grace  shall  much  more 
abound.  IV.  The  disapprobation  of  Christ.  1.  Christ  first  employs  mild 
measures  to  correct  His  Church.  Truth,  suasion,  love,  example,  are  the  mild 
means  He  ordinarily  employs.  2.  When  His  mild  measures  fail  severer  ones  are 
employed.  The  severest  is  abandonment.  No  sword  more  terrible  than  this — to  be 
abandoned  by  Christ  is  of  all  evUs  the  most  tremendous.  V.  The  blessedness  of 
THE  faithful.  The  hidden  manna  and  the  white  stone  may  mean  Divine  susten- 
tation  and  Divine  distinction.  Those  who  are  faithful  to  truth  shall  be  at  once 
sustained  and  honoured  by  God.  Conclusion  :  Let  us  hold  fast  the  name  of  Christ. 
He  is  everything  to  us.  Without  Him  what  are  we  ?  PUgrims  in  an  intricate  and 
perilous  desert  without  a  guide — voyagers  on  a  tempestuous  ocean,  without  a  chart 
or  pilot.  [Caleb  Morris.)  I  know  thy  works,  where  thou  dwellest,  even  where 
Satan's  seat  is. — God's  estimate  of  Christian  works : — I.  It  is  possible  to  be  a 
Christian  anywhere.  Christianity  is  not  a  thing  of  locality,  but  of  character. 
There  are  plants  which  will  bloom  in  some  latitudes  and  die  in  others.  Tropical 
shrubs  will  not  flourish  within  Arctic  circles,  the  Alpine  flora  are  not  found  on  low- 
lying  plains.  But  Christianity  can  live  wherever  a  man  can  live,  for  it  is  a  thing 
of  personal  character,  and  as  that  is  a  matter  of  choice,  and  as  a  man  is  always 
what  he  chooses  to  be,  he  may  be  a  Christian  if  he  chooses  in  any  circumstances  or 
in  any  place.  Obadiah  kept  his  conscience  clear  even  in  the  house  of  Ahab  :  Daniel 
preserved  his  integrity  amid  the  corruption  of  the  court  of  Babylon ;  and  Nehemiah 
maintained  his  piety  in  the  palace  of  the  Persian  emperor.  And  what  is  true  of 
places  is  equally  true  of  occupations.  Unless  a  man's  business  be  in  and  of  itself 
sinful,  pandering  to  the  vices  and  demoralising  to  the  characters  of  his  fellows,  he 
may  serve  Christ  in  any  profession  or  trade.  The  Roman  army  was  a  very  poor 
school  for  morals,  and  yet,  strangely  enough,  all  the  centurions  mentioned  in  the 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


New  Testament  seem  to  have  been  men  with  some  good  thing  in  their  hearts  towards 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  Character  may  take  some  of  its  colouring  from  circum- 
stances, but  it  is  itself  independent  of  them  ;  for  it  is  the  choice  of  the  personal  will 
i  by  which  a  man  is  enabled  to  breast  circumstances,  and  make  them  subservient  to 
his  own  great  life-purposes.  Now  if  it  be  true  that  a  man  may  be  a  Christian  any- 
where, what  follows  ?  1.  This,  in  the  first  place — that  we  must  not  be  prejudiced 
against  a  man  because  of  the  locality  in  which  we  find  him.  Test  a  man  by  what 
he  is,  rather  than  by  where  he  comes  from.  2.  But  still  further,  if  it  be  true  that 
it  is  possible  to  be  a  Christian  anywhere,  then  it  follows,  in  the  second  place,  that 
we  ought  not  to  excuse  ourselves  for  our  lack  of  Christianity  by  pleading  the  force 
of  circumstances,  or  the  nature  of  our  business,  or  the  character  of  the  place  in 
which  we  live.  II.  It  is  harder  to  be  a  Christian  in  some  places  than  in  others. 
Thus  there  are  households  in  which  it  seems  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world 
for  a  child  to  grow  up  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  there  are  others  in  which 
everything  like  loyalty  to  Christ  is  met  with  opposition,  and  can  be  maintained  only 
by  a  strenuous  exertion.  The  boy  brought  up  in  a  rough  and  godless  neighbourhood 
has  far  more  to  contend  with  if  he  is  to  be  a  Christian  than  he  would  have  residing 
in  a  different  kind  of  locality.  It  is  also  undeniable  that  the  surroundings  of  some 
professions  and  trades  are  more  trying  to  those  who  are  seeking  to  follow  Christ 
than  those  of  others.  What  then  ?  If  it  be  true,  then,  in  the  first  place,  the  Lord 
knows  that  it  is  so,  and  He  will  estimate  our  work  by  our  opportunity.  But  as 
another  lesson  from  this  difference  in  our  individual  circumstances,  we  ought  to 
learn  to  be  charitable  in  our  judgment  of  each  other.  The  flower  in  the  window  of 
the  poor  man's  cottage  may  be  very  far  from  a  perfect  specimen  of  its  kind  ;  but 
that  it  is  there  at  all  is  a  greater  marvel  than  it  is  to  find  a  superb  specimen  of  the 
same  in  the  conservatory  of  the  wealthy  nobleman.  And  there  may  be  more 
honour  to  one  man  for  all  the  Christianity  he  has  maintained  in  the  face  of  great 
obstacles,  though  it  be  marked  by  some  blemishes,  than  there  is  to  another  who 
has  no  such  blemishes,  but  who  has  had  no  such  conflict.     III.  The  harder  the 

PLACE  IN  which  WE  ARE  WE  SHOULD  BE  THE  MORE  EARNEST  BY  PRAYER  AND  WATCHFUL- 
NESS TO  MAINTAIN  OUR  CHRISTIANITY.  Here,  howcver,  it  is  needful  that  we  clearly 
comprehend  what  the  hardest  place  is.  It  is  not  always  that  in  which  there  is  the 
greatest  external  resistance  to  Christianity.  An  avowed  antagonist  he  meets  as  an 
antagonist ;  he  prepared  himself  for  the  encounter,  and  he  is  rarely  taken  unawares ; 
but  when  the  ungodly  meet  him  as  friends,  then  he  is  in  real  peril.  The  world's 
attentions  are  more  deadly  to  the  Christian  than  its  antagonisms,  and  it  is  against 
these  that  we  must  be  especially  on  our  guard.  The  Church  is  in  the  world  as  a 
boat  is  in  the  sea ;  it  can  float  only  by  keeping  above  it ;  and  if  we  let  it  become,  as 
I  may  say,  world-logged,  it  will  be  swamped  thereby,  just  as  surely  as  a  boat  will  be 
that  is  filled  with  water.  Another  thing  which  makes  a  place  hard  for  a  Christian 
to  maintain  his  loyalty  in  is  what  I  may  call  its  atmosphere.  We  talk  loosely  of 
the  genius  of  a  place.  But  every  place  has  its  own  spirit,  trend,  tendency,  or,  if 
you  will  not  be  offended  by  the  word,  its  own  particular  idolatry.  In  one  the 
question  regarding  a  new-comer  may  be,  "  What  does  he  know  ?  Has  he  written 
anything  ?  "  There  we  have  the  worship  of  intellect,  or,  as  it  is  called  by  us  over 
the  way,  culture.  In  another  the  inquiry  is,  "  Who  was  his  grandfather?  "  There 
tlie  idolatry  is  that  of  family.  In  another  the  test  is,  "  What  is  he  worth  ?  "  There 
the  idolatry  is  that  of  wealth.  IV.  The  greater  the  difficulty  which  we  over- 
come IN  the  maintenance  of  our  Christianity,  the  nobler  will  be  our  reward. 
"  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  and  I  will  give 
him  a  white  stone,"  &c.  You  see,  here  are  three  things — the  stone,  the  name,  and 
the  secret.  White  stones  were  used  for  different  purposes  ;  sometimes  for  giving  a 
vote  of  acquittal  to  one  charged  with  crime ;  sometimes  as  tokens  of  admission  to 
banquets ;  sometimes  as  mere  expressions  of  love  between  two  dear  friends.  The 
last  seems  to  be  the  reference  here  :  "I  will  give  him  a  special  manifestation  of  My 
love."  Then  there  is  the  new  name  written  in  the  stone.  You  know  that  through- 
out the  Scriptures,  whenever  a  new  name  was  given  by  God  to  any  one,  it  was 
always  connected  with  some  particular  crisis  in  his  personal  history,  and  especially 
commemorative  of  that.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  shall  discover  in  this  new  name 
something  distinctly  commemorative  of  the  personal  history  and  conflicts  of  the 
individual ;  and  when  it  is  added  that "  No  man  knoweth  it  saving  he  that  receiveth 
it,"  we  have  the  further  peculiarity  that,  as  referring  to  t^e  most  terrible  struggles 
and  experiences  of  the  man,  it  is  a  matter  of  sacred  confidence  between  him  and  the 
Lord.    There  are  secrets  between  the  Lord  Jesus  and  each  of  His  people,  even  now 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  157 

and  here.  The  sun  belongs  to  all  the  flowers  alike,  and  yet  he  is  to  each  something 
that  he^is  not  to  any  of  the  rest,  giving  to  each  its  own  distinctive  appearance,  its 
crimson  tips  to  the  sweet  mountain  daisy,  and  its  beautiful  combination  of  colours 
to  the  fragrant  violet.  Just  so,  Christ  has  through  my  personal  history  and 
experience  revealed  Himself  in  some  aspects  to  me  that  He  has  not  shown  to  you, 
and  to  you  in  some  that  He  has  not  shown  to  me.  This  new  name  at  last  will 
gather  up  into  one  external  excellency  all  that  personal  revelation  which  Christ  has 
made  of  Himself  to  each  individual  through  His  history,  experience,  and  conflicts. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Thou  holdest  fast  My  name,  and  hast  not  denied  My 
faith. — Holding  fast  the  faith  : — I.  Consider  this  fact.  1.  The  name  of  Christ  is 
here  made  to  be  identical  with  the  faith  of  Christ.  "  Thou  boldest  fast  My  name, 
and  hast  not  denied  My  faith."  The  faith  of  Scripture  has  Christ  for  its  centre, 
Christ  for  its  circumference,  and  Christ  for  its  substance.  The  name — that  is,  the 
person,  the  character,  the  work,  the  teaching  of  Christ — this  is  the  faith  of  Christians. 
The  great  doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  all  intimately  connected  with  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself ;  they  are  the  rays,  and  He  is  the  Sun.  2.  But  how  may  the  faith 
be  denied  ?  (1)  Some  deny  the  faith,  and  let  go  the  name  of  Jesus  by  never  con- 
fessing it.  (2)  Christ  is  also  denied  by  false  doctrine.  (3)  By  unholy  living.  Christ 
is  to  be  obeyed  as  a  Master,  as  well  as  to  be  believed  as  a  Teacher.  (4)  Alas !  we 
can  deny  the  faith  by  actually  forsaking  it,  and  quitting  the  people  of  God.  Some 
do  so  deliberately,  and  others  because  the  charms  of  the  world  overcome  them.  3. 
In  what  way  may  we  be  said  to  hold  fast  the  name  of  Christ  and  the  faith  of  Christ  ? 
(1)  By  the  full  consent  of  our  intellect,  yielding  up  our  mind  to  consider  and  accept 
the  things  which  are  assuredly  believed  among  us.  (2)  If  we  hold  fast  the  name  of 
Jesus,  we  must  hold  the  faith  in  the  love  of  it.  We  must  store  up  in  our  affections 
all  that  our  Lord  teaches.  (3)  We  also  hold  it  fast  by  holding  it  forth  in  the  teeth 
of  all  opposition.  We  must  confess  the  faith  at  all  proper  times  and  seasons,  and 
we  must  never  hide  our  colours.  Let  us  never  be  either  ashamed  or  afraid.  11. 
Having  considered  the  fact,  let  us  further  enlarge  upon  it.  What  do  we  mean 
by  holding  fast  the  name  of  Christ  ?  1.  We  mean  holding  fast  the  Deity  of  that 
name.  We  believe  in  our  Lord's  real  Godhead.  "  His  name  shaU  be  called 
Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  mighty  God."  One  of  the  names  by  which  He  is 
revealed  to  us  is  Immanuel.  2.  We  also  hold  fast  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  the  faith 
of  Jesus,  as  to  the  royalty  of  His  name.  He  was  born  King  of  the  Jews,  and  He  is 
also  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  3.  Moreover,  we  believe  in  the  grandeur 
of  that  name,  as  being  the  first  and  the  last.  Oh,  what  blessings  have  come  to  us 
through  Jesus  Christ !  4.  We  hold  fast  the  name  of  Christ  as  we  believe  in  its 
saving  power.     5.  We  hold  fast  this  name  in  its  immutability.     HI.  Let  me  show 

THE  PRACTICAL  PLACE   OF  THE   NAME  AND  OF  THE  FAITH  WITH  US.      The  practical  place 

of  it  is  this :  1.  It  is  our  personal  comfort.  For  all  time  the  Lord  Jesus  is  our 
heart's  content.  Through  this  blessed  name  and  this  blessed  faith  believers  are 
themselves  made  glad  and  strong.  It  is  strength  for  our  weakness,  yea,  life  for  our 
death.  2.  And  then  this  name,  this  faith,  these  are  our  message.  Our  only 
business  here  below  is  to  cry,  "  Behold  the  Lamb !  "  3.  He  also  is  our  Divine 
authority  for  holy  work.  If  the  spirituaDy  sick  are  healed,  it  is  His  name  which 
makes  them  strong.  4.  This  also  is  our  power  in  preaching.  The  devil  will  never 
be  cast  out  by  any  other  name — let  us  hold  it  fast.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Courageous 
piety  : — This  praise  is  great  by  reason  of  these  circumstances.  The  governor  of  a 
ship  and  the  mariners  in  a  calm  sea  are  not  tried  ;  it  is  no  mastery  nor  praise  for 
them  to  keep  upright.  But  if  in  boisterous  tempests  and  through  the  raging  surges 
they  can  keep  upright,  and  go  safe  through,  it  is  to  their  great  commendation. 
The  captain  in  wars  and  his  soldiers  are  not  said  to  be  valiant  upon  no  assault  of 
enemies,  or  for  some  light  skirmish ;  but  if  they  be  set  upon  on  every  side,  and 
compassed  round  about  with  fierce  and  terrible  enemies  and  are  not  then  abashed, 
but  stand  valiantly  in  the  fight  and  give  the  repulse  to  their  enemies,  who  doth  not 
magnify  their  courage?  1.  That  they  dwelled  where  Satan  had  his  throne  it 
showeth  first  what  miserable  estate  all  men  are  in  without  Christ,  even  under  the 
cruel  tyrant  Satan,  who  ruleth  in  their  corrupt  lusts  and  holdeth  them  captive  to 
do  his  will.  2.  This  doth  magnify  and  extol  the  mercy  of  God  that  would  send  His 
gospel  into  such  a  place,  even  almost  as  it  were  into  hell,  for  could  it  be  much 
better  where  Satan  had  his  throne  ?  3.  As  we  may  see,  it  extoUeth  the  might  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  not  only  in  planting  His  Church  there,  but  in  preserving  it. 
For  will  Satan  make  final  resistance  when  that  is  set  up  which  casteth  him 
down,  and  even  in  the  place  where  he  dwelleth?     Men  can  better  endure  that 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

which  they  mislike  if  it  be  further  from  them  than  if  it  be  just  by  them. 
Then  that  He  saith  thou  hast  kept  My  name  and  not  denied  My  faith,  it  is  a 
most  excellent  thing.  The  devil  laboureth  nothing  more  than  through  terror  of 
persecution  to  drive  men   from  confessing  Christ.     (G.  Gyfford.)  Testimony 

for  Christ: — If  you  are  the  only  Christian  in  the  shop,  the  store,  or  tiie 
office  where  you  work,  a  peculiar,  responsibility  rests  upon  you,  a  responsibility 
which  no  other  one  shares  with  you.  You  are  Christ's  only  witness  in  your  place. 
If  you  do  not  testify  there  for  Him,  there  is  no  other  one  who  will  do  it.  Miss 
Havergal  tells  of  her  experience  in  the  girls'  school  at  Diisseldorf.  She  went  there 
soon  after  she  had  become  a  Christian  and  had  confessed  Christ.  Her  heart  was 
very  warm  with  love  for  her  Saviour,  and  she  was  eager  to  speak  for  Him.  To  her 
amazement,  however,  she  soon  learned  that  among  the  hundred  girls  in  the  school 
she  was  the  only  Christian.  Her  first  thought  was  one  of  dismay — she  could  not 
confess  Christ  in  that  great  company  of  worldly,  unchristian  companions.  Her 
gentle,  sensitive  heart  shrank  from  a  duty  so  hard.  Her  second  thought,  however, 
was  that  she  could  not  refrain  from  confessing  Christ.  She  was  the  only  one 
Christ  had  there,  and  she  must  be  faithful.  ♦'  This  was  very  bracing,"  she  writes. 
"  I  felt  I  must  try  to  walk  worthy  of  my  calling  for  Christ's  sake.  It  brought  a  new 
and  strong  desire  to  bear  witness  for  my  Master.  It  made  me  more  watchful  and 
earnest  than  ever  before,  for  I  knew  that  any  slip  in  word  or  deed  would  bring 
discredit  on  my  Master."  She  realised  that  she  had  a  mission  in  that  school,  that 
she  was  Christ's  witness  there.  His  only  witness,  and  that  she  dare  not  fail, 
{J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  Loyalty  to  the  last : — In  the  battle  of  Sadowa,  after  the 
Prussians  had  gained  the  victory  over  the  Austrians,  a  young  Austrian  officer  was 
found  mortally  wounded  in  a  wet  ditch.  When  the  Prussian  ambulance  officers 
tried  to  remove  him  he  besought  them  with  such  terrible  earnestness  to  let  him  lie 
where  he  was  and  die  in  peace,  that  at  last,  seeing  he  had  but  a  few  hours  to  live, 
they  yielded  to  his  entreaties ;  and  there,  in  that  wet  ditch,  he  died.  When  they 
moved  the  body  they  discovered  the  reason  of  his  earnestness  to  be  left  where  he 
lay.  Underneath  the  body  were  found  hidden  the  colours  of  his  regiment.  Bather 
than  they  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  he  had  covered  them  with  his 
dying  body.  The  noble  foe  f orebore  to  touch  them.  They  wound  them  round  the 
young  hero's  body,  and  buried  him  in  that  shroud  with  military  honours.  {Ellice 
Hopkins.)  Holding  fast,  icpariig,  as  with  tooth  and  nail,  or  by  main  strength. 
{J.  Trapp.)  Antipas,  my  faithful  martyr,  who  was  slain. — Antipas  ;  or,  reliable 
principles : — Antipas  is  probably  the  well-known  name  of  some  elder  or  pastor 
in  the  Church  at  Pergamos,  and  means  "against  all,"  or  "one  against 
many."  Most  interesting  is  the  study  of  names  and  their  meanings.  There 
is  always  some  peculiarity  or  strength  of  character  indicated  by  a  name  which 
has  been  given,  not  by  parents,  but  by  common  consent,  as  Kichard  Coiur  de 
Lion,  or  William  the  Silent.  If  a  man  inherits  a  good  name  he  should  never  stain 
it,  if  a  commonplace  name  he  should  make  it  honourable.  Antipas  made  his 
to  be  honoured  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven.  When  the  principles  of  Christianity 
are  embraced,  they  make  a  man  a  very  Antipas  with  respect  to  the  world.  He  wiU 
find,  ofttimes,  things  that  will  clash  with  conscience,  and  circumstances  such  as 
will  demand  much  casuistical  reasoning  in  the  effort  to  reconcile  the  claims  of 
God  and  Mammon.  Sometimes  in  business  he  must  set  himself  against  evil 
maxims.  Sometimes  in  the  Church  itself  there  is  need  for  a  man  to  act  as  an 
Antipas.  If  he  finds  non-essentials  made  the  pretext  for  useless  divisions,  and 
cumbersome  creeds  the  means  for  lading  men's  shoulders  with  burdens  grievous  to 
be  borne,  he  must  speak  out.  If  he  finds  out  some  truth  long  overlooked,  and 
which  it  would  be  for  the  welfare  of  the  whole  Church  to  accept,  he  may  not  keep 
the  truth  to  himself.  In  aU  his  struggles,  anxieties,  and  sufferings  the  true  Antipas 
may  always  be  sure  of  the  support  of  Christ.  When  the  trial  comes  he  finds  a 
strength  given  such  as  he  little  expected.  Suffering  for  Christ,  he  is  permitted  to 
enter  more  into  the  "fellowship  of  the  mystery."  What  but  this  supported  an 
Athanasius  when  alone  he  dared  to  raise  a  barrier  against  the  Arian  heresy  on  the 
one  hand  and  imperial  despotism  on  the  other?  What  but  this  supported 
Savonarola  under  all  his  cares,  and  especially  at  that  wonderful  moment  in  the 
Piazza  of  Florence,  before  the  great  crowds,  when,  holding  aloft  the  consecrated 
elements  in  his  hands,  his  eyes  uplifted,  and  quivering  with  excitement  in  his  whole 
aspect,  he  said,  "  Lord,  if  I  have  not  wrought  in  sincerity  of  soul,  if  my  word 
Cometh  not  from  Thee,  strike  me  at  this  moment,  and  let  the  fires  of  Thy  wrath 
enclose  me  1 "    What  but  this  led  Bunyan  to  say  to  the  judge,  "  I  am  at  a  point 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  159 

with  you,  and  if  I  were  out  of  prison  to-day  I  would,  by  the  help  of  God,  preach 
the  gospel  to-morrow  "  ?  At  this  day,  when  there  is  so  much  unsettlement  as  to 
the  principles  necessary  to  be  held,  and  the  doctrines  essential  to  salvation,  it  is  of 
the  highest  importance  to  foster  this  spirit  of  fealty  to  Christ.  Almost  as  much 
grace  on  the  part  of  a  Christian  is  needful  to  live  consistently  in  the  midst  of  the 
present  subtile  temptations  of  a  smooth  prosperity,  as  to  go  to  prison  or  to  the  stake. 
When  the  storm  is  raging,  the  captain's  watchful  eye  and  sailor's  ready  help  may 
keep  the  ship  from  wreckage,  but  what  can  they  do  against  the  calm  and  heat  of 
the  tropics  ?  When  a  man  is  likely  to  suffer  severely  for  his  opinions  he  is  sure  to 
be  careful  as  to  what  principles  he  embraces.  Still,  all  should  be  as  concerned  to 
be  right  and  to  hold  the  truth  whether  they  have  to  suffer  or  not  for  their  opinions. 
{F.  Hastings.)  The  names  of  individual  souls  on  the  breastplate  of  Christ : — 
Never  did  any  man  receive  such  a  testimony  as  this.  We  are  surer  of  his  salvation 
than  of  that  of  any  other ;  for  of  him  alone  has  Jesus  Himself  testified  that  in  the  latest 
moment  of  this  earthly  life  no  shadow  came  between  him  and  his  Lord,  that  he 
was  faithful  unto  death.  I.  Antipas  had  not,  like  St.  Paul,  made  converts  in 
A  HUNDRED  CITIES  ;  he  had  not  been  in  journeyings  often,  in  perils  by  land  and  by 
sea,  with  the  care  of  all  the  Churches  upon  him.  He  had  Uved  in  a  heathen  city, 
a  simple  believer  in  Christ,  and,  when  the  trial-hour  came,  holding  fast  to  his 
principles ;  and  his  is  the  name  which,  before  the  judgment,  the  Judge  has  Himself 
pronounced  blessed.  We  can  scarcely  overrate  the  importance  of  the  truth  here 
taught.  How  very  few  of  us  can  really  do  much  for  Christ  I  To  how  very  few  is 
it  given  to  produce  any  great  results  in  the  world  I  How  few  can  be  builders  up  of 
the  faith,  destroyers  of  heresy,  converters  of  the  heathen ;  aye,  how  exceedingly  few 
are  they  who  can  recount  that  in  their  whole  lives  they  have  turned  one  sinner 
from  the  error  of  his  ways !  It  may  be  so  :  but  now  our  Lord  tells  us,  that  if  only 
we  have  in  our  own  lives  and  deaths  witnessed  for  Him,  if  in  our  own  souls  we  have 
held  fast  His  Word,  not  allowing  our  faith  to  be  shaken,  doing  quietly  in  our  own 
sphere  whatsoever  our  hand  findeth  to  do,  bearing  what  He  sendeth  on  us — oh,  we 
may  be  hidden  and  unknown  amid  the  thousands  of  the  people,  and  the  busy  world 
may  have  nothing  to  write  on  our  gravestone,  no  triumph  over  sin  or  suffering  to 
connect  with  us  ;  but  the  name  never  heard  among  men  shall  be  a  familiar  sound 
on  high.  n.  This  passage  implies  our  Lord's  intimate  knowledge  of  the 
CHARACTER  OP  EVERY  INDIVIDUAL  MAN.  1.  He  knows  at  this  minute  the  trial  to 
which  we  are  being  subjected,  and  our  conduct  under  it.  2.  From  the  beginning 
He  knew  all  that  we  should  be,  all  that  we  should  go  through.  We  know  no  truth 
at  once  more  solemn  and  more  encouraging  than  this:  solemn — for  what  an 
unutterable  awfulness  is  imparted  to  our  daily  existence  by  the  thought  that  we  are 
unfolding  the  roll  that  was  written  before  Adam  was  fashioned  ;  encouraging — for 
how  must  God  watch  over  this  life  of  ours,  care  for  it,  regulate  it,  its  joys  and 
sorrows,  its  cloud  and  sunshine,  if  it  is  no  chance  string  of  events,  but  a  portion 
of  His  own  plan  from  the  beginning  !  how  will  He  call  us,  each  one,  Antipas-like, 
by  his  name,  whose  every  member  of  body  and  disposition  of  soul  He  foreknew 
when  as  yet  there  was  none  of  them  1     {Bp.  Woodford.) 

Vers.  14,  15. — Thou  hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam. — The 

convictions  of  Balaam : — The  forty  years'  wandering  of  the  children  of  Israel  in 
the  wilderness  was  now  done.  The  king  of  Moab,  Balak,  alarmed  at  the  destruction 
which  had  fallen  upon  the  powerful  northern  neighbours,  and  no  doubt  unaware  of 
the  command  which  had  left  him  unharmed,  did  not  venture  upon  open  violence 
against  the  "  desert-wearied  "  tribes.  He  bethought  him  of  a  more  skilful  mode  of 
attack.  He  sent  the  elders  of  Moab  and  the  elders  of  Midian,  laden  with  presents,  the 
reward  of  divination,  to  the  "  diviner,"  or"  soothsayer" — to  Balaam.  Balaam,  the 
diviner,  waits  upon  God  for  direction.  Balaam  obeys  the  word  of  God.  He  refuses  to 
go,  and  the  messengers  return.  Balak,  however,  is  importunate.  Why  did  Balaam 
hesitate  ?  Why  did  he  bid  the  princes  tarry  yet  that  night  ?  He  asked  in  madness, 
and  he  received  the  permission  he  coveted  from  God  in  anger.  It  was  madness  in  the 
servant  of  God  to  wish  to  go  against  God's  will.  The  incident  of  the  miraculous  voice 
of  the  ass  brought  him  to  a  sense  of  his  sin.  However,  he  is  bidden  to  proceed  on  his 
mission.  Thus  far  we  read  in  Balaam's  history  the  struggle  between  the  love  of  the 
"world  and  the  overwhelming  consciousness  of  truth  in  the  same  mind.  It  is  an  in- 
structive lesson.  How  often  do  we  feel  ourselves  placed,  more  or  less,  in  the  same 
position;  our  liking,  our  ambition,  our  heart,  all  set  one  way, — our  reason,  our 
consciousness  of  truth,  our  intellectual  faith  distinctly  calling  us  the  other  I     To 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Balaam,  indeed,  the  case  was  thus  far  different  from  ours,  that  he  could  not,  in  so 
broad  and  obvious  an  instance  as  the  one  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  go  directly 
against  God.  The  voice  of  God  in  his  ears  compelled  him ;  miracles  dragged  him ;  - 
his  inspiration  overbore  him.  He  was,  as  it  were,  forced  into  speaking  the  truth. 
To  us,  alas !  the  danger  is,  in  such  sort,  greater,  that  our  consciousness  of  truth,  our 
intellectual  faith,  are  in  themselves  less  imperative,  and  are  sure  to  sink  and  die 
away  if  they  be  smothered  by  want  of  love.  Yet  we  also  know  only  too  well  what  it  is  to 
speak  out  faithfully,  to  stick  to  the  truth  in  outward  words,  to  be,  it  may  be,  its  staunch 
defenders  and  admirers,  while  our  hearts  neither  love  it  nor  obey  it ;  holding  on,  as  it 
were,  by  our  knowledge,  or  our  logic,  or  our  consistency,  whUe  our  heart  and  love 
would  fain  rebel  against  it.  A  dangerous  antagonism !  yet  one  out  of  which  there  is  a 
safe  and  holy  escape,  if  those  who  are  at  all  conscious  of  it  in  themselves  wUl  throw 
themselves,  heart  and  soul,  into  confession,  and  win  by  prayer  that  great  and  precious 
gift,  never  denied  to  those  who  pray  in  earnest,  the  heart  to  love, — the  simple,  godly 
heart  to  do  the  thing  that  they  know  to  be  right,  and  nought  beside.  Let  4^s  see  how 
it  fared  with  Balaam.  He  had  gone  home  "  to  his  place  "  by  the  Euphrates  in  disgrace. 
The  Lord  had  kept  him  back  from  honour.  How  he  returned  again  to  the  court  of 
Moab,  whether  summoned  again  by  Balak  or  of  his  own  irrepressible  ambition,  we 
are  not  told.  But  he  came.  He  found  the  children  of  Israel  still  holding  their 
encampment  on  the  acacia  plain  of  the  Jordan.  Wearied  as  they  were  with  the  desert 
life,  surrounded  by  heathen  rites  that  were  full  of  luxury  and  temptation,  might 
they  not  be  easily  led  to  bring  upon  themselves  the  curse,  which  in  his  unwilling  lips 
had  been  turned  into  a  blessing  ?  Were  it  not  a  fine  stroke  of  policy  to  make  them 
curse,  so  to  speak,  themselves  ?  No  word,  probably,  would  need  to  be  spoken,  no 
formal  scheme  proposed.  A  look,  a  gesture  might  sufl&ce.  Balak  would  be  able  to 
understand  a  slight  hint.  There  were  the  women  of  Midian,  they  took  part  in  the 
dances  and  plays  of  the  sacrifices.  Would  it  be  Balaam's  fault  if  those  hardy  desert 
warriors,  so  young,  so  impetuous,  so  dangerous  in  their  fidehty  to  the  true  God,  were 
led  by  skilful  and  unseen  management  to  partake  in  the  feasts  of  the  idol-sacrifices, 
and  by  degrees,  losing  their  allegiance  to  the  true  Jehovah,  and  breaking  the  first  of 
His  laws,  to  break  the  seventh  also,  and  unite  themselves  to  the  wanton  women  who 
had  used  every  artifice  to  lure  them  to  rebellion  and  ruin  ?  The  scheme  answered  only 
too  well.  And  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel,  not  to  be  slaked  tiU ! 
the  zeal  of  Phineas,  the  son  of  Eleazar  the  high  priest,  after  twenty-four  thousand 
had  died,  stayed  the  plague  from  the  children  of  Israel.  But  what  of  the  crafty 
politician  ?  Is  he  to  triumph  in  secret  ?  to  compass  his  ends,  and  keep  his  character 
too  V  to  cheat  God  ?  How  his  advice  and  double-dealing  became  known  to  the  Israelites 
we  are  not  told.  In  some  way,  no  doubt,  God,  whom  his  cunning  had  outraged, 
revealed  it  to  them.  "  Balaam  also,  the  son  of  Beor,  the  soothsayer,  did  the  children 
of  Israel  slay  with  the  sword,  among  them  that  were  slain  by  them."  And  from  that 
day  forth,  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  is  known  throughout  the  Holy  Scriptures,  in  the 
writings  of  prophets  and  apostles,  as  the  type  of  those  who  for  the  sake  of  the  wages 
of  unrighteousness,  of  health,  reward,  honour,  in  defiance  of  better  knowledge, 
wilfully  sin  by  casting  a  stumbling-block  before  the  children  of  God.  And  what  a 
strange  course  was  his !  strange,  I  mean,  regarded  theoretically,  and  without  reference 
to  the  weakness  and  wilfulness  of  men.  But  alas  for  the  deadly  gift  of  cleverness ! 
alas  for  the  danger  of  that  sharpness  of  wit  which  leads  us  to  endeavour  to  compass 
our  ends  by  indirect  and  circuitous  means  1  The  politician,  who  could  not  forego 
true  words,  tried  his  craft.  He  succeeded,  and  he  failed.  He  succeeded  against, 
man;  he  failed  against  God.  The  evU  that  he  planned,  by  means  of  other  men's' 
sins  he  brought  about.  The  personal  advancement  that  he  sought  was  overthrown 
by  a  miserable  death,  and  a  name  blasted  to  all  generations  in  the  inspired  oracles 
of  God.  Oh,  let  us  turn  our  eyes  upon  ourselves !  How  apt  we  are  to  totter  thus 
and  stagger  upon  the  edge  of  truth  and  duty  1  Not  indeed  visibly,  intentionally, 
distinctly  giving  it  up  and  forsaking  it ;  but  trying  to  hold  it  together  with  as  much; 
of  worldly  indulgence  and  prosperity  as  we  can  ;  trying  to  serve  God  and  mammon. 
But  if  a  man  does  thus  allow  himself  to  palter  with  that  which  ought  to  be  the 
foundation  and  basis  of  all  else,  if  he  divides  his  aim  between  two  objects  in  his 
life,  do  you  suppose  that  that  conflict  wUl  continue  long  ?  No,  by  no  means :  that 
which  the  intellect  holds  will  yield  and  give  way ;  that  which  the  heart  loves  will 
gain  strength  and  have  victory.  One  way  or  the  other,  the  worldly  heart  will  have 
its  way.  It  smothers  the  intellectual  faith.  It  necessarily  kiUs  it.  The  world 
cannot  be  taken  in  to  share  the  empire  of  the  heart  without  becoming,  ere  long,  the 
sole  ruler  and  tyrant  in  it.    It  is,  I  think,  not  to  be  denied  that  the  particular  sin 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  161 

of  Balaam,  the  sin,  I  mean,  which  consists  in  yielding  to  worldly  temptation  in 
defiance  of  better  knowledge,  as  it  was  the  characteristic  sin  of  the  Church  of 
Pergamos,  so  it  is  a  very  particular  danger  in  the  Church  of  England.  There  ia 
among  a  very  large  proportion  of  our  countrymen  a  general  knowledge  of  religion, 
however  much  it  may  be  overlaid  in  general  and  forgotten  in  the  midst  of  the  tumult 
and  interests  of  our  common  life.  In  outer  life — luxury,  fashion,  idleness,  company, 
business,  politics — think  what  multitudes  of  men  and  women,  who  know  what 
truth  is,  and  have  a  sort  of  wish  to  be  good  and  true  in  the  end,  these  things  do 
keep  from  anything  like  a  real  conversion  to  God,  a  real  yielding  of  themselves  up, 
in  body,  soul,  and  conscience,  to  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit  1  Then  blessed  be 
sickness  !  blessed  pain  !  blessed  adversity !  blessed  sorrow !  for  what  would  become 
of  this  poor  world  if  these  things  did  not  come  upon  us,  now  and  then,  to  waken 
us  up  from  this  worldly  incrustation,  this  growing  of  stone  round  about  our  hearts, 
and  force  us  to  lay  our  consciences  bare  and  sore  and  naked  before  the  merciful 
eye  of  our  Heavenly  Father !  Oh,  think  of  Balaam's  sin  !  Look  forth  upon  these 
young  men,  whose  tents  are  pitched  around  you,  by  these  *'  willow-shaded  streams." 
The  sacrifices  to  idols,  the  pleasant  games  and  plays  which  are  not  of  God,  are 
soliciting  them  daily.  The  women  of  Midian  are  around  them  to  lure  them  into 
sin.  What  if  any  of  the  old  prophets,  who  know  the  truth,  should  be  so  fond  of  his 
ease,  or  so  careful  of  his  popularity,  or  so  busy  with  his  comfort,  or  his  preferment, 
or  I  know  not  what  else,  as  to  shut  his  eyes,  to  wink  at  Israel's  sin,  and  let  God's 
children  bring  down  upon  themselves  a  curse,  which  he  would  not  utter  with  his 
lips  for  aU  the  world  ?  What  if  his  neglect  to  act  upon  his  own  convictions  should 
give  encouragement  to  them  to  forget  the  truth  that  is  in  them,  and  practically  and 
finally  to  desert  God  ?  Let  us  obey  the  holy  calling.  Kemember  the  exceeding  danger 
of  those  who  know  the  truth,  and  yet  follow  their  own  evil  likings.  Beware  of  the 
gradual  and  imperceptible  on-coming  of  that  fatal  worldliness, — like  the  sleep  of  the 
weary  traveller  among  the  Alpine  snows, — in  which  faith  inevitably  dies.  Statedly, 
regularly,  and  really  search  your  own  consciences  before  God.  {Bp.  Moberly.) 
Idolatry  and  sensuality  in  the  Church : — We  can  gather  from  the  context  that  the 
introduction  into  the  Church  of  the  world's  idolatrous  and  sensual  habits  is  denoted 
as  the  great  evil  against  which  the  Church  was  listless  and  supine.  In  the  apostolic 
day  the  fashion  of  the  world  had  what  would  be  to  us  a  grosser  form  in  its  idolatry 
and  sensuaUty ;  but  in  its  principles  and  essential  practice  it  differed  in  no  respect  then 
from  what  it  is  to-day.  Every  walk  in  life  is  full  of  idol  fanes,  before  which  the 
youth  entering  upon  his  career  is  tempted  to  worship  as  part  of  the  necessary  pro- 
gress to  preferment.  In  business  life,  in  Government  employ,  in  social  circles,  he  is 
required  to  connive  at  or  co-operate  in  falsehood  and  fraud,  and  to  adopt  a  standard 
of  morals  such  as  destroyed  the  empire  of  Kome.  The  only  alternative  is  a  bold, 
heroic  refusal,  which  thrusts  him  back  into  isolation  and  want.  No  !  not  isolation, 
not  want,  for  no  young  man  can  take  that  noble  position  in  the  fear  of  God  without 
being  fully  supplied  and  sustained  by  the  Lord  God  of  Daniel.  The  idolatry  and 
sensuality  of  the  world  go  together.  They  are  parts  of  one  whole.  Men  depart  from 
the  holy  God  and  seek  unto  idols  on  purpose  that  they  may  indulge  their  fleshly 
lusts.  Now  when  this  poison  enters  the  Church,  when  idols  are  set  up  in  the  house 
of  God,  when  the  rites  of  Molech  and  Ashtoreth  are  combined  with  the  worship  of 
Jehovah,  a  deadly  disease  threatens  the  life  of  the  Church.  The  world's  fashions, 
introduced  into  the  Church  and  allowed  to  go  unrebuked,  soon  captivate  weak  saints, 
suggest  further  compromises  to  stronger  ones,  and  lower  the  standard  of  Christian 
life  and  experience  for  all.  (if.  Crosby.)  The  doctrine  of  Balaam : — We  are  very 
much  in  the  habit  of  supposing  that  when  a  character  has  been  explained  and 
denounced  in  Scripture,  we  may  thenceforth  regard  it  both  as  very  rare  and  very  easily 
detected.  We  are  thus  naturally  led  into  a  sort  of  security  about  our  own  resem- 
blance to  the  very  persons  against  whose  sins  we  need  to  be  most  on  our  guard.  1. 
There  is  no  character  in  Scripture  concerning  which  it  is  more  necessary  to  be 
careful  against  making  these  mistakes  than  that  of  Balaam,  because  he  was  not  only 
very  bad,  but  really  very  much  better  than  many  who  consider  themselves  to  be  in 
no  danger  of  resembling  him.  The  fact  is  that  Balaam  had  about  him  many  good 
points.  There  was  just  one  thing  which  he  lacked.  What  that  one  thing  was  we 
shall  see  as  we  proceed.  I  should  say,  indeed,  that  Balaam,  if  he  were  among  us, 
would  be  considered  the  pattern  of  a  religious  character  ;  because  he  really  proposed 
to  himself  a  very  high  standard,  and  followed  it  rigidly,  and  to  his  own  cost.  How 
many  persons  are  as  scrupulous  as  Balaam  was  ?  How  many  persons  similarly 
circumstanced  would  have  hesitated  about  going  with  the  messengers  the  first  time  ? 

11 


1G2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

He  was  far  beyond  the  mere  sayer  of  religious  words.  He  was  in  a  certain  way — 
and  that  no  very  common  way — conscientious :  he  was  conscientious  to  his  cost : 
and,  more  than  this,  his  view  of  God's  requirements  in  man  was  perfectly  unex- 
ceptionable, and  such  as  to  show  no  ordinary  Divine  illumination.  For  these 
reasons  Balaam  himself  might  be  described,  up  to  a  certain  point,  as  "  holding  fast 
by  God's  name,"  and  not  denying  his  faith.  Therefore  it  is  not  so  strange  that  he 
should  be  the  sort  of  character  against  which  strictly  conscientious  persons  should 
be  warned,  and  his  the  "  doctrine  "  which  they  might  be  inclined  to  embrace.  2. 
Now  what  is  that  view  of  religion  that  may  be  considered  the  "  doctrine  of  Balaam  "  ? 
As  illustrated  by  his  character,  ifc  would  seem  to  be  this,  that  what  we  have  to  do  is 
to  serve  God  without  loving  Him ;  to  seek  our  own  will  and  our  own  ends,  and  yet 
to  contrive  to  keep  out  of  punishment  at  His  hands ;  not  to  desire  our  will  to  be 
moulded  to  God's  will,  and  to  be  subservient  to  it  readily  and  in  all  things ;  but  to 
desire  our  will  to  be  done,  as  far  as  ever  it  can  be,  within  the  strict  letter  of  God's 
commandments.  This  is  the  main  feature  in  the  "  doctrine  of  Balaam."  Strict 
duty,  without  any  love ;  resolute  observance  of  a  disagreeable  rule,  not  earnest 
obedience  to  a  loved  parent:  determination  to  escape  punishment — no  desire  to 
please  God.  Now  this  is  very  much  the  sort  of  "  religion "  into  which  many 
honourable,  upright  men  have  a  tendency  to  sink.  To  those  who  have  no  sense  of 
religious  obligation — no  dread  of  the  future — no  regard  for  God's  law — Balaam 
furnishes  no  lesson  at  all.  They  and  he  have  no  points  in  common.  You  cannot 
warn  them  against  being  like  him,  because  he  is  so  much  below  what  he  ought  to 
be.  Now,  the  particular  act  of  Balaam  alluded  to  in  the  text  is  quite  in  harmony 
with  such  a  character  as  I  have  described.  He  "  taught  Balak,"  says  St.  John,  "to 
cast  a  stumbling-block  before  the  children  of  Israel,  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto 
idols,  and  to  commit  fornication."  Balaam  would  not  curse,  because  he  was  told  in 
BO  many  words  not  to  curse ;  but  he  brought  about  a  like  end,  by  worse  means — all 
in  order  that  his  own  selfish  desires  might  be  gratified :  as  it  would  seem  they  were. 
(J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.)  Minor  departure  from  truth  : — The  carpenter's  gimlet 

makes  but  a  small  hole,  but  it  enables  him  to  drive  a  great  nail.  May  we  not  here 
see  a  representation  of  those  minor  departures  from  the  truth  which  prepare  the 
minds  of  men  for  grievous  errors,  and  of  those  thoughts  of  sin  which  open  a  way  for 
the  worst  crimes?  Beware,  then,  of  Satan's  gimlet.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Sin 
uncomely  in  the  Church : — As  a  wen  looks  worse  on  a  face  of  beauty,  and  a  skull 
on  a  bank  of  snow,  so  a  sinner  in  a  holy  church,  most  uncomely  and  loathsome. 
(T.  Guthrie.)  The  Church  as  a  whole  injured  by  individual  evil : — The  Church 
in  Pergamos  failed,  not  because  she  encouraged  the  sin  blamed,  but  because  she  did 
not  take  more  vigorous  steps  for  its  extinction.  She  did  not  sufficiently  realise  the 
fact  that  she  was  a  part  of  the  body  of  Christ,  and  that,  if  one  member  suffer,  all  the 
members  suffer  with  it.  Believers  in  her  community  were  too  easily  satisfied  with 
working  out  their  own  salvation,  and  thought  too  little  of  presenting  the  whole 
Church  "  as  a  pure  virgin  to  Christ."  Therefore  it  was  that,  even  amidst  much 
faithfulness,  they  need  to  repent  to  feel  more  deeply  than  they  did  that  "  a  little 
leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump,"  and  that  in  the  Church  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we  are 
to  a  large  extent  responsible  not  only  for  our  own  but  for  our  neighbours'  sins.  By 
keeping  up  the  Christian  tone  of  the  whole  Church  the  tone  of  each  member  of  the 
Church  is  heightened.     {W.  Milligan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Repent ;  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly. — The  necessity  of 
immediate  repentance : — I.  What  that  .  bepentance  ib  that  is  hebe  enjoined. 
Eepentance  in  Scripture  has  a  threefold  acceptation.  1.  It  is  taken  for  the  first  act 
by  which  the  soul  turns  from  sin  to  God ;  the  first  dividing  stroke  that  separates 
between  sin  and  the  heart;  the  first  step  and  advance  that  a  sinner  makes  to 
holiness ;  the  first  endeavours  and  throes  of  a  new  birth.  2.  It  is  taken  for  the 
whole  course  of  a  pious  life,  comprising  the  whole  actions  a  man  performs  from 
first  to  last  inclusively ;  from  his  first  turning  from  a  wicked  life  to  the  last  period 
of  a  godly.  3.  Eepentance  is  taken  for  a  man's  turning  to  God  after  the  guilt  of 
Bome  particular  sin.  It  differs  from  the  former  thus :  that  the  former  is  from  a 
state  of  sin :  this  latter  only  from  a  sinful  act.  No  repentance  precedes  the  former, 
but  this  supposes  a  true  repentance  to  have  gone  before.  This  repentance,  there- 
fore, builds  upon  the  former ;   and  it  is  that  which  is  here  intended.     II.  Abgu- 

MENTS   TO   ENGAGE  US  IN  THE   SPEEDY  AND   IMMEDIATE   EXERCISE  OF  THIS   DUTY.       1.    No 

man  can  be  secure  of  the  future.  Neither,  indeed,  will  men  act  as  if  they  were  in 
things  that  concern  this  life,  for  no  man  willingly  defers  his  pleasures.    And  did 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION,  163 

men  here  well  compute  the  many  frailties  of  nature,  and  further  add  the  con- 
tingencies of  chance,  how  quickly  a  disease  from  within,  or  a  blow  from  without, 
may  tear  down  the  strongest  constitution,  certainly  they  would  ensure  eternity 
upon  somethmg  else  than  a  life  as  uncertain  as  the  air  that  feeds  it.  2.  Supposing 
the  allowance  of  time,  yet  we  cannot  be  sure  of  power  to  repent.  It  is  very  possible, 
that  by  the  insensible  encroaches  of  sin  a  man's  heart  may  be  so  hardened  as  to 
have  neither  power  nor  will  to  repent,  though  he  has  time  and  opportunity.  The 
longer  the  heart  and  sin  converse  together,  the  more  familiar  they  will  grow  ;  and 
then,  the  stronger  the  familiarity,  the  harder  the  separation.  A  man  at  first  is 
strong  and  his  sin  is  weak,  and  he  may  easily  break  the  neck  of  it  by  a  mature 
repentance ;  but  his  own  deluding  heart  tells  him  that  he  had  better  repent  here- 
after ;  that  is,  when,  on  the  contrary,  he  himself  is  deplorably  weak  and  his  sin 
invincibly  strong.  3.  Admitting  a  man  has  both  time  and  grace  to  repent,  yet  by 
such  delay  the  work  wiU  be  incredibly  more  difl&cult.  The  longer  a  debt  lies 
unpaid,  the  greater  it  grows ;  and  not  discharged,  is  quickly  multiplied.  The 
sin  to  be  repented  of  will  be  the  greater,  and  power  and  strength  to  repent  by  will 
be  less.  And  though  a  man  escapes  death,  the  utmost  effect  of  his  distemper,  yet 
certainly  he  will  find  it  something  to  be  cut  and  scarified  and  lanced  and  to 
endure  all  the  tortures  of  a  deferred  cure.  We  find  not  such  fierce  expressions  of 
vengeance  against  any  sinner,  as  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  Deut.  xxix.  20,  21,  discharges 
against  him  that  obstinately  delayed  his  repentance.  (1)  Because  it  is  the  abuse 
of  a  remedy.  Certainly  it  cannot  but  be  the  highest  provocation  to  see  guilt  kick 
at  mercy,  and  presumption  take  advantage  merely  from  a  redundancy  of  com- 
passion. He  that  will  fight  it  out,  and  not  surrender,  only  because  he  has  articles 
of  peace  offered  to  him,  deserves  to  feel  the  sword  of  an  unmerciful  enemy.  (2) 
The  reason  why  God  is  exasperated  by  our  delaying  this  duty  is,  because  it  clearly 
shows  that  a  man  does  not  love  it,  as  a  duty,  but  only  intends  to  use  it  for  an 
expedient  of  escape.  It  is  not  because  it  is  pleasing  to  God,  grateful  to  an  offended 
majesty,  or  because  he  apprehends  a  worth  and  excellency  in  the  thing  itself ;  for 
then  he  would  set  about  it  immediately :  for  love  is  quick  and  active,  and  desire 
hates  all  delay.  (3)  A  third  reason  that  God's  displeasure  so  implacably  burns 
against  this  sin  is,  because  it  is  evidently  a  counterplotting  of  God,  and  being  wise 
above  the  prescribed  methods  of  salvation,  to  which  God  makes  the  immediate 
dereUction  of  sin  necessary.  But  he  that  defers  his  repentance  makes  this  his 
principle,  to  live  a  sinner  and  die  a  penitent.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  To  him  that 
overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna. — Christian  victory: — The 
Christian  life  is  often  compared  in  Scripture  to  "  a  warfare."  It  is  not  enough  to 
put  on  the  armour  and  to  commence  the  battle.  He  that  overcometh,  and  he  alone, 
will  receive  the  salutation,  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  But  we  are 
not  left  to  fight  without  encouragement.  As  generals  before  a  battle  go  in  front  of 
their  troops  to  stimulate  them  to  valour,  so  Christ,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation, 
leads  on  the  consecrated  hosts  of  His  elect.  I.  The  promise.  1.  The  promise 
of  the  hidden  manna.  God  fed  the  IsraeUtes  in  the  wilderness  with  manna.  A 
portion  of  this  was  laid  by  in  the  ark,  and  thus  was  hidden  from  public  view. 
Christ,  speaking  of  the  manna  as  a  type  of  Himself,  said,  "  I  am  the  Bread  which 
came  down  from  heaven."  Jesus  is  the  food  of  our  faith,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  He  is  the  food  of  our  love,  "  We  love  Him 
because  He  first  loved  us."  He  is  the  food  of  our  obedience,  "  The  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us."  He  is  the  food  of  our  peace,  for  when  "justified  by  faith,  we 
have  peace  with  God."  He  is  the  food  of  our  joy,  for  if  •*  we  joy  in  God  "  it  is 
"  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  He  is  the  food  of  our  hope,  "  that  blessed  hope, 
the  glorious  appearing  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  The  manna 
which  sustained  the  Israelites  was  evidently  the  gift  of  God.  And  so  this  "  hidden 
manna  "  is  from  heaven.  It  is  no  contrivance  of  man,  no  philosophy  of  human 
invention.  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son."  It  is 
spoken  of  as  the  "  hidden  manna."  Such  is  the  Christian's  life.  "  Our  life  is  hid 
with  Christ  in  God."  The  outward  effects  of  it  may  be  seen,  but  the  inner  life  is 
invisible.  So  is  the  nourishing  of  the  life.  You  may  see  the  Christian  on  his 
knees,  you  may  hear  the  words  which  he  utters,  but  you  cannot  see  the  streams  of 
Divine  influence  which  are  poured  into  his  spirit ;  nor  hear  the  sweet  whispers  of 
Divine  love  which  fill  him  with  joy ;  nor  comprehend  the  peace  passing  all  under- 
standing which  he  is  permitted  to  experience.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with 
them  that  fear  Him."  Were  this  promise  merely  the  reward  of  final  victory,  that 
victory  itself  would  never  be  gained.     We  need  to  eat  this  manna  during  our 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

pilgrimage.  We  cannot  live  without  it.  Every  act  of  overcoming  will  be  followed 
by  a  verification  of  the  promise,  "  I  will  give  him  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna." 
Yet  we  must  look  beyond  the  present  life  for  its  full  accomplishment.  As  the 
manna  was  hidden  in  the  ark,  and  that  ark  was  hidden  behind  the  curtain  of  the 
holy  of  holies,  so  the  Christian's  hope  "  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  sure  and  stead- 
fast, enters  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil."  Those  joys  we  cannot  yet  con- 
jecture ;  their  splendour  is  too  intense.  2.  The  promise  of  the  white  stone.  At  a 
time  when  houses  of  public  entertainment  were  less  common,  private  hospitality 
was  the  more  necessary.  When  one  person  was  received  kindly  by  another,  or  a 
contract  of  friendship  was  entered  into,  the  tessera  was  given.  It  was  so  named 
from  its  shape,  being  four-sided ;  it  was  sometimes  of  wood,  sometimes  of  stone ;  it 
was  divided  into  two  by  the  contracting  parties ;  each  wrote  his  own  name  on  half 
of  the  tessera ;  then  they  exchanged  pieces,  and  therefore  the  name  or  device  on 
the  piece  of  the  tessera  which  each  received  was  the  name  the  other  person  had 
written  upon  it,  and  which  no  one  else  knew  but  him  who  received  it.  It  was 
carefully  prized,  and  entitled  the  bearer  to  protection  and  hospitality.  Plautus,  in 
one  of  his  plays,  refers  to  this  custom.  Hanno  inquires  of  a  stranger  where  he 
may  find  Agorastocles,  and  discovers  to  his  surprise  that  he  is  addressing  the 
object  of  his  search.  "If  so,"  he  says,  "compare,  if  you  please,  this  hospitable 
tessera ;  here  it  is ;  I  have  it  with  me."  Agorastocles  replies,  "  It  is  the  exact 
counterpart ;  I  have  the  other  part  at  home."  Hanno  responds,  "  0  my  friend,  I 
rejoice  to  meet  thee ;  thy  father  was  my  friend,  my  guest ;  I  divided  with  him  this 
hospitable  tessera."  "  Therefore,"  said  Agorastocles,  "  thou  shalt  have  a  home 
with  me,  for  I  reverence  hospitality."  Beautiful  illustration  of  gospel  truth !  The 
Saviour  visits  the  sinner's  heart,  and  being  received  as  a  guest,  bestows  the  white 
stone,  the  token  of  His  unchanging  love.  He  who  chooses  the  sinner's  heart  as  His 
banqueting  chamber,  spreads  there  His  choicest  gifts — His  exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises.  His  finished  sacrifice.  His  human  sympathy.  His  perfect 
example.  His  pure  precepts.  His  all-prevailing  intercession,  the  various  develop- 
ments of  His  infinite  love.  He  enrols  our  name  among  His  friends.  "  He  makes 
an  everlasting  covenant  with  us,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."  He  promises 
never  to  leave  nor  forsake  us.  He  tells  us  we  "  shall  never  perish."  He  gives  us 
the  tessera,  the  white  stone  1  Is  not  this  "  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,"  the  "  earnest 
of  the  promised  possession  "  ?  Does  not  His  voice  in  our  heart  echo  to  His  voice  in 
the  written  Word?  On  this  white  stone  is  inscribed  a  " new  name."  The  part  of 
the  tessera  which  each  of  the  contracting  parties  received  contained  the  name  of 
the  other.  And  therefore  the  "new  name"  on  the  "  white  stone"  which  he  that 
overcometh  receives  is  that  of  Him  who  gives  it.  By  the  unbeliever  God  is  known 
as  Power,  as  Majesty,  as  Justice.  The  Christian  alone  knows  Him  as  "  Love." 
He  was  once  Kuler — now  He  is  Friend ;  He  was  once  Judge — now  He  is  Father. 
Do  you  know  God  by  His  "  new  name  "  ?  Do  you  so  know  Him  as  to  wish  no 
longer  to  hide /rom  Him,  but  to  hide  in  Him,  as  the  only  home  in  which  you  can  be 
safe  and  happy  ?  Then,  everywhere,  in  every  city  and  every  village,  on  the  desert 
and  on  the  ocean,  in  the  solitude  of  secrecy  and  in  the  solitude  of  a  crowd,  in  the 
bustle  of  business  and  in  the  sick  chamber,  a  Friend  is  at  hand  who  will  always 
recognise  the  white  stone  He  gave  us  as  a  token  of  His  love.  We  have  only  to 
present  it  to  claim  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise.  What  Divine  entertainment  we 
shall  receive!  What  safety  from  peril  I  What  succour  in  difi&culty!  What 
comfort  in  trouble  I  What  white  raiment  I  What  heavenly  food !  What  exalted 
fellowship!  What  secure  repose!  A  day  is  coming  when  we  must  leave  the 
homes  of  earth,  however  endeared,  and  embrace  for  the  last  time  the  friends 
united  to  us  as  our  own  souls.  What  kind  roof  will  receive  us?  What  loving 
friend  will  welcome  us  ?  We  shall  not  have  left  our  best  treasure  behind !  No ! 
we  shall  carry  the  white  stone  with  us ;  and  looking  for  no  inferior  abode,  shall 
advance  at  once  right  up  to  the  palace  of  the  Great  King.  We  present  the  tessera ; 
the  "  new  name  "  is  legible  upon  it ;  the  angelic  guards  recognise  the  symbol ;  the 
everlasting  gates  lift  up  their  heads ;  and  the  voice  of  Jesus  Himself  invites  us  to 
enter!  II.  The  condition  annexed.  A  great  war  is  being  waged.  It  is  not 
merely  between  the  Church  as  a  whole  and  the  powers  of  darkness  as  a  whole  ;  it 
is  not  merely  an  affair  of  strategy  between  two  vast  armies,  wherein  skilful 
manoeuvres  determine  the  issue,  many  on  either  side  never  coming  into  actual 
combat ;  but  it  is  also  a  duel,  for  every  Christian  has  to  fight  hand  to  hand  with 
the  enemy.  God,  as  our  Creator  and  Redeemer,  justly  demands  our  obedience  and 
love.    Whatever  interferes  with  these  claims  is  an  enemy  summoning  us  to  battle. 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  165 

The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  draw  up  their  battalions  in  imposing  array.  If 
we  would  possess  the  promise,  we  must  "  overcome  "  them,  A  mere  profession  of 
religion  is  of  no  avail.  We  must  devote  ourselves  entirely  and  unreservedly  to  this 
great  daily  battle  of  life.  It  is  a  warfare  until  death.  While  we  are  in  the  body  it 
wiU  be  always  true,  '*  We  wrestle."  The  oldest  Christian  cannot  lay  aside  his 
weapons.  The  whole  of  the  way,  up  to  the  very  gate  of  heaven,  is  beset  with  foes, 
and  we  must  fight  to  the  last  if  we  would  overcome  and  enter  in.  Ah,  it  is  no  soft 
flowery  meadow  along  which  we  may  languidly  stroll,  but  a  rough,  craggy  cliff  that 
we  must  climb.  "  To  him  that  overcometh ! "  It  is  no  smooth,  placid  stream  along 
which  we  may  dreamily  float,  but  a  tempestuous  ocean  we  must  stem.  "  To  him 
that  overcometh  I "  It  is  no  lazy  lolling  in  a  cushioned  chariot  that  bears  us  on 
without  fatigue  and  peril,  but  plodding  painfully  in  heavy  marching  order  up  the 
long  and  weary  and  beleagured  road  of  self-sacrifice.  "  To  him  that  overcometh !  " 
It  is  not  a  time  of  listless  repose,  of  careless  mirth,  as  if  no  danger  threatened,  no 
foe  were  near.  We  fight  in  good  company.  The  truly  wise  of  all  ages  are 
on  our  side.  We  have  the  assured  hope  of  victory.  {Newman  Hall,  LL.D.) 
The  manna  and  the  stone  : — In  Pergamos  there  were  two  houses,  which  represented 
the  two  forces  that  made  life  a  battle  to  the  Christian.  One  was  the  Church  of 
Christ  and  the  other  was  the  temple  of  idolatry.  When  a  man  left  that  gorgeous 
temple  in  the  great  square  he  left  everything  that  appealed  to  ease  and  pride  and 
ambition.  When  he  entered  the  poor  little  church  in  the  back  lane,  he  entered  into 
conflict  with  his  heart  and  with  the  world.  That  single  renimciation  of  the  sweets 
and  successes  of  life  was  but  the  beginning  of  the  strife.  In  the  Church  itself  were 
some  who  taught  that  the  Christian  need  not  break  with  his  former  life  in  choosing 
Christ.  The  promise  in  the  text  corresponds  to  that  temptation.  Let  these 
worshippers  of  the  Christ  keep  from  the  meats  of  the  idol  shrine,  and  they  shall 
feast  on  the  best  in  the  house  of  God.  Let  them  refuse  to  be  votaries  of  the  foul 
altar,  and  they  shall  be  very  priests  of  the  holy  of  holies.  Let  them  forego  the 
society  of  the  heathen,  and  they  shall  be  the  close  and  particular  friends  of  Him 
who  is  the  visible  Divinity  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary.    I.  A  provision  peculiar  to 

THE  SANCTUARY  IS  PROMISED  TO  HIM  THAT  OVERCOMETH.     Let  US  be  loyal  tO  JeSUS  HOW, 

as  we  see  Him  not,  and  at  the  end  of  the  brief  trial  we  shall  come  face  to  face  with 
Him.  He  shall  look  on  us  with  joy.  He  shall  lead  us  forward,  and  name  us  to  aU 
heaven.  He  of  whom  we  have  had  so  many  thoughts,  and  to  whom  we  have 
winged  so  many  words,  shall  be  a  real  and  close  presence.  And  that  hidden  manna, 
laid  bare  thus  to  our  adoring  gaze,  is  no  mere  feast  for  our  eyes,  but  true  food  for 
our  soul.  That  near  and  constant  companionship  with  Jesus  shall  cheer  and 
strengthen  and  exalt  our  life.  In  new  knowledge  of  Him,  in  new  love,  in  new 
likeness,  we  shall  receive  Him  ever  anew  and  ever  more  fully.  How  poor,  then, 
how  altogether  past  and  perished,  are  the  joys  for  which  we  almost  bartered  the 
rich  provision  of  the  eternal  sanctuary !  Our  gracious  Lord  does  not,  after  all, 
make  us  wait  for  the  prize  until  the  fight  is  won.  He  brings  to  us,  even  in  the 
stress  of  the  struggle,  a  foretaste  of  the  feast.  He  makes  our  poor,  fainting  heart 
a  sanctuary,  and  turns  our  faith  into  a  sacred  ark  for  the  manna.  We  have  Him 
in  us,  and  heaven  with  Him.     So  we  have  food  of  which  the  world  knows  nothing. 

II.    A    DIGNITY   PECULIAR   TO   THE    SANCTUARY   IS   PROMISED    TO   HIM   THAT   OVERCOMETH. 

To  have  a  right  to  enter  the  holiest,  and  to  look  on  its  secrets,  meant,  indeed,  no 
less  than  to  be  High  Priest.  No  other  had  the  privilege  of  lifting  the  veil.  This 
was  an  honour  so  great  that  it  was  solitary.  He  who  was  called  of  God  to  this 
dignity  wore  on  his  heart  a  symbol  of  it.  This  was  the  mystic  Urim  and  Thummim 
— the  light  and  the  perfection.  Like  the  glory  over  the  ark,  it  was  the  symbol  of 
Jehovah  Himself — the  Infinite  in  purity  and  in  loveliness.  This  diamond  was 
likely  the  one  stone  of  its  kind  known  to  Israel,  for  the  gem  so  named  as  on  the 
breastplate  was  assuredly  a  commoner  jewel.  This  unique  stone  was  white  with  the 
very  splendour  of  its  shining,  and  it  was  given  to  Aaron  as  the  badge  of  his  dignity. 
With  that  upon  his  heart  he  had  assurance  of  access  to  the  very  glory  of  God. 
Such  was  the  dignity  promised  to  those  who  kept  their  feet  from  the  threshold  of 
the  heathen  temple.  Let  them  care  nothing  for  the  social  standing  which  would  be 
theirs  as  worshippers  of  the  idol,  and  instead  they  shall  have  the  loftiest  rank  in 
the  home  of  God.  Theirs  to  go  to  the  inmost,  holiest  spot,  and  to  have  the 
foremost  favour,  and  do  the  foremost  service.  And  to  us,  tried  by  the  like 
seductions,  is  the  same  cheer  sent.  If  we,  after  all,  do  cling  to  the  Lover  of  our 
soul.  He  shall  at  once  put  into  our  hand  the  mysti<j  stone  which  means  so  much. 
Now,  even  as  we  war,  is  the  priest's  badge  hung  on  the  soldier's  breastplate.    The 


166  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

TJrim  of  old  was  but  a  dead  stone,  and  it  lay  but  on  the  breast.  It  was  but  an 
outward  symbol  of  God.  This  white  stone  is  lustrous  with  the  very  Light,  which 
is  God,  and  it  is  hidden  within  the  breast  itself.  The  upshining  of  faith,  the  far- 
darting  beams  of  hope,  and  the  outspreading  glow  of  love  are  glories  born  of  God'a 
own  glory.  A  Divine  nature  begins  at  the  centre  of  the  human  nature,  and  as 
the  Christian  obeys  it,  it  grows.  III.  A  communion  peculiar  to  the  sanctuary  is 
PROMISED  TO  HIM  THAT  ovERCOMETH.  The  Urim  of  the  High  Priest  was  sacred 
because  of  the  sacred  purpose  to  which  it  was  put  as  a  symbol  of  God.  But  it  was 
made  yet  holier  by  a  more  personal  connection  with  Him.  It  is  supposed,  at  least, 
that  graven  on  the  flashing  stone  were  the  four  sacred  letters  which  express  the 
thrice  holy  name  of  Jehovah.  So  intimately  did  the  Jews  associate  the  word  with 
the  person  that  they  forbore  to  utter  it.  It  stood  for  all  of  God  which  He  had 
made  known  to  men.  To  see  it  was  to  see,  through  it,  the  Invisible  One.  When 
the  priest,  therefore,  found  the  name  written  on  the  stone,  he  understood  that  God 
was  to  be  his,  and  to  be  with  him.  As  if  from  the  midst  of  very  glory  the 
Glorious  One  was  to  draw  near  to  him.  Whenever  in  secret  he  laid  bare  the 
hidden  name  his  spirit  was  hushed  by  the  Holy  Presence.  He  heard  a  gentle  yet 
majestic  voice  whose  words  he  felt  as  very  love  and  very  truth.  He  let  his  own 
heart  answer,  and  knew  that  his  thoughts  were  pulsing  in  an  ear  close  and  quick. 
Such  a  solemn  and  yet  blessed  fellowship  was  the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  priest. 
It  is  promised  also  to  those  who  shall  let  the  friendships  of  earth  go  rather  than 
belie  their  friendship  with  Jesus.  To  them,  indeed,  an  intimacy  even  nearer  and 
dearer  still  is  here  prefigured.  In  the  white  stone  which  they  wear  is  set  a  new 
word  for  God.  He  is  to  let  them  know  what  none  else  has  learned  as  to  what  He 
is.  By  the  lips  of  Jesus  He  is  to  unveil  His  heart  in  a  special  way  to  them.  This 
third  hidden  thing,  like  the  other  two,  is  a  boon  of  which  we  may  have  the  first- 
fruits  now.  Like  those  Christians  of  JPergamos  we  take  on  us  the  name  of  Christ. 
Let  us  but  hold  it  fast,  as  they  did,  in  spite  of  every  temptation  to  deny  our  faith, 
and  we  shall  in  that  very  loyalty  attain  a  special  communion  with  our  Lord,  and 
receive  a  special  name  for  God.  Heaven  will  but  make  this  name  the  dearer  and  the 
deeper  a  secret  between  the  soul  and  its  God.  (D.  Burns.)  The  spiritual  warfare, 
and  the  Divine  promise  : — I.  The  spiritual  warfare.  1.  We  must  overcome  the  evil 
that  is  within  ourselves.  The  best  of  men  have  spoken  with  sorrow  of  the  state  of 
their  own  hearts.  "  In  many  things  we  all  offend."  "  If  we  say  we  have  no  sin,"  &c. 
"  Wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  ?  "  &c.  The  Christian  Church  has 
always  recognised  the  same  mournful  truth.  The  Te  Deum  Laudamus  is  the 
greatest  Christian  hymn.  It  is  a  lofty  song  of  faith,  hope,  and  triumph ;  but  a 
trembling  undertone  of  sadness  runs  through  its  joyous  praise.  "Vouchsafe,  O 
Lord,  to  keep  us  this  day  without  sin.  0  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  have  mercy 
upon  us."  The  reason  why  good  men  see  and  feel  the  evil  within  them  is  that 
they  are  good  men.  The  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  them  and  His  light  reveals  the 
soul  to  itself.  The  holier  we  are,  the  more  shall  we  feel  our  own  imperfections. 
But  it  is  not  enough  to  feel  and  bewail  the  evil ;  we  should  also  overcome  it.  The 
human  heart  resembles  a  garden.  If  rightly  cared  for,  it  will  grow  flowers  of 
greatest  beauty  and  trees  abundant  in  fruit;  but  if  neglected,  it  will  put  forth 
noxious  weeds  and  worthless  thorns  and  briars.  2.  We  must  overcome  the 
opposition  of  the  world.  The  Christians  at  Ephesus  fought  against  error,  and 
overcame  it,  and  hence  the  praise  given  to  them.  There  are  two  ways  in  which 
you  may  attempt  to  overcome  error.  First,  you  may  make  direct  war  against 
it ;  you  may  use  arguments,  and  show  that  it  is  error  and  not  truth,  a  phantom 
and  not  any  real  thing  whatsoever.  Your  mind  is  the  bow,  your  arguments  are 
the  arrows ;  the  bow  may  be  strong,  and  the  arrows  sharp  and  weU  aimed ;  but 
what  matters  it  ?  They  can  do  but  little  harm  to  the  phantom.  The  second 
method  of  opposing  error  is  the  establishment  of  positive  truth.  When  the  fire 
of  the  glowworm  begins  to  pale  and  the  birds  stir  among  the  branches  and  the 
dawn  opens  in  the  east,  the  ghost  in  a  great  play  is  made  to  vanish  from  the  sight. 
The  spirit  of  the  world  is  also  to  be  overcome.  There  is  nothing  more  difficult  to 
overcome  than  this.  A  man  may  reason  against  false  doctrines  and  confute  their 
teachers  ;  and  he  may  have  courage,  and  defy  persecution  in  aU  its  forms.  But  this 
spirit  is  subtle,  silent,  and  penetrating.  Living  within  the  circle  of  its  influence, 
we  can  hardly  escape  its  effects.  It  is  like  an  impure  atmosphere ;  if  you  breathe 
it  at  all,  you  must  inhale  the  poison.  3.  We  have  to  overcome  the  influence  of 
the  Wicked  One.  Deceit,  fraud,  guile,  malice,  and  all  the  serpent  qualities  are 
ascribed  to  him  ;  and  of  him  it  may  be  said,  *•  Dust  shall  be  the  serpent's  meat." 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  167 

Tliis  evil  spirit  is  called  "  the  Tempter."  He  showed  our  Saviour  aU  the  kingdoms 
of  the  world,  and  said,  "  Worship  me,  and  this  power  and  glory  shall  be  Thine." 
He  is  ever  reveahng  such  things  to  men.  True,  they  are  only  phantom  kingdoms 
which  he  paints  before  the  imagination  ;  but  then  they  appear  most  real  at  the 
time.  The  question  we  have  to  decide  is,  Shall  we  fall  down  before  the  Tempter 
like  the  first  Adam,  or  overcome  with  "  the  Second  Man,  the  Lord  from  heaven  "  ? 
n.  The  Divine  pbomise.  1.  Christ  strengthens  and  supports  the  soul  in  its  conflict 
with  evil.  Let  the  experience  of  the  apostles  illustrate  this.  Li  their  outward 
circumstances  they  had  all  the  elements  of  unhappiness  and  misery.  But  a  greater 
Power  was  for  them  than  that  by  which  they  were  opposed.  The  promised  and 
mysterious  Presence  followed  them  through  all  the  trials,  temptations,  and  sorrows 
of  life.  They  fought,  overcame,  and  received  the  crown  of  victory.  *'  Li  all  these 
things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us."  We  should 
mark  their  experience  at  the  time  of  their  great  conflict.  The  world  frowned,  but 
heaven  smiled  upon  their  spirit.  They  were  not  only  able  to  withstand  the  enemy, 
but  they  had  peace,  joy,  and  consolation  in  the  midst  of  the  strife.  "  The  peace  of 
God  " — a  plentiful  stream  from  the  fountain  of  all  blessedness — flowed  into  their 
hearts.  2.  The  strength  which  Christ  gives  is  known  only  to  the  soul  who  receives 
it.  It  is  "hidden  manna."  Nature  has  her  "open  secrets."  They  are  exposed 
to  the  gaze  of  all,  but  aU  have  not  the  power  to  behold  them — open  and  yet  secret. 
This  applies  to  the  spiritual  life.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear 
Him."  The  Divine  energy  that  braces  the  mind  and  heart  for  noble  deeds; 
the  peace  which  results  from  perfect  reconciliation  to  God ;  the  consolation 
imparted  to  the  soul  by  His  Spirit — these  are  the  open  secrets  of  religion.  They 
are  open  and  clear  as  daylight.  But  from  the  unbelieving,  from  the  proud,  from 
the  worldly,  and  from  the  disobedient  they  are  concealed.  Being  unfelt  they  must 
be  unknown,  for  they  are  revealed  to  the  heart  rather  than  to  the  intellect. 
{T.  Jones.)  The  laurels  of  a  victorious  life  : — I.  Divine  sustentation.  1.  His 
doctrines  are  bread  to  the  intellect.  2.  His  fellowship  is  bread  to  the  heart. 
3.  His  Spirit  is  bread  to  the  whole  life.  H.  Divine  distinction.  1.  "  The  sign  of 
distinction."  "  A  white  stone."  He  will  have  fuU  admission  into  aU  the  honours 
of  eternity.  2.  The  character  of  the  distinction.  {Homilist.)  Moral  conqu£St 
and  its  destiny : — I.  The  victobt.  The  life  of  the  good  is  a  stern  moral  eoE^ct, 
pervading  every  sphere  of  life — the  home,  the  mart,  the  shop,  &c.  It  is  impossible 
to  go  where  the  strife  is  not.  In  this  way  character  is  tested  and  developed,  and  our 
attachment  to  Christ  revealed.  1.  Moral  conquest  is  required,  not  an  indolent 
evasion  of  the  strife.  2.  Moral  conquest  is  required,  not  a  cowardly  retreat  in  the 
conflict  of  life.  3.  Moral  conquest  is  required,  not  an  easy  method  of  attaining  the 
dignity  of  the  future  life.  H.  The  repast.  1.  This  repast  is  in  sublime  contrast 
to  any  other  that  can  be  provided.  2.  It  is  concealed  from  the  unsanctified  gaze  of 
men.  3.  It  wiU  give  eternal  satisfaction  to  aU  who  shall  partake  of  it.  HI.  The 
BEVEiATioN.  1.  The  Christian  victor  will  enter  upon  the  highest  method  of  moral 
life.  2.  The  Christian  victor  will  enjoy  the  most  complete  revelation  of  God. 
Lessons:  1.  Learn  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith.  2.  Persevere  unto  victory. 
3.  Take  courage  from  this  glimpse  of  your  reward.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  rewards  of  the  conquering  Christian : — I.  The  text  is  addressed  to  "  him 
that  overcometh."  1.  The  man  to  whom  this  description  can  be  appUed  must 
certainly  be  one  who  knows  that  he  has  spiritual  enemies  assailing  him.  He  must 
have  discovered  that  he  has  interests  at  stake,  which  the  world,  the  flesh,  ajid  the 
devil  unite  in  opposing.  The  idea  of  a  victory  necessarily  presupposes  a  contest. 
2.  The  language  before  us  must  imply,  therefore,  that  1±ie  man  to  whom  these 
blessings  are  promised  is  contending  with  the  enemies  by  whom  he  finds  himself 
surrounded.  It  describes  the  Christian,  not  as  the  friend  of  the  world,  but  the 
determined  opposer  of  its  corrupt  maxims  and  customs ;  not  as  the  obedient  slave  of 
the  prince  of  darkness,  but  his  decided  foe.  It  is  this  habitual  conflict  with  evil 
which  constitutes  the  great  difference  between  the  servant  of  God  and  the  man  of  the 
world.  It  is  this  which  testifies  that  our  understandings  are  enlightened,  that  our 
conscience  is  on  the  side  of  God,  that  our  affections  have  been  touched  by  His  grace, 
and  a  principle  of  a  new  and  spiritual  life  coumiunicated  to  our  souls.  But  we  must 
not  stop  here.  3.  The  texts  leads  us  to  infer  that  the  Christian  is  actually  over- 
coming his  enemies.  The  world  is  gradually  losing  its  power  over  him  ;  Satan  is 
bruised  underneath  his  feet  ;  and  as  for  his  lusts,  they  are  one  by  one  weakened  and 
subdued.  Oh  what  a  blessed  victory  is  thisl  Who  does  not  long  to  share  in  its 
honours  and  inherit  its  rewards?    But  these  rewards  are  not  easily  attained,  neither 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  h, 

is  this  victory  easily  won.  No  mortal  power  can  achieve  it.  The  victory  must  be 
ascribed  to  God.  It  is  He  who  gives  us  at  first  a  disposition  to  struggle  with  our 
adversaries ;  it  is  He  who  crowns  that  struggle  with  success.  II.  But  though  the 
victory  is  the  Lord's,  He  often  condescends  to  speak  of  it  as  attained  by  the  Christian 
himself  ;  and  He  promises  him  in  the  text  a  gracious  and  kich  rewabd.  1.  One  of 
the  blessings  comprehended  in  this  promise  is  pardon.  But  a  mere  acquittal, 
precious  as  it  is  to  us,  is  too  poor  a  gift  for  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  to  bestow. 
2.  He  adds  to  it  the  blessing  of  adoption.  God  Himself  "  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called 
his  God,"  and  prepares  for  His  long  lost  but  now  recovered  son  a  never  ending  feast 
of  joy.  3.  Hence  spiritual  provision  is  another  blessing  included  in  this  promise. 
(G.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  hidden  manna  : — I.  There  is  a  victory  to  be  gained. 

1.  We  must  overcome  Satan.  He  was  not  afraid  to  assail  our  blessed  Lord.  We 
have  times  of  special  darkness  and  assault.  2.  There  is  a  victory  over  ourselves ; 
over  the  evil  of  our  own  hearts ;  over  the  corruption  of  our  own  natures.  3.  You 
must  overcome  false  doctrines.  You  must  resist  all  unscriptural  opinions.  4.  If 
there  is  any  easily-besetting  sin,  any  marked  peculiarity  of  your  condition  which  has 
a  tendency  to  evil,  it  must  be  overcome.  Is  there  constitutional  temperament  which 
is  unfavourable  to  virtue  ?  Bring  your  body  into  subjection.  5.  Lastly,  there  is 
victory  over  the  world  ;  and  in  two  forms  of  it — first,  as  intimidating,  and  second,  as 
persecuting.  Men  and  women  are  victors  on  earth  as  they  adhere  to  the  truth,  as 
they  practise  virtue,  and  do  the  will  of  God,  and  are  conformed  to  the  image  and 
example  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  II.  The  privileges  that  accompany  the  conquest 
THAT  is  gained.  1.  Here  is  the  hidden  manna ;  that  is  the  first  thing.  It  is  the 
secret  hidden  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  efficacy,  power,  and  satisfaction  of 
the  truth  and  doctrine  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Let  the  believer  eat  and  be  satisfied ; 
satisfied  in  the  love  of  God,  in  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  in  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  2.  And  I  will  give  him  a  white  stone.  This  indicates  absolution  from 
all  sin  and  the  forgiveness  of  all  iniquity.  There  is  forgiveness  in  the  court  of 
heaven,  and  in  the  court  of  our  own  consciences.  3.  Lastly,  it  is  said  that  in  the 
stone  there  shall  be  a  new  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth,  saving  he  that 
receiveth  it.  We  may  take  a  person  to  be  a  hypocrite  and  a  castaway,  when  God 
Bees  him  to  be  His  child.  No  one  knows  but  God  and  ourselves.  Judge  not  others ; 
judge  yourself.  {Jas.  Straiten.)  A  white  stone. — A  white  stone  : — I.  Victory. 
There  is  before  my  mind's  eye  a  vision  of  the  ancient  Olympic  games.  Vast 
amphitheatre,  with  seats  rising  tier  on  tier,  crowded  with  eager  and  excited  spectators. 
Sweet  perfume  drops  through  the  canopy  which  shelters  from  the  burning  sun,  and 
clouds  of  dust  rise  from  the  chariot-wheels,  from  the  glowing  hoofs  of  the  horses, 
and  from  the  swift  feet  of  those  who  run.  By  and  by  I  hear  a  mighty  shout  that 
almost  rends  the  welkin,  as  the  plaudits  of  the  thousands  echo  round  the  scene ;  and 
presently  a  man  steps  forward  who  has  won  the  race,  or  slain  the  lion,  or  killed  the 
gladiator,  to  receive  from  the  emperor's  own  hand  a  crown  of  laurel  leaves  which 
fades  by  the  very  heat  of  the  head  that  wears  it.  I  notice  also  that  the  emperor 
gives  him  a  pure  white  stone,  with  his  name  written  on  it.  He  is  now  entitled,  on 
presentation  of  that  white  stone  ticket,  to  be  fed  at  the  country's  expense,  and  to  be 
feted  and  honoured  well-nigh  wheresoever  he  goes.  Now,  the  Christian  life  is  a  race ; 
the  Christian  experience  is  a  conflict.  Kise  to  the  battle  now.  Go  on  to  victory,  and 
to  thy  reward.  II.  Purity.  I  see  now  an  ancient  tribunal  where  the  judges  sit. 
There  are  lictors  bearing  the  fasces — a  bundle  of  sticks  with  an  axe-head  bound  up 
amongst  them,  the  symbol  of  justice  and  of  punishment.  I  see  the  jurors  in  their 
places  ;  I  listen  to  the  progress  of  the  trial ;  and  when  all  the  witnesses  have  been 
heard,  and  the  prisoner  has  made  his  own  defence,  I  notice  that  into  the  ballot-box 
are  cast  some  little  stones.  Some  are  white,  others  black ;  but,  thank  God,  the  white 
stones  predominate,  and  the  foreman  of  the  jury  having  counted  them,  declares  that 
the  prisoner  is  not  guilty  and  should  be  dismissed.  So  in  this  place  of  sin,  with  all 
the  enticements  of  evil,  there  were  some  who  retained  their  purity  and  spotlessness — 
some  who,  like  Joseph,  fled  at  the  tempter's  voice ;  some  who,  Uke  Daniel,  could  not 
forget  the  Lord  their  God ;  some  who,  like  the  holy  children,  would  rather  blaze  in 
the  furnace  than  bow  before  the  image.  To  such  the  token  of  innocence  was  given. 
How  is  it  with  thee  ?  HI.  Novelty.  I  remember  to  have  seen  one  of  Dor6's  cele- 
brated pictures — "  The  entry  of  Christ  into  Jerusalem " — shortly  after  it  was 
painted,  when  the  colours  were  all  bright  and  beautiful ;  and  though  I  much  admired 
the  drawing,  I  was  particularly  struck  with  the  colouring.  Everything  seemed  so 
fresh  and  new ;  of  course  it  was  in  a  new  frame,  and  the  very  faces  of  the  people 
seemed  lighted  up  with  a  new  joy  as  they  beheld  their  King.    It  is  possible  that  the 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  169 

colours  have  faded  before  this,  but  this  I  know— that  Christ's  triumphal  entry  into 
the  sinner's  heart  brings  glorious  sunshine,  new  joys,  new  hopes,  new  songs,  new 
desires,  new  everything.  1.  The  new  name  is  the  name  of  adoption.  2.  Then  there 
is  the  new  name  of  espousal,  for  we  are  married  unto  Him,  and  He  to  us.  3.  There 
is  the  new  name,  too,  of  promotion  for  those  who  overcome.  It  were  a  grand  thing 
to  be  a  private  in  Christ's  army,  to  belong  to  the  rank  and  file  of  the  Lord's  elect ; 
but  when  He  says,  '•  Come  up  higher,  and  I  will  exalt  thee,  for  thou  hast  exalted 
Me,"  it  is  better  still ;  and  this  He  does  so  often  as  we  fight  His  battles  well,  and 
every  victory  leads  to  some  fresh  reward.  4.  The  new  name  that  we  shall  get  at  last 
is  the  name  of  glorification.  Worms  now,  we  shall  be  angels  then ;  sinful  creatures 
at  present,  sons  of  the  living  God  and  brighter  than  the  seraphs  shall  we  then  appear. 
IV.  Secrecy.  The  name  He  gives  is  unknown,  except  to  those  who  receive  it.  The 
world  cannot  understand  us,  or  our  joys,  or  our  sorrows.  These  are  spiritual  things, 
and  must  be  spiritually  discerned.  V.  Charity.  Everything  that  we  have 
is  God's  good  gift.  If  we  eat  of  hidden  manna,  it  is  because  He  gives  us 
to  eat  thereof,  and  if  we  have  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  it  is  because  He  gives 
us  the  pure  white  stone.  Some  think  there  is  a  reference  here  to  a  stone  called 
the  tessera  hospitalis.  My  heart  is  open  to  Christ ;  heaven  is  open  to  me. 
I  am  His  property  and  He  my  possession  ;  He  holds  me  in  His  mighty  hand,  and 
I  retain  my  hold  on  Him  with  such  faith  as  He  gives  me.  {J.  A,  Spurgeon.) 
The  white  stone: — With  this  white  stone  may  the  saints  comfort  themselves 
against  all  the  black  coals  wherewith  the  world  seeks  to  besmear  them.  {J.  Trapp.) 
A  new  name  written. — The  new  name : — I.  The  large  hopes  which  gather  round 
THIS  PROMISE  OF  A  **  NEW  NAME."  Abraham  and  Jacob,  in  the  Old  Testament, 
received  new  names  from  God  ;  Peter  and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, received  new  names  from  Christ.  In  the  sad  latter  days  of  the  Jewish 
monarchy  its  kings,  being  deposed  by  barbarian  and  pagan  conquerors,  were  rein- 
stated, with  new  names  imposed  upon  them  by  the  victors.  In  all  these  cases  the 
imposition  of  the  new  name  implies  authority  and  ownership  on  the  part  of  the 
giver ;  and  generally  a  relationship  to  the  giver,  with  new  offices,  functions,  and 
powers  on  the  part  of  the  receiver.  And  so  when  Christ  from  the  heavens  declares 
that  He  wiU  rename  the  conqueror.  He  asserts  on  the  one  hand  His  own  absolute 
authority  over  him,  and  on  the  other  hand  His  own  perfect  knowledge  of  the  nature 
and  inmost  being  of  the  creature  He  names.  And,  still  further.  He  gives  a  promise 
of  a  nature  renewed,  of  new  functions  committed  to  the  conqueror,  of  new  spheres, 
new  closeness  of  approach  to  Himself,  new  capacities,  and  new  powers.  Can  we  go 
any  further?  Let  me  just  remind  you  that  there  are  two  things  that  shine  out 
plain  and  clear  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  and  vagueness  that  surround  the  future 
glories  of  the  redeemed.  The  one  is  their  closer  relationship  to  Jesus  Christ ;  the 
other  is  their  possession,  in  the  ultimate  and  perfect  state,  of  a  body  of  which  the  pre- 
dicates are  incorruption,  glory,  power,  and  which  is  a  fit  organ  for  the  spirit,  even 
as  the  present  corporeal  house  in  which  we  dwell  is  an  adequate  organ  for  the 
animal  life,  and  for  that  alone.  H.  The  connection  between  Christ's  "  new 
name"  AND  OURS.  What  is  this  "new  name"  of  Christ's?  Obviously  the  new 
name  of  Jesus  is-a  revelation  of  His  character,  nature,  and  heart ;  a  new  manifesta- 
tion of  Himself  to  the  glad  eyes  of  those  that  loved  Him,  when  they  saw  Him  amidst 
the  darkness  and  the  mists  of  earth,  and  so  have  been  honoured  to  see  Him  more 
clearly  amidst  the  radiances  of  the  glories  of  heaven.  Only  remember  that  when 
we  speak  of  a  "  new  name  "  of  Christ's  as  being  part  of  the  blessedness  of  the  future 
state  to  which  we  may  humbly  look  forward,  it  is  no  antiquating  of  the  old  name. 
Nothing  will  ever  make  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ  less  the  centre  of  the  revelation  of 
God  than  it  is  to-day.  But  the  new  name  is  the  new  name  of  the  old  Christ.  Then 
what  is  the  inscription  of  that  name  upon  the  conqueror  ?  It  is  not  merely  the 
manifestation  of  the  revealed  character  of  Jesus  in  new  beauty,  but  it  is  the  mani- 
festation of  His  ownership  of  His  servants  by  their  transformation  into  His  likeness, 
which  transformation  is  the  consequence  of  their  new  vision  of  Him.  IH.  The 
BLESSED  secret  OF  THE  NEW  NAME.  "  No  man  knoweth  it  save  he  that  receivethit." 
Of  course  not.  There  is  only  one  way  to  know  the  highest  things  in  human  experi- 
ence, and  that  is  by  possessing  them.  Nobody  can  describe  love,  sorrow,  gladness, 
BO  as  to  awaken  a  clear  conception  of  them  in  hearts  that  have  never  experienced 
them.  That  is  eminently  true  about  religion,  and  it  is  most  of  all  true  about  that 
perfect  future  state.  A  chrysalis,  lying  under  ground,  would  know  about  as  much 
of  what  it  would  be  like  when  it  had  got  its  wings  and  lived  upon  sweetness  and 
blazed  in  the  sunshine,  as  a  man  when  he  lets  his  imagination  attempt  to  construct 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

a  picture  of  another  life.    Death  keeps  his  secret  well,  and  we  have  to  pass  his 
threshold  before  we  know  what  lies  beyond.    But  more  than  that.     That  same 
blessed  mystery  lies  round  about  the  name  of  each  individual  possessor,  to  all  but 
himself.    Just  as  we  shall  know  Christ  perfectly,  and  bear  His  new  name  inscribed 
upon  our  foreheads,  and  yet  He  has  "  a  name  which  no  man  knoweth  but  He  Him- 
self," so  the  mystery  of  each  redeemed  soul  will  still  remain  impenetrable  to  others. 
But  it  will  be  a  mystery  of  no  painful  darkness,  nor  making  any  barrier  between 
ourselves  and  the  saints  whom  we  love.     Bather  it  is  the  guarantee  of  an  infinite 
variety  in  the  manner  of  possessing  the  one  name.    All  the  surrounding  diamonds 
that  are  set  about  the  central  blaze  shall  catch  the  light  on  their  faces,  and  from 
one  it  will  come  golden,  and  from  another  violet,  and  another  red,  and  another 
flashing    and    pure  white.       Each  glorified  spirit  shall  reveal  Christ,   and  yet 
the  one  Christ  shall  be  manifested  in  infinite  variety  of  forms,  and  the  total 
summing  up  of  the  many  reflections  will  be  the  image  of  the  whole  Lord.    IV.  The 
GIVING  OF  THE  NEW  NAME  TO  THE  VICTORS.     The  language  of  my  text  involves  two 
things,  *'  To  him  that  overcometh  "  lays  down  the  conditions ;  "  Will  I  give  "  lays 
down  the  cause  of  the  possession  of  the  "  new  name  " — that  is  to  say,  this  renova- 
tion of  the  being,  and  efflorescence  into  new  knowledges,  activities,  perfections,  and 
joys  is  only  possible  on  condition  of  the  earthly  life  of  obedience  and  service  and 
conquest,     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  secret  of  the  new  name : — The  book  which 
is  the  grand  interpreter  of  man's  inward  nature  and  relations  makes  repeated 
references  to  the  sacred  power  of  names.     In  the  biblical  view,  to  give  anything  a 
name  is  to  perform  an  act  of  religion.    What  is  it  ?    It  is  to  apply  to  some  individual 
object,  having  God  for  its  maker,  that  sign  by  which  it  shall  be  known,  separated 
from  other  things,  and  called  :  and  surely  that  ought  to  be  done  reverently,  as  in 
the  presence  of  Him  from  whom  all  things  came,  and  to  whom  all  things  are  known. 
When  we  rise  to  the  plane  of  human  life,  this  same  sanctity  of  names  becomes  more 
evident  yet.    Because  then  they  come  to  stand  not  only  for  individual  existences, 
but  for  conscious  beings.     They  mark  off  soul  from  soul,  among  the  infinite  ranks 
and  gradations  of  the  immortal  family,  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  that  no  man  can 
number.     If  we  ascend  still  higher,  from  the  human  to  the  Divine,  the  power  of 
names  is  more  signally  manifested  yet.     Him  whom  no  eye  hath  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  nor  hand  touched,  we  yet  know  by  His  wonderful  and  Almighty  name — our 
God.     It  is  striking  that  the  Scriptures  everywhere  speak  of  the  "  name"  of  the 
Lord  as  of  the  Lord  Himself.    His  name  is  His  glory,  His  presence,  His  power,  His 
wisdom.  His  person — and  it  is  the  only  outward  sign,  or  bond,  of  personal  com- 
munication between  Him  and  us  who  are  allowed  to  make  no  image  of  Him.    How 
impressive,  too,  that  when  His  great  manifestation  is  to  be  made  in  humanity,  it  is 
declared  that  the  eternal  Word  is  made  flesh.     That  is  the  uttered  Divinity — the 
God   pronounced,  communicated  to  man,  through  the  Incarnation.     After  the 
Bedeemer  appeared,  the  universal  command  to  Christendom  was  that  its  prayers 
should  be  lifted  to  the  Father  "  in  the  name  "  of  Christ.     So  we  arrive  at  the  point 
of  the  text :  "  To  him  that  overcometh,"  saith  that  Faithful  and  True  Witness,  the 
First  and  the  Last,  "  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  and  will  give  him  a 
white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving 
he  that  receiveth  it,"     The  spiritual  truth  which  the  veil  of  figure  covers  can  hardly 
be  mistaken.     He  that  overcometh — every  victorious  soul  prevailing  by  faith  and 
by  righteousness  in  the  long  and  patient  battle  of  life — shall  have  secret  satisfac- 
tions springing  up  in  his  heart,  known  only  between  himself  and  his  Lord.     They 
will  not  consist  in  outward  applauses,  in  visible  successes,  in  any  worldly  compensa- 
tions whatever.     The  chief  of  them  all  will  be  the  silent  assurances  of  His  personal 
affection,  who  is  the  purest,  highest,  holiest.     The  token  of  His  favour  will  be  the 
inestimable  good.     So  much  light  does  advancing  excellence  always  cast  on  old 
forms  of  truth,  a  deeper  life  ever  illuminating  even  familiar  oracles,  that  the  very 
name  of  the  Christ  shall  have  a  new  meaning.    It  shall  be  a  new  name.    It  shall 
have  a  personal  charm  and  preciousness  to  each  several  believer.     None  shall  know 
it  as  he  knoweth  it  that  receiveth  it.     I.  The  strict  and  private  individuality  of 
AiiTi  REAL  religious  EXPERIENCE.     Sooner  or  later  some  monitory  Providence  comes 
and  searches  us,  and  shows  that  the  path  to  God's  right  hand  is  in  great  part  a 
lonely  one.     II.  A  second  characteristic  of  that  true  inward  life  which  the  text 
implies  is  that  its  rewards  are  not  such  as  can  be  described  beforehand.    No  man 
knoweth  them  saving  he  that  receiveth  them.     They  remain  to  come  out  and  be  felt 
unexpectedly  in  their  place.     The  very  result  the  religion  of  Christ  undertakes  to 
achieve  in  men's  hearts  is  disinterested  devotion.    Virtue  under  pay  is  no  longer 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  171 

virtue.  Faith  is  not  hired.  Why,  even  in  all  the  loftier  and  purer  human  relation- 
ships, affection  scorns  the  calculations  of  self-interest.  There  is  not  a  tie  of 
holy  friendship  on  earth  but  feels  itself  insulted  by  the  suggestion  of  a  price. 
III.  Christian  piety  is  to  be  pbized  for  its  secret  intrinsic  quality,  bather 
THAN  FOR  ITS  QUOTABLE  RESULTS.  No  man  knoweth  it  like  him  that  hath  it. 
Its  hidden  testimonies  are  worth  more  than  its  public  demonstrations.  Being 
religious  for  effect  spoils  the  effect — like  being  honest  for  effect,  or  humble  for  effect, 
or  affectionate  or  chaste  for  effect.  It  runs  straight  to  a  base  hypocrisy,  and  not 
only  abolishes  its  own  influence,  but  begets  a  general  scepticism  of  sincerity  which 
blights  every  high  interest,  and  unsettles  virtue  itself.  Faith  must  dwell  in  her  own 
sanctuary,  see  by  her  own  light,  feed  on  her  own  secret  and  immortal  manna,  be 
content  with  her  own  joy,  cling  to  the  white  stone  with  the  ineffable  name,  and  wait 
for  her  spiritual  justification  and  victory.  To  selfish,  earth-bound  hearts  no 
secrets  are  revealed.  No  tokens  of  personal  remembrance,  no  signs  of  secret  favour 
come  from  the  Master.  IV,  It  has  been  applied  all  along  as  a  chief  doctrine  lying 
at  the  very  heart  of  this  passage,  as  it  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  gospel  itself,  that  the 
special  character  and  privilege  of  the  Christian  rest  in  a  personal  and  con- 
scious UNION  between  him  AND  HIS  LIVING  Kedeemer.  {Bp.  F.  D.  Huntingtou.) 
The  new  name  : — The  "white  stone"  has  been  spoken  of  as  being  the  symbol  of 
acquittal,  of  election  and  choice,  of  admission  to  the  heavenly  banquet ;  all  which 
may  be  true.  But  there  is  one  objection  to  any  such  interpretations,  namely,  that 
they  all  are  gathered  from  the  circle  of  heathen  associations,  whereas  the  whole 
Apocalypse  moves  within  the  circle  of  Jewish  symbols.  So,  then,  if  we  doubt  as  to 
the  force  of  these  and  other  similar  interpretations,  have  we  anything  in  the  Jewish 
history,  especially  somewhere  about  the  same  period  as  the  manna,  which  may  help 
us  ?  I  think  that  an  explanation  which  has  been  sometimes  given  seems  to  be 
commended  by  very  many  considerations.  There  was  a  precious  stone,  lustrous  and 
resplendent — for  that  is  the  force  of  the  word  "  white  "  here,  not  a  dead  white  but 
a  brilUant  coruscating  white — on  which  there  was  something  written,  which  no  eye 
but  one  ever  saw,  that  mysterious  seat  of  revelation  and  direction  known  in  the  Old 
Testament  by  the  name  of  Urim  and  Thummim  (that  is,  lights  and  perfectnesses), 
enclosed  within  the  folds  of  the  High  Priest's  breast-plate,  which  none  but  the  High 
Priest  ever  beheld.  We  may,  perhaps,  bring  that  ancient  fact  into  connection  with 
the  promise  in  my  text,  and  then  it  opens  out  into  a  whole  world  of  suggestions 
with  regard  to  the  priestly  dignity  of  the  victors,  with  regard  to  the  gift  that  is 
bestowed  upon  them,  a  hidden  gift  worn  upon  their  breasts  and  containing  within 
it  and  inscribed  upon  it  the  Divine  name,  unseen  by  any  eye  but  that  of  him  that 
bears  it.  I.  That  new  name  is  Christ's  and  ours.  It  is  His  first,  it  becomes  ours 
by  communication  from  Him.  1.  "I  will  give  him  a  new  name" — a  deeper, 
a  more  inward,  a  fresh  knowledge  and  revelation  of  My  own  character — as 
eternal  love,  eternal  wisdom,  all-sufficient,  absolute  power,  the  home  and  treasure, 
the  joy  and  righteousness  of  the  whole  heart  and  spirit.  The  Cross  remains  for  ever 
the  revelation  of  the  love  of  God,  but  in  heaven  we  shall  learn  what  we  know  not 
here — the  full  wealth  which  shall  succeed  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance,  and  posses- 
sing the  lustrous  glories  we  shall  understand  something  more  of  the  infinite  mercy 
that  has  bought  them  for  us.  The  sun  remains  the  same,  but  as  different  as  its 
sphere  looks,  seen  from  the  comet  at  its  aphehon,  away  out  far  beyond  the  orbits  of 
the  planets  in  the  dim  regions  of  that  infiiiite  abyss,  and  seen  from  the  same  orb  at 
its  periheUon  when  it  circles  round  close  by  the  burning  brightness,  so  different  does 
that  mighty  Sun  of  righteousness  look  to  us  now  in  His  eternal  self -revelation,  by 
sacrifice  and  death,  from  what  He  will  seem  in  that  same  self -revelation  when  we 
shall  stand  by  His  side  1  2.  On  this  new  revelation  of  the  name  of  Christ  there 
follows  as  a  consequence  assimilation  to  the  name  which  we  possess,  transformation 
into  the  Hkeness  of  Him  whom  we  behold.  We  cannot  know  His  name  without 
sharing  it.  If  we  behold  His  glory  we  shall  possess  it,  as  the  light  must  enter  the 
eye  for  vision.  The  hght  and  the  soul  which  receives  will,  as  it  were,  act  and 
react.  The  light  beheld  transforms.  The  soul  transformed  is  capable  of  more 
light.  That  again  flows  in  and  purifies  and  beautifies.  Thus,  in  continuous 
reciprocal  energy,  the  endless  process  of  learning  to  know  an  infinite  Saviour,  and 
becoming  Uke  a  perfect  Lord  goes  on  with  constant  approximation,  and  yet  with 
somewhat  ever  undisclosed.  The  gift  is  not  once  for  all,  but  is  continuous  through 
eternity.  3.  Then  there  is  a  third  idea  impUed  in  this  promise,  if  the  new  name  be 
Christ's,  and  that  is  possession  or  consecration.  His  name  is  given,  that  is.  His 
character  is  revealed.    His  chiuacter  is  imparted,  and  further,  by  the  gift  He  takes 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

as  well  as  gives,  He  takes  us  for  His  even  in  giving  Himself  to  be  ours.  The  High 
Priest's  mitre  bore  on  its  front  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  one  of  the  last  and 
ihighest  promises  of  Scripture  is  cast  in  the  form  supplied  by  the  symbol  of  Aaron's 
loffice  and  honour,  "His  servants  shall  serve  Him" — in  priestly  service  that  is — 
*'  and  they  shall  see  His  face."  Action  and  contemplation,  so  hard  to  harmonise 
here,  shall  blend  at  last.  "  And  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads,"  the  token 
of  His  possession,  manifest  for  all  eyes  to  behold.  And  thus  when  we  behold  Him 
we  become  like  Him,  and  in  the  measure  which  we  become  like  Him  we  belong  to 
Him,  not  one  step  further.  H.  This  new  name  is  unknown  except  bt  its  possessor. 
That,  of  course,  is  true  in  all  regions  of  human  experience.  Did  ever  anybody 
describe  a  taste  so  that  a  man  that  had  not  tasted  the  thing  could  tell  what  it  was 
like?  Did  ever  anybody  describe  an  odour  so  as  to  do  more  than  awaken  the 
memory  of  some  one  who  had  once  had  the  scent  lingering  in  his  nostrils  ?  If  we 
have  not  known  the  love  of  a  child,  no  talking  will  ever  make  a  man  understand 
what  a  father's  heart  is.  Religious  experiences  are  not  unlike  ordinary  human 
experiences  in  this  matter.  It  is  not  possible  to  communicate  them,  partly 
by  reason  of  the  imperfection  of  human  language,  partly  by  reason  that  you 
need  in  all  departments  sympathy  and  prior  knowledge  in  order  to  make  the 
descriptions  significant  at  all.  And  in  our  earthly  life,  though  your  faith  and 
mine,  and  our  joys  and  our  consciousness  of  Christ's  love  are  all  weak  and 
tremulous,  as  we  know,  still  we  cannot  speak  them  full  out,  and  if  we  could 
there  are  no  ears  to  hear  except  the  ears  of  those  who  are  possessors  of  like 
precious  faith.  The  law  applies  to  the  heavens  as  well.  Not  till  we  get  there  shall 
we  know.  The  text  seems  to  imply  what  is  more  wonderful  still,  that  though  there 
shall  be  no  isolation  in  heaven,  which  is  the  perfection  of  society,  there  may  be 
incommunicable  depths  of  blessed  experience  even  there.  Each  man  standing  at 
his  own  angle  will  see  his  own  side  of  the  hght ;  it  will  be  enough  and  the  same  for 
all,  and  yet  different  in  each.  "  No  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth."  We 
must  possess  to  understand ;  we  must  stand  before  the  throne  to  apprehend.  HI. 
The  condition  and  the  true  cause  of  possessing  this  new  nature.  It  comes  as 
the  reward  of  victory;  it  comes  as  a  bestowment  from  Christ ;  "  To  him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  give."  And  it  seems  to  me  that  we  have  much  need  of  trying  to 
unite  these  two  thoughts  more  closely  together  than  we  generally  do.  The  victory  is 
a  condition.  It  is  not  anything  more  than  a  condition.  The  real  cause  is  Christ's 
bestowment.  I  believe  as  thoroughly  as  any  man  can  in  the  application  of  the  idea 
of  reward  to  Christian  service,  but  I  believe  that  this  is  a  secondary  idea,  and  that 
the  primary  one  is  "  The  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord." 
I  believe  that  all  outward  discipline,  and  labour,  and  sorrows,  and  disappointments, 
and  struggles,  the  efforts  that  we  make  after  victory,  that  all  these  prepare  Chris- 
tians, and  make  us  capable  of  receiving  the  gift.  I  believe  that  the  gift  comes  only 
out  of  His  infinite  and  undeserved,  and  God  be  thanked !  inexhaustible  forgiving 
goodness  and  mercy.  The  one  is,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  preparing  of  the  cloth  for 
the  dye,  and  after  that  you  have  the  application  of  the  colour.  No  heaven  except 
to  the  victor.  The  victor  does  not  fight  his  way  into  heaven,  but  Christ  gives  it  to 
him.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  new  name  : — 1.  A  new  name  preaches  to  us  of  a 
new  relationship.  A  child  parts  with  its  own  name,  and  takes  the  name  of  the 
family  into  which  it  is  received  as  an  adopted  son  or  daughter.  "  The  Lord  God 
shall  call  His  servants  by  another  name."  2.  This  new  name  is  the  declaration  of 
sanctity.  If  we  are  children  we  should  maintain  the  honour  of  the  family  name. 
"Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil."  3.  Dignity  is  expressed  by  a  new  name. 
Christianity  bestows  a  name  of  rank  and  title  that  is  emphatically  "  new  " — above 
the  human,  above  the  angelic — Divine.  4.  Secrecy  belongs  to  this  name.  "  A  new 
name  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth  it."  Our  holiest  and 
grandest  emotions  are  those  that  stifle  utterance.  They  seal  the  lips,  and  make  us 
feel  how  inadequate  are  all  human  vehicles  to  express  heavenly  and  Divine  emotions. 
The  pleasures  of  the  worldling  lie  on  the  surface.  "  You  have  seen,  it  may  be," 
says  a  writer,  "  an  antique  Italian  painted  window,  with  the  bright  Italian  sunshine 
glowing  through  it.  It  is  the  special  excellence  of  pictured  glass  that  the  light 
which  falls  merely  on  the  outside  of  other  pictures,  is  here  interfused  throughout 
the  work,  illuminating  the  design,  and  investing  it  with  a  living  radiance.  .  .  . 
Christian  faith  is  a  grand  cathedral  with  Divinely  pictured  windows.  Standing 
without  you  see  no  glory,  nor  can  possibly  imagine  any.  Nothing  is  visible  but  the 
merest  outline  of  dusty  shapes.  Standing  within  all  is  clear  and  defined,  every'ray 
of  light  reveals  a  harmony  of  unspeakable  splendours."     {The  London  Pul;pit.) 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  173 

The  new  name : — The  giving  of  the  white  stone  with  the  new  name  is  the  com- 
munication of  what  God  thinks  about  the  man  to  the  man.  It  is  the  Divine  judg- 
ment, the  solemn  holy  doom  of  the  righteous  man,  the  "Come,  thou  blessed," 
spoken  to  the  individual.  In  order  to  see  this,  we  must  first  understand  what  is 
the  idea  of  a  name — that  is,  what  is  the  perfect  notion  of  a  name.  The  true  name 
is  one  which  expresses  the  character,  the  nature,  the  being,  the  meaning  of  the 
person  who  bears  it.  It  is  the  man's  own  symbol — his  soul's  picture,  in  a  word — 
the  sign  which  belongs  to  him  and  to  no  one  else.  Who  can  give  a  man  this,  his  own 
name?  God  alone.  For  no  one  but  God  sees  what  the  man  is,  or  even,  seeing 
what  he  is,  could  express  in  a  name-word  the  sum  and  harmony  of  what  he  sees. 
To  whom  is  this  name  given  ?  To  him  that  overcometh.  When  is  it  given  ? 
When  he  has  overcome.  Does  God  then  not  know  what  a  man  is  going  to  become  ? 
As  surely  as  He  sees  the  oak  which  He  put  there  lying  in  the  heart  of  the  acorn. 
Why  then  does  He  wait  till  the  man  has  become  by  overcoming  ere  He  settles  what 
his  name  shall  be?  He  does  not  wait ;  He  knows  his  name  from  the  first.  '  It  is 
only  when  the  man  has  become  his  name  that  God  gives  him  the  stone  with  the 
name  upon  it,  for  then  first  can  he  understand  what  his  name  signifies.  The  name 
is  one  "  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth  it."  Not  only  then  has 
each  man  his  individual  relation  to  God,  but  each  man  has  his  peculiar  relation  to 
God.  He  is  to  God  a  peculiar  being,  made  after  his  own  fashion,  and  that  of  no 
one  else  ;  for  when  he  is  perfected  he  shall  receive  the  new  name  which  no  one  else 
can  understand.  Hence  he  can  worship  God  as  no  man  else  can  worship  him— can 
understand  God  as  no  man  else  can  understand  Him.  This  or  that  man  may 
understand  God  more,  may  understand  God  better  than  he,  but  no  other  man  can 
understand  God  as  he  understands  Him.  As  the  fir-tree  lifts  up  itself  with  a  far 
different  need  from  the  need  of  the  palm-tree,  so  does  each  man  stand  before  God, 
and  lift  up  a  different  humanity  to  the  common  Father.  And  for  each  God  has  a 
different  response.  With  every  man  He  has  a  secret — the  secret  of  the  new  name. 
In  every  man  there  is  a  loneliness,  an  inner  chamber  of  peculiar  life  into  which  God 
only  can  enter.  See,  now,  what  a  significance  the  symbolism  of  our  text  assumes. 
Each  of  us  is  a  distinct  flower  or  tree  in  the  spiritual  garden  of  God — precious,  each 
for  his  own  sake,  in  the  eyes  of  Him  who  is  even  now  making  us — each  of  us 
watered  and  shone  upon  and  filled  with  life,  for  the  sake  of  his  flower,  his  com- 
pleted being,  which  will  blossom  out  of  him  at  last  to  the  glory  and  pleasure  of  the 
great  Gardener.  For  each  has  within  him  a  secret  of  the  Divinity ;  each  is  growing 
towards  the  revelation  of  that  secret  to  himself,  and  so  to  the  full  reception, 
according  to  his  measure,  of  the  Divine.  Every  moment  that  he  is  true  to  his  true 
self,  some  new  shine  of  the  white  stone  breaks  on  his  inward  eye,  some  fresh  channel 
is  opened  upward  for  the  coming  glory  of  the  flower,  the  conscious  offering  of  his 
whole  being  in  beauty  to  the  Maker.  Each  man,  then,  is  in  God's  sight  of  great 
worth.  Life  and  action,  thought  and  intent,  are  sacred.  And  what  an  end  lies 
before  us  1  To  have  a  consciousness  of  our  own  ideal  being  flashed  into  us  from 
the  thought  of  God !  (George  MacDonald,  LL.B.)  The  third  promise  to  the 
victors : — The  Church  at  Pergamos,  to  which  this  promise  is  addressed,  had  a 
sharper  struggle  than  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  two  Churches  whose  epistles  precede  this. 
It  was  set "  where  Satan's  seat  is."  The  severer  the  struggle,  the  nobler  the  reward. 
I.  We  have  the  victor's  food,  the  manna.  That  seems,  at  first  sight,  a  somewhat 
infelicitous  symbol,  because  manna  was  wilderness  food.  But  that  characteristic  is 
not  to  be  taken  into  account.  Manna,  though  it  fell  in  the  wilderness,  came 
from  heaven,  and  it  is  the  heavenly  food  that  is  suggested  by  the  symbol.  One 
moment  the  din  of  the  battlefield,  the  next  moment  the  refreshment  of  the  heavenly 
manna.  And  the  first  thing  that  it  plainly  suggests  to  us  is  the  absolute  satisfaction 
of  all  the  hunger  of  the  heart.  Here  we  have  to  suppress  desires,  sometimes  because 
they  are  illegitimate  and  wrong,  sometimes  because  circumstances  sternly  forbid 
their  indulgence.  There,  to  desire  wiU  be  to  have,  and  partly  by  the  rectiying  of 
the  appetite,  partly  by  the  fulness  of  the  supply,  there  will  be  no  painful  sense  of 
vacuity.  Then  there  is  the  other  plain  thing  suggested  here,  that  that  satisfaction 
does  not  dull  the  edge  of  appetite  or  desire.  Bodily  hunger  is  fed,  is  replete,  wants 
nothing  more  until  the  lapse  of  time  and  digestion  have  intervened.  But  it  is  not 
so  with  the  loftiest  satisfactions.  You  that  know  what  happy  love  is  know  what 
that  means — a  satisfaction  which  never  approaches  satiety,  a  hunger  which  has  in 
it  no  gnawing.  Satisfaction  without  satiety,  food  which  leaves  him  blessedly 
appetised  for  larger  bestowments,  belong  to  the  victor.  Another  thing  to  be 
noticed  here  is  what  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  point  out  in  the  previous 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

promises  :  "  I  will  give  him."  The  victor  is  seated  at  the  board,  and  the  Prince, 
as  in  some  earthly  banquet  to  a  victorious  army,  himself  moves  up  and  down 
amongst  the  tables,  and  supplies  the  wants  of  the  guests.  Christ  Himself 
bestows  upon  His  servants  the  sustenance  of  their  spirits  in  the  realm  above.  But 
there  is  more  than  that.  Christ  is  not  only  the  Giver,  but  He  is  Himself  the  Food. 
He  said,  "  I  am  the  Bread  of  God  that  came  down  from  heaven."  The  man  that 
lives  upon  the  Christ  by  faith,  love,  obedience,  imitation,  communion,  aspiration, 
here  on  earth,  has  already  the  earnest  of  that  feast.  If  you  do  not  like  the  earthly 
form  of  feeding  upon  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  trusting  Him,  obeying  Him,  thinking 
about  Him,  you  would  like  less  the  heavenly  form  of  that  feeding  upon  Him. 
n.  Note,  THE  victor's  kew  name.  When  we  read,  "I  will  give  Him  a  stone,  on 
which  there  is  a  new  name  written,"  we  infer  that  the  main  suggestion  made  in  that 
promise  is  of  a  change  in  the  self,  something  new  in  the  personality  and  the 
character.  What  new  capacities  may  be  evolved  by  the  mere  fact  of  losing  the  limi- 
tations of  the  bodily  frame ;  what  new  points  of  contact  with  the  new  universe ;  what 
new  analogues  of  that  which  we  here  call  our  senses,  and  means  of  perception  of  the 
external  world,  may  be  the  accompaniments  of  the  disembarrassment  from  "  the 
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle,"  we  dare  not  dream.  But  whatsoever  be  these 
changes,  they  are  changes  that  repose  upon  that  which  has  been  in  the  past.  And 
BO  the  second  thought  that  is  suggested  by  this  new  name  is  that  these  changes  are 
the  direct  results  of  the  victor's  course.  Both  in  old  times  and  in  the  peerage  of 
England  you  will  find  names  of  conquerors,  by  land  or  by  water,  who  carry  in  their 
designations  and  transmit  to  their  descendants  the  memorial  of  their  victories  in 
their  very  titles.  In  like  manner  as  a  Scipio  was  called  Africanus,  as  a  Jervis 
became  Lord  St.  Vincent,  so  the  victor's  "new  name"  is  the  concentration  and 
memorial  of  the  victor's  conquest.  So  once  more  we  come  to  the  thought  that 
whatever  there  may  be  of  change  in  the  future,  the  main  direction  of  the  character 
remains,  and  the  consolidated  issues  of  the  transient  deeds  of  earth  remain,  and  the 
victor's  name  is  the  summing  up  of  the  victor's  life.    HI.  Lastly,   note    the 

MYSTEKY    OF     BOTH    THE    FOOD     AND    THE    NAME.      Both    Symbols     poiut     tO    the   One 

thought,  the  impossibility  of  knowing  until  we  possess  and  experience.  That 
impossibility  besets  all  the  noblest,  highest,  purest,  Divinest  emotions,  and 
possessions  of  earth.  Poets  have  sung  of  love  and  sorrow  from  the  beginning  of 
time ;  but  men  must  love  to  know  what  it  means.  Since,  then,  experience  alone 
admits  to  the  knowledge,  how  vulgar,  how  futile,  how  absolutely  destructive  of  the 
very  purpose  which  they  are  intended  to  subserve,  are  all  the  attempts  of  men  to 
forecast  that  ineffable  glory.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D,) 

Vers.  18-29.  Thyatira.  —Thyatira — the  sentimental  Church  : — One  thing  which 
Ephesus  had  Thyatira  wanted,  and  it  was  a  blessed  want ;  nothing  is  said  of  Thyatira's 
"  toil."  The  temper  which  animated  the  Church  made  all  its  service  joyous.  Therefore 
the  Lord's  commendation  is  so  full  and  unreserved ;  He  does  not  talk  of  removing  the 
candlestick  out  of  its  place ;  instead  He  frankly  recognises  the  growing  efficiency 
of  His  servants:  ♦'  I  know  that  thy  latest  works  are  more  than  the  first."  Never- 
theless there  is  a  great  and  grievous  lack.  As  in  Ephesus,  the  mention  of  this 
defect  is  unqualified;  not,  "I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,"  nor,  "I  have 
this  against  thee,"  but,  •'  I  have  against  thee  that  thou  are  tolerating  that  woman 
Jezebel,"  &c.  The  name  is  a  mystic  one.  Jezebel  was  the  lady-wife  of  the  half- 
barbarous  king  Ahab ;  the  story  of  her  reign  is  the  story  of  the  quick  corruption 
and  utter  downfall  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  Idol-feasts  were  followed  by  "  cham- 
bering and  wantonness,"  and  corruption  spread  rapidly  among  the  youth  of  Israel. 
So  was  this  prophetess  introducing  the  speculations  of  Asiatic  freethinkers  and  the 
Asiatic  habit  of  voluptuousness  into  the  Church  of  Thyatira.  A  love  of  talk  about 
forbidden  things  was  setting  in  ;  regard  for  law  was  being  weakened ;  audacity  was 
taking  the  place  of  reserve ;  the  teaching  spread  that  self-indulgence  was  nobler 
than  self-denial,  and  more  in  accordance  with  the  freedom  of  the  gospel.  There 
was  a  double  attraction  in  the  teaching  of  the  prophetess — the  subtle  charm  of 
womanhood,  and  the  seductiveness  of  the  thoughts  themselves  she  was  disseminat- 
ing. Thus  she  led  her  votaries  on  into  what  they  loved  to  call  the  "  deeper  aspects  " 
of  life  and  morals.  We  must  observe  that  the  Church  is  not  charged  with  com- 
plicity in  this  teaching.  Nor  is  the  minister  accused  of  sharing  in  the  doctrine; 
the  implication  is  that  he  is  pure.  But  it  is  charged  against  him  that  he  tolerates 
it ;  and  both  he  and  the  Church  are  warned  of  their  neglect  of  duty.  Why  is  he  so 
tolerant  of  this  modern  Jezebel — a  woman  who  is  working  in  the  Church  mischiefs 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  175 

as  subtle,  and  in  their  consequences  as  dire,  as  those  which  destroyed  the  manhood 
of  Israel?  First,  doubtless,  he  bore  with  her  because  she  was  a  woman.  The 
gracious  tolerance  of  a  strong  man  often  takes  this  form.  It  is  very  hard  for  such 
a  one  to  assert  himself  at  all ;  most  hard  where  self-assertion  seems  most  easy. 
Next,  the  woman  called  herself  "  a  prophetess."  Here  comes  in  regard  for  "  the 
freedom  of  prophecy  "  ;  the  very  inspiration  of  the  Church  was  a  hindrance.  "  Who 
knows  whether  God  is  not  speaking  by  her,  notwithstanding  all  that  is  suspicious  in 
her  teaching  ?  "  The  very  spirit  of  service  might  help  to  mislead  a  gracious  man. 
Underneath  the  easy  temper  of  the  pastor  of  Thyatira  there  was,  however,  a  grave 
deficiency,  one  of  the  gravest  in  a  Church  ruler  :  he  had  an  inadequate  sense  of  the 
authority  of  law.  Thyatira  stands  before  us  the  type  of  a  sentimental  Church ; 
the  charm  and  the  danger  of  the  sentimental  temperament  are  both  set  before  us 
here.  There  is  a  sentimentalism  of  the  strong  as  well  as  of  the  weak.  In  the 
weak  sentiment  takes  the  place  which  belongs  to  conviction ;  they  try  to  make 
feeling  do  the  work  of  moral  qualities.  And  they  miserably  fail ;  their  Christian 
character  itself  degenerates ;  like  the  Amy  of  "  Locksley  Hall,"  they  are  doomed 
to  "  perish  in  their  self-contempt."  The  strong  are  not  in  danger  of  this  :  their 
personal  character  may  seem  to  keep  itself  unstained.  But  if  they  have  responsi- 
bihties  for  others  laid  upon  them,  their  sentimentaHsm  may  mean  unfaithfulness. 
If  Ephesus  may  be  looked  upon  as  typifying  the  peril  of  the  Puritan  habit, 
Thyatira  is  a  type  of  what  we  may  call  Neo-Puritanism.  The  Puritan  was  the 
guardian  of  the  claims  and  rights  of  the  individual.  He  trusted  his  own  conscience 
to  see  the  will  of  God,  his  own  intelligence  to  interpret  it.  In  strenuous  years  the 
man  of  such  a  temper,  and  with  this  lofty  ambition,  tends  to  be  hard,  self-confident, 
a  dogmatist  in  his  thinking,  a  precisian  in  his  conduct.  He  is  the  man  who 
can  try  the  spirits ;  who  can  tear  aside  disguises  ;  can  see  through  them  who  call 
themselves  apostles  when  they  are  not,  and  can  find  them  false.  Times  have  grown 
easier ;  there  has  swept  over  us  a  great  impulse  of  tenderness,  which  has  become 
the  prevailing  habit,  and  the  characteristic  individualism  of  the  Puritan  has 
changed  its  form.  Out  of  regard  for  the  sanctity  of  the  individual  conscience  and 
judgment,  varying  interpretations  of  God's  law  are  to  be  received  as  binding 
on  various  persons ;  and  where  divers  interpretations  of  law  are  admitted,  the 
law  itself  ceases  to  be  law.  In  the  freedom  which  is  to  be  allowed  to  self -develop- 
ment, the  educative  influence  of  positive  enactments  is  gone ;  every  man  is  to  be 
his  own  schoolmaster  as  well  as  his  own  judge.  I.  The  appeal  to  reality.  In 
contrast  with  their  readiness  to  be  deluded.  He  sets  out  His  own  clear  vision, 
piercing  through  all  plausibilities,  and  detecting  the  heart  of  the  matter ;  His 
fervid  indignation,  too,  that  wiU  not  long  be  restrained.  Nothing  is  more  needed 
than  occasional  plain  speech  about  the  foulness  which  lurks  in  much  that  professes 
to  be  an  enlarged  spirituality.  There  is  more  than  an  etymological  connection 
between  sentimentalism  and  sensuality.  They  who  encourage  display  of  the 
peculiar  charms  of  womanhood,  and  seek  to  advance  public  causes  by  constant 
speech  of  things  which  both  nature  and  piety  tell  us  should  be  held  in  strict 
reserve,  degrade  the  woman  they  seek  to  emancipate  and  brutalise  the  man.  More 
than  once  the  world  has  been  startled  by  the  announcement  of  "  esoteric  "  teachings 
and  practices  among  some  who  have  posed  as  heralds  of  a  higher  morality,  which 
difEer  not  at  all  from  the  words  and  deeds  of  others  who  are  frankly  vicious.  And 
what  is  still  more  startling  is  the  discovery  that  some  who  have  not  accepted  all 
the  doctrines  of  their  circle  have  known  of  the  prevalence  of  them,  and  suffered 
them  to  pass  without  rebuke.  These  are  really  the  coarse.  H.  The  appeal  to 
COMPASSION.  •'  Behold,"  says  the  Lord,  "  I  cast  them  that  commit  adultery  with 
her  into  great  tribulation  ";  "and  I  will  kill  her  children  with  death."  There  were 
simple  souls  in  Thyatira  saved  from  moral  ruin  by  their  ignorance.  They  "  knew 
not  the  deep  things  of  Satan  "  which  the  initiated  talked  of.  There  were  other 
simple  ones  who  feU  by  their  curiosity.  It  was  the  place  of  the  pastor  to  stand 
between  these  and  the  Lord  of  the  flaming  eyes  and  the  glowing  feet ;  to  save  them 
from  coming  judgment  by  instruction,  warning,  if  need  were  by  discipline, 
•'pulling  them  out  of  the  fire,  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  with  the  flesh."  It 
is  a  cruel  thing  to  be  tolerant  of  those  who  are  destroying  the  souls  of  the 
unwary.  HI.  The  appeal  to  duty.  "I  lay  upon  you  the  charge  to  be  faithful  to 
the  law  you  have  received.  I  impose  no  other  obligation  on  you.  But  this  you 
have ;  hold  it  fast  until  I  come."  It  was  the  duty  of  all  in  Thyatira ;  it  was  the 
special  duty  of  "the  angel  of  the  Church."  An  unwelcome  duty  it  might  be,  but  not 
on  that  account  less  urgent.  And  it  was  enforced  by  the  promise  "  to  him  that  over- 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

comethi."  God's  rewards  are  of  two  classes.  We  are  to  have  more  of  what  we 
have  ;  there  is  to  be  given  us  that  which  we  have  not.  We  think  more  habitually 
of  the  former  class — "  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given  " — but  the  Lord  thinks  also  of 
the  latter  class,  and  this  is  well  for  us.  For  if  we  were  only  to  go  on  enlarging  and 
developing  the  graces  most  congenial  to  us,  which  we  find  it  easiest  to  exercise,  we 
might  attain  to  excellence,  but  we  should  be  ever  one-sided  men.  God  would  make  us 
perfect  men.  He  will  not  let  us  keep  the  defects  of  our  qualities.  (-4 .  Mackennal,  D.D.) 
Christ's  letter  to  the  Church  at  Thyatira  : — I.  The  commendable  in  chakactbr. 
"  I  know  thy  works,"  &c.  Its  progressive  excellence  is  here  commended.  "  And 
the  last  to  be  more  than  the  first."  Several  excellent  things  are  here  mentioned — 
"  Charity,"  which  is  love.  The  one  genuine  principle  has  various  manifestations. 
"Service,"  that  is  ministry.  "Faith."  By  this  I  understand  not  belief  in  propo- 
sitions, but  universal  and  living  confidence  in  God,  Christ,  and  eternal  principles. 
"  Patience  " — that  is  calm  endurance  of  those  evils  over  which  we  have  no  control. 
"  Works  " — all  the  practical  developments  of  holy  principles.  11.  The  reprehen- 
sible IN  DOCTRINE.  Whatever  was  the  particular  doctrine  that  this  prophetess 
taught,  it  was  a  great  evil ;  it  led  to  two  things.  1.  It  led  to  great  wickedness  in 
conduct.  (1)  Licentiousness — ^" commit  fornication."  (2)  Idolatry — "eat  things 
sacrificed  to  idols."  A  corrupt  doctrine  will  lead  to  a  corrupt  life.  Creed  and 
conduct  have  a  vital  connection  with  each  other.  2.  It  incurred  the  displeasure  of 
Christ.  "  Behold  I  will  cast  her  into  a  bed,"  &c.,  &c.  (1)  A  terrible  retribution. 
The  couch  of  indulgence  would  be  changed  into  a  bed  of  torture.  (2)  An  en- 
lightened retribution.  "I  am  He  which  searcheth  the  reins  and  the  hearts." 
There  will  be  no  ignorance  in  the  dispensation  of  the  punishment;  the  Judge 
knows  all.  (3)  A  righteous  retribution.  "I  will  give  unto  every  one  of  you 
according  to  your  works."  III.  The  indispensable  in  duty.  What  is  to  be  done 
to  correct  these  evils,  and  to  avoid  this  threatened  doom  ?  1.  Eepent  of  the  wrong. 
Kind  Heaven  gives  all  sinners  time  for  repentance,  and  unless  repentance  takes 
place  punishment  must  come.  2.  Hold  fast  to  the  right.  (1)  You  have  something 
good.  You  have  some  right  views,  right  feelings,  right  principles ;  hold  them  fast. 
(2)  This  something  you  are  in  danger  of  losing.  There  are  seductive  influences 
around  you  in  society.  Error  is  a  prophetess  ever  at  work,  seeking  to  rifle  the  soul 
of  all  good.  (3)  This  something  will  be  safe  after  Christ's  advent.  "  Till  I 
come."  He  will  perfect  all,  put  all  beyond  the  reach  of  the  tempter.  Meanwhile  hold 
fast.  IV.  The  blessed  in  destiny.  There  are  several  glorious  things  here  promised 
to  the  faithful  and  true.  1.  Freedom  from  all  future  inconvenience.  No  other 
burden  will  be  put  on  them.  Freedom  from  evil,  what  a  blessing  !  2.  Exaltation 
to  authority,  "  To  him  I  will  give  power  over  the  nation^."  The  Christian  victor 
shall  share  in  the  dominion  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  vi.  2).  3.  The  possession  of  Christ. 
"  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star,"  that  is,  I  wiU  give  Myself  to  him,  the  light  of 
life,  the  light  that  breaks  upon  the  world  after  a  night  of  darkness  and  tempest. 
{Caleb  Morris.)  Thyatira :  —  I.  The    majesty    and    judicial    aspects  of    its 

Divine  Author.  1.  His  majesty — "Son  of  God."  (1)  Our  Lord's  resurrection; 
its  grand  and  unanswerable  demonstration  (Kom.  i.  4).  (2)  The  title  proof  of 
His  glory  and  Divinity  (Heb.  i.  2-8).  2.  His  judicial  aspects.  (1)  Nothing  can 
escape  His  piercing  glance.  (2)  No  one  can  escape  His  resistless  power. 
11.  His  loving  recognition  of  every  commendable  quality  (ver.   19).    III.  His 

HOLY  ABHORRENCE  OF  THE  EVILS  PERMITTED  IN  THE  ChURCH  (vCI.  20).  IV.  HiS 
LOVING  FORBEARANCE  OF  THIS  WICKED  PARTY  (VCI.  21).  V.  ThE  TERRIBLE  DOOM 
THAT   AWAITS    THIS    PARTY    UNLESS    THEY    REPENT    (vcrS.  22,    23).      VI.    OUR     LoRD'S 

INSPIRING  WORDS  TO  THE  FAITHFUL  (vcr.  24).  1.  The  importance  of  not  giving 
heed  to  false  doctrine.  2.  The  connection  between  false  doctrine  and  the  knowing 
"the  depths  of  Satan."  VH.  The  importance  of  firmly  holding  the  truth 
AND  grace  of  Christ  (ver.  25).  VIH.  The  blessed  reward  of  Christian 
HEROISM  (vers.  26-28).  IX.  Our  Lord's  earnest  exhortation  to  the  Churches 
(ver.  29).  {D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  Church  contaminated  by  doctrinal  error: — 
I.  This  Church  had  previously  been  of  high  moral  character.  1.  Fervent  in 
its  love.  2.  Faithful  in  its  service.  3.  Constant  in  its  faith.  4.  Genuine  in  its 
patience.  6.  Progressive  in  its  excellences.  II.  This  Church,  notwithstanding 
its  previous  high  moral  character,   was    contaminated    by    doctrinal  error 

THROUGH   THE   SEDUCTIVE  INFLUENCE  OF  A  CORRUPT  WOMAN  (vcr.  20^.      1.    This  Chuich 

was  contaminated  in  doctrine  by  the  teaching  of  a  woman.  (1)  Of  wicked  name- 
sake. (2)  Of  vain  pretensions.  (3)  Of  corrupt  morality.  (4)  Of  seductive 
influence.      2.  This  Church,  through  its    doctrinal    error,   was  led  into  sinful 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  177 

practices.     3.  There  is  a  contaminating  influence  in  doctrinal  error.     III.  Those 

WHO  ABE  INSTRUMENTAL  IN  LEADING  A  ChURCH  INTO  DOCTRINAL  ERROR,  AND  ITS 
CONS'^QUENT    EVILS,     ARE     THREATENED     WITH     SEVERE      RETRIBUTION      (veiS.     22,    23). 

Less  )ns  :  1.  To  cultivate  in  Church  life  an  increase  of  all  Christian  graces.  2.  To 
avoid  vain  and  impious  teachers  who  profess  the  prophetic  gift.  3.  That  women 
should  keep  silence  in  the  Church.  4.  That  doctrinal  heresy  will  lead  to  an  awful 
destiny.  {J.  S.  Exell  M.A.)  I  know  thy  works  and  charity  .  .  .  and  the  last  to 
he  more  than  the  first. — The  first  and  last  works : — I.  What  every  Christian 
LIFE  IS  MEANT  TO  BE.  A  life  of  Continual  progress  in  which  each  "  to-morrow  shaU 
be  as  this  day,  and  much  more  abundant,"  in  reference  to  all  that  is  good  and 
noble.  A  continuous  progress  towards  and  in  all  good  of  every  sort  is  the  very  law 
of  the  Christian  life.  Every  metaphor  about  the  life  of  the  Christian  soul  carries 
the  same  lesson.  Is  it  a  building  ?  Then  course  by  course  it  rises.  Is  it  a  tree  ? 
Then  year  by  year  it  spreads  a  broader  shadow,  and  its  leafy  crown  reaches  nearer 
heaven.  Is  it  a  body?  Then  from  childhood  to  youth,  and  youth  to  manhood,  it 
grows.    Christianity  is  growth,  continual,  all-embracing,  and  unending.     II.  What 

A  SADLY  LARGE  PROPORTION  OF  PROFESSEDLY  CHRISTIAN  LIVES  ARE  NUT.  Many  pro- 
fessing Christians  are  cases  of  arrested  development,  like  some  of  those  mon- 
strosities that  you  see  about  our  pavements — a  full  grown  man  in  the  upper  part 
with  no  under  limbs  at  all  to  speak  of,  aged  half  a  century,  and  only  half  the 
height  of  a  ten  years  old  child.  They  grow,  if  at  all,  by  fits  and  starts,  after  the 
fashion,  say,  of  a  tree  that  every  winter  goes  to  sleep,  and  only  makes  wood  for  a 
little  while  in  the  summer  time.  Or  they  do  not  grow  even  as  regularly  as  that, 
but  there  will  come  sometimes  an  hour  or  two  of  growth,  and  then  long  dreary 
tracks  in  which  there  is  no  progress  at  all,  either  in  understanding  of  Christian 
doctrine  or  in  the  application  of  Christian  precept ;  no  increase  of  conformity  to 
Jesus  Christ,  no  increase  of  realising  hold  of  His  love,  no  clearer  or  more  fixed  and 
penetrating  contemplation  of  the  unseen  realities,  than  there  used  to  be  long,  long 
ago.  Let  us  learn  the  lesson  that  either  to-day  is  better  than  yesterday  or  it  is 
worse.  If  a  man  on  a  bicycle  stands  still  he  tumbles.  The  condition  of  keeping 
upright  is  to  go  onwards.  If  a  cUmber  on  an  Alpine  ice-slope  does  not  put  all  his 
power  into  the  effort  to  ascend,  he  cannot  stick  at  the  place,  at  an  angle  of  forty-five 
degrees  upon  the  ice,  but  down  he  is  bound  to  go.  Unless,  by  effort,  he  overcomes 
gravitation,  he  will  be  at  the  bottom  very  soon.  And  so  if  Christian  people  are  not 
daily  getting  better,  they  are  daily  getting  worse.  There  are  two  alternatives  before 
us.  Either  we  are  getting  more  Christlike  or  we  are  daily  getting  less  so.  III.  How 
THIS  COMMENDATION  MAY  BECOME  OURS.  Noticc  the  coutcxt.  Christ  says,  "  I  know 
thy  works  and  love  and  faith  and  service  "  (or  ministry),  "and  patience,  and  that  thy 
last  works  are  more  than  the  first."  That  is  to  say,  the  great  way  by  which  we  can  secure 
this  continual  growth  in  the  manifestations  of  Christian  life  is  by  making  it  a  habit 
to  cultivate  what  produces  it,  viz.,  these  two  things,  charity  (or  love)  and  faith. 
These  are  the  roots ;  they  need  cultivating.  If  they  are  not  cultivated  then  their 
results  of  "  service  "  (or  "  ministry  ")  and  patience  are  sure  to  become  less  and  less. 
These  two,  faith  and  love,  are  the  roots  ;  their  vitality  determines  the  strength  and 
abundance  of  the  fruit  that  is  borne.  If  we  want  our  works  to  increase  in  number 
and  to  rise  in  quality,  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  make  an  honest  habit  of  cultivating 
that  which  is  their  producing  cause — love  to  Jesus  Christ  and  faith  in  Him.  And 
then  the  text  still  further  suggests  another  thought.  At  the  end  of  the  letter  I 
read  :  '*  He  that  overcometh  and  keepeth  My  works  to  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give," 
&c.  Now,  mark  what  were  called  "  thy  works  "  in  the  beginning  of  the  letter  are 
called  '•  My  works  "  in  its  close.  If  we  want  that  the  Master  shall  see  in  us  a  con- 
tinuous growth  towards  Himself,  then,  in  addition  to  cultivating  the  habit  of  faith 
and  love,  we  must  cultivate  the  other  habit  of  looking  to  Him  as  the  source  of  all 
the  work  that  we  do  for  Him.  And  when  we  have  passed  from  the  contemplation 
of  our  deeds  as  ours,  and  come  to  look  upon  all  that  we  do  of  right  and  truth 
and  beauty  as  Christ  working  in  us,  then  there  is  a  certainty  of  our  work 
increasing  in  nobility  and  in  extent.  There  is  still  another  thing  to  be 
remembered,  and  that  is,  that  if  we  are  to  have  this  progressive  godliness 
we  must  put  forth  continuous  effort  right  away  to  the  very  close.  We  come 
to  no  point  in  our  lives  when  we  can  slack  off  in  the  earnestness  of  our 
endeavour  to  make  more  and  more  of  Christ's  fulness  our  own.  {A.  Maclaren,D.D.) 
Notwithstanding,  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  because  thou  sufferest  that 
woman  Jezebel. — An  imperfect  Church  :  —I.  A  serious  charge  all]  ged  against  the 
Church  at  Thyatira.     The  most  perfect  Church  upon  earth  is  very  imperfect.    A 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

seriously  observant  man  will  soon  perceive  '•  an  end  of  all  perfection  "  in  the  most 
excellent  characters.  All  our  Lord's  descriptions  of  character  are  faithful.  He  never 
drew  a  false  likeness.  By  Him  neither  excellences  or  imperfection  were  ever  exag- 
gerated. The  design  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  exposing  the  sins  and  imperfections  of 
the  people  of  God  is  to  warn  Christians  of  their  danger,  and  to  excite  them  to 
constant  watchfulness  and  fervent  prayer.  The  faithful  reproof  marks  the  line  of 
conduct  we  are  bound  conscientiously  to  pursue  in  dealing  with  professors  of  the 
religion  of  Christ.  11.  Divine  patience  spares  for  a  season  the  most  abandoned 
AND  GUILTY  CHARACTERS.  Justicc  might  instantly  inflict  condign  punishment  upon 
licentious  characters.    IH.  Tremendous  judgments  will  succeed  the  exercise  of 

PATIENCE    UPON    THOSE   WHO     CONTINUE     IMPENITENT.        IV.    OUB    LoRD    ASSERTS    HiS 

omniscience  and  His  prerogative  to  punish  and  reward  mankind.    V.  The  epistle 

CONCLUDES   WITH   EXHORTATION    AND   ENCOURAGEMENT    ADDRESSED    TO    THOSE    WHO   HAD 

NOT  APPROVED  OF  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  Jezebel.     {J.  Hyatt.)       Inconsistency  : — Alas  for 
our  many  inconsistencies,  our  varied  imperfections ;  alas  for  the  mischief  they  do  to 
our  own  souls  and  to  the  cause  of  Christ  everywhere !    Up  to  a  certain  point,  by 
the  grace  of  God  and  a  steadfast  will,  we  have  done,  let  us  suppose,  pretty  well. 
We  have  gained  something.      But  the  difficulty  is  to  get  on  a  little  farther. 
Conscience  has  always  a  few  things  against  us  which  we  cannot  quite  conquer — very 
unimportant,  perhaps,  according  to  the  world's  judgment,  and  yet,  we  know,  very 
contrary  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.    We  ought  to  be  humble,  and  we  are  proud.    We 
ought  to  be  grave,  and  we  are  frivolous.     We  ought  to  be  exact  in  our  times  of 
prayer,  and  we  suffer  all  manner  of  things  to  interrupt  us.     We  ought  to  be  over- 
flowing  with   kindness;  and  we  are  reserved,   impatient,   and  unsympathising. 
It  is  well  for  us  if  we  can  perceive  our  inconsistencies  and  try  to  amend  them.     The 
devil  does  his  best  to  keep  our  attention  fixed  on  what  we  have  gained.     Our  incon- 
sistencies, whatever  they  may  appear  to  us,  are  spots  and  blemishes  in  the  soul, 
disfiguring  that  image  of  Christ  into  which  we  desire  to  be  transformed,  holding 
us  back  from  God  only  knows  what  higher  degrees  of  perfection,   spoiling  the 
offering  of  our  life,  keeping  back  a  part  of  the  spoil.     Moreover,  it  is  by  these 
inconsistencies  that  the  devil  gains  power  over  us  in  other  ways.     These  are  his 
stations  which  he  seizes  and  fortifies,  establishing  on  them  his  engines  of  war, 
from  which  he  hurls  his  fiery  darts  of  temptation  so  as  to  overcome  our  defence  in 
the  matter  of  some  kindred  fault,  and  to  throw  in  other  forces  of  his  own  as  soon 
as  the  breach  is  opened.    And  who  shall  tell  the  disheartening  effect  upon  our- 
selves of  these  inconsistencies  ?     So  much  for  the  effect  of  our  inconsistency  on 
ourselves.    And  what  shall  we  say  of  its  effect  upon  the  world  at  large  ?    There  is 
nothing  which  does  the  devil's  work  half  so  well  as  the  unholy  life  combined  with 
great  profession.     {W.  Mitchell,  3I.A.)        The  Jezebel  of  Thyatira  proceeded  in  the 
same  way  as  all  do  who  succeed  in  making  havoc  of  the  Church  of  Christ.     She 
came  under  the  semblance  of  religion  ;  she  pretended  to  be  inspired  of  God  ;  and  she 
appears  to  have  gained  such  credit  with  the  bishop  himself  that  he  was  beguiled 
by  her  enticing  words,  and  suffered  her  to  teach ;  this  was  his  sin.    Now  it  is 
evident  when  we  read  the  character  of  this  man  that  he  had  not  lent  himself 
knowingly  to  any  wicked  designs  of  the  false  prophetess.    What  does  this  show 
but  our  constant  liability  to  error,  even  though  we  should  be  exalted  to  the  highest 
station  in  the  Church  of  Christ  ?    We  may  be  compromising  our  high  and  evan- 
gelical principles  by  unworthy  and  undignified  concession  to  the  errors  of  others, 
as  effectually  as  did  those  deceived  Christians  of  Thyatira ;  and  there  will  never  be 
wanting  a  Jezebel  or  a  doctrine  which  that  name  will  denote  to  assure  us  that  it  is 
right  so  to  do,  and  that  we  thereby  gain  a  universal  esteem  which  will  help  us  to 
extend  our  own  particular  views  and  influence.    But,  besides  this  practice,  the  false 
prophetess  had  a  doctrine,  and  it  is  characterised  by  "  the  depths  of  Satan."     Our 
Lord  pronounces  the  things  whereof  Jezebel  and  her  followers  made  their  boast  to 
be  deep,  but  they  were  not  the  deep  things  of  God,  but  of   Satan;   there  is  a 
spirit  which  searcheth  the  mysteries  of  godliness ;  and  there  is  a  spirit  which  is 
busy  in  diving  into  the  depths  of  evil  under  the  pretension  of  seeking  out  causes, 
until  it  becomes  what  may  be  termed  mysticism.     The  false  prophetess,  no  doubt, 
led  her  votaries  to  believe  that  some  other  revelation  than  what  was  in  God's  Word 
had  been  made  to  her,  and  professed  to  communicate  some  superior  light  on  the 
deepest  and  most  intricate  points  of  faith.     Generally  speaking,  when  error  is 
worked  into  a  system,  it  must  have  an  air  of  mystery  thrown  around  it,  and  be 
supposed  to  conceal  something  which  cannot  meet  the  vulgar  eye  or  be  known 
to  the  uninitiated.    Nothing  but  truth  will  bear  an  open  investigation ;  truth  is  the 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  17^ 

only  system  that  may  be  committed  with  safety  to  a  whole  community ;  not  that  it 
will  be  so  safe  as  never  to  be  perverted,  but  it  will  finally  triumph,  and  requires 
neither  secret  machinery  nor  open  violence  to  force  it  on  men's  minds.  Beware  of 
an  inordinate  love  of  speculation  on  the  nature  and  counsels  of  the  Most  High ; 
deep  things,  though  most  alluring,  are  not  the  best  elements  for  the  health  of  the 
soul,  and  very  few  who  have  exercised  themselves  much  therein  have  been  able 
to  maintain  a  spirit  of  sobriety  unto  the  end.  Let  us  beware  of  a  tendency  to  begin 
our  inquiries  where  all  wise  men  make  an  end.  Let  us  seek  to  be  wise  up  to  the 
word,  not  beyond  it ;  and  thus  keeping  our  hearts  in  all  simplicity  we  shall  soon 
learn  to  whom  the  Father  reveals  His  mysteries,  and  we  shall  retain  an  unclouded 
judgment  to  approve  things  that  are  excellent,  and  to  discuss  with  patience  and 
candour.  2.  The  other  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  this  history  regards  the  discipline 
and  ordinances  of  the  Churchy  The  deluded  followers  of  the  false  prophetess  had 
Bet  at  nought  the  discipline  of  the  overseers  of  the  Church  for  the  time  being, 
apparently  esteeming  it  a  burden  not  to  be  tolerated  by  them  who  pretended  to  such 
great  gifts.  God,  however,  is  not  a  God  of  confusion  but  of  order,  and  was  careful 
to  confirm  that  burden  and  thereby  to  give  His  sanction  to  discipline.  {R.  Burgess^ 
B.D.)  Jezebel  to  be  cast  out  of  the  Church: — Why  they  did  not  insist  upon 
having  this  Jezebel  turned  out  of  the  Church  appears  exceedingly  strange. 
Perhaps  she  was  a  woman  of  wealth  and  riches,  of  some  note  and  rank  in 
Thyatira.  There  are  few  Churches  so  exactly  apostolic  as  to  pursue  a  strict 
impartiality.  The  gold  ring  and  the  gay  clothing  goes  a  great  way.  A  woman, 
whether  she  was  a  prophetess  or  not,  provided  she  had  some  thousands  a  year,  and 
knew  how  to  apply  it  among  her  friends,  might  be  guilty  of  a  great  many 
peccadillos  and  have  them  winked  at,  when  one  of  low  degree  could  not  escape 
censure  for  the  first  trip.  There  is  something  bewitching  in  riches  and  worldly 
dignity — they  make  mankind  do  very  absurd  and  inconsistent  things,  and  even 
New  Testament  Churches  have  been  fascinated  therewith.  Perhaps  this  prophetess 
would  have  been  accounted  a  good  Christian  in  these  soft,  good-natured  times 
when  divorces  are  so  common.  She  would  probably  have  endowed  a  church, 
entertained  the  clergy,  like  a  good  Christian  and  orthodox  believer ;  and  this  would 
cover  a  multitude  of  sins.  But  Christ  does  not  judge  as  men  do,  for  He  looks  into 
the  heart  and  sees  that  many  specious  actions  are  only  intended  as  a  cover  to 
conceal  other  designs  than  those  that  are  pretended  publicly.  There  is  no 
imposing  upon  Him  that  searches  the  hearts.  It  is  a  great  mercy  that  the  Church 
has  such  an  Head,  who  knows  all  things,  and  discerns  all  characters,  and  will  not 
suffer  sin  to  pass  without  rebuke.  {J.  Murray.)  Sins  of  omission  : — It  is  a  fault, 
then,  not  only  to  be  active  in  evil,  but  to  be  passive  of  evil.  (J.  Trapp.)  Jezebel 
a  type  of  worldliness  : — Jezebel  was  a  heathen  princess,  the  first  heathen  queen 
who  had  been  married  by  a  king  of  the  northern  kingdom  of  Israel.  She  was, 
therefore,  peculiarly  fitted  to  represent  the  influences  of  the  world ;  and  the  charge 
against  the  first  Church  of  the  second  group  is  that  she  tolerated  the  world  with 
its  heathen  thoughts  and  practices.  She  knew  it  to  be  the  world  that  it  was, 
but  notwithstanding  this  she  was  content  to  be  at  peace,  perhaps  even  to  ally 
herself  with  it.  {W.  Milligan,  B.D.)  And  I  gave  her  space  to  repent. — 
A  timely  period : — God  is  the  great  giver ;  He  gives  Ufe  and  food  and  happiness 
to  all  His  creatures.  I.  A  definition  of  time.  Some  call  time  the  measure  of 
duration ;  others  the  succession  of  ideas,  pearls  strung  upon  a  golden  thread.  But 
is  not  this  as  good  as  either — "space  to  repent?"  JI.  A  limitation  of  mercy. 
"Space,"  a  definite  period  of  time.  Man's  "days  are  determined"  (Job  xiv.  5). 
1.  How  rash  the  calculations  of  the  sinner.  2.  How  simple  the  reckoning  of  the 
saint  (Gen.  xlvii.  9 ;  Job  xiv.  14 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  29).  HI.  A  declabation  of  duty. 
"Kepent."  IV.  A  foreshadowing  of  destiny.  Man  is  related  to  eternity. 
{Homilist.)  Time  for  repentance : — I.  Divinely  allotted.  1.  The  wealth  of 
Divine  mercy.  2.  Man  will  have  no  excuse  if  finally  lost.  H.  Certainly 
limited.  Then  use  it  well,  prize  it  highly,  see  that  the  Divine  purpose 
concerning  your  destiny  is  accomplished.  III.  Wilfully  neglected.  1.  Be- 
cause their  minds  are  darkened.  2.  Because  their  hearts  are  insensible.  3. 
Because  their  retributions  are  delayed.  IV.  Eternally  ruinous.  Lessons : 
1.  We  are  Divinely  called  to  repentance.  2.  We  should  repent  now,  because 
now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Space  to  repent : — "  In  space  comes  grace  "  proves  not  always  a  true  proverb.  They 
that  defer  the  work,  and  say  that  men  may  repent  hereafter,  say  truly,  but  not 
safely.    The  branch  that  bears  not  timely  fruit  is  cut  ofif  (,^obn  xv.  2).    The  ground 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that  yields  not  a  seasonable  and  suitable  return  is  nigh  unto  cursing  (Heb.  vi.  8). 
{John  Trapp.)  I  will  give  unto  every  one  of  you  according  to  your  works. — 
Self-prepared  penalties  : — My  children,  li  you  saw  a  man  prepare  a  great  pile  of 
wood,  heaping  up  fagots  one  upon  another,  and  when  you  asked  him  what  he  was 
doing,  he  were  to  answer  you,  "  I  am  preparing  the  fire  that  is  to  bum  me,"  what 
would  you  think  ?  And  if  you  saw  this  same  man  set  fire  to  the  pile,  and  when 
it  was  lighted,  throw  himself  upon  it,  what  would  you  say  ?  This  is  what  we  do 
when  we  commit  sin.  (G.  Vianney.)  The  depths  of  Satan  : — This  is  not  the 
name  which  these  persons  gave  to  the  doctrines  they  held,  but  the  real  character 
they  deserved.  Mankind  have  always  been  fond  of  depths  and  mysteries,  and 
more  disposed  to  adhere  to  things  which  they  do  not  understand,  than  to  simple 
and  plain  truths  that  are  more  plain  and  obvious.  It  would  appear  to  have  been 
one  of  the  particular  stratagems  of  the  wicked  one  to  persuade  mankind  that 
Divine  revelation  is  beyond  the  understanding  of  the  inferior  ranks  of  Church 
members,  and  that  they  must  depend  for  their  direction  how  to  understand  them, 
upon  some  select  commissioners  that  are  initiated  in  the  secrets  thereof.  The 
depths  of  Satan  differ  from  all  things  that  may  be  called  depths  in  the  Word  of 
God,  in  the  following  particulars.  1.  Satan  appoints  trustees  to  keep  the  key  of  his 
secrets,  and  does  not  show  an  index  to  the  mysteries  which  are  in  his  system. 
But  there  are  no  mysteries  in  the  Word  of  God,  but  what  have  a  key  to  open 
them,  and  an  index  to  point  them  out.  2.  The  interpretation  of  Scripture 
mysteries  is  always  shorter,  and  expressed  in  fewer  words,  than  the  mysteries 
themselves.  The  vision  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  great  image  pointed  out  himself  in 
a  mystery ;  the  interpretation  was  short,  and  yet  exceedingly  plain.  The  depths 
and  mysteries  of  Satan  are  quite  different;  the  mystery  is  short,  but  the  inter- 
pretation long,  and  the  opening  of  the  mystery  very  tedious.  3.  The  depths  of 
God  are  always  opened  up  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the  course  of  Divine 
revelation,  and  without  the  interpretation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  original 
author,  all  the  art  of  men  and  angels  could  not  develop  one  single  emblem  in 
either  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  The  depths  of 
Satan  are  like  Milton's  Darkness  Visible,  incapable  of  any  consistent  interpre- 
tation, nor  are  they  ever  intended  to  be  understood.  They  are  believed  because 
they  are  inscrutable,  and  on  that  account  require  a  large  measure  of  faith.  But 
what  God  reveals,  the  nature  and  character  thereof  is  plain,  though  the  measure 
is  unfathomable.  4.  These  doctrines,  which  John  calls  the  depths  of  Satan, 
appear  to  have  been  the  dogmas  of  men,  and  the  conceits  of  sophisters  in  religion, 
which  were  intended  to  render  godliness  more  fashionable  and  agreeable  to  the 
taste  of  coirupt  professors  ;  and  they  differed  from  the  simphcity  of  the  gospel  in 
the  ease  they  promised  to  those  who  embraced  them.  {J.Murray.)  But  that  whicli 
ye  have  already,  hold  fast  till  I  come. — A  little  religion  is  worth  retaining : — I. 
Hold  fast  that  which  you  have,  because  it  is  wokth  betaiking.  1.  Because  of 
the  means  which  God  has  employed  to  put  you  in  the  possession  of  it.  2.  Because 
it  is  connected  with  the  salvation  of  your  soul.  3.  Because  the  minutest  portion  of 
it  is  valuable,  and  is  capable  of  unlimited  increase.  When  the  whole  substance  ia 
composed  of  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  intrinsic  value  belongs  to  every 
particle  and  to  every  grain,  so  that  its  very  dust  is  carefully  preserved.  And  so  it 
is  with  aU  the  impressions  and  feelings  which  belong  to  true  religion,  for  they 
are  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  portions  of  the  ways  of  the  unsearchable  God.  The 
mariner  does  not  throw  away  the  little  light  which  shines  upon  him  from  the  polar 
star,  but  retains  it  in  his  eye  tiU  it  has  guided  his  vessel  into  port.  And  though  in 
some  periods  of  your  religious  experience,  Jesus  Christ  may  not  appear  to  you  in 
His  fuU  tide  of  glory,  as  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  yet  if  He  appears  to  you  in  the 
feebler  beams  of  the  morning  star,  ever  remember  that  what  you  see,  though  but  a 
glimmering,  still  is  light,  real  heavenly  light.  Hold  it,  therefore,  in  your  view.  If 
you  possessed  but  one  single  grain  of  wheat,  its  intrinsic  value  would  be  trifling  ; 
but  how  is  its  value  enhanced,  and  with  what  care  will  it  be  preserved,  when  you 
know  that  if  it  be  sown  and  reaped,  and  sown  and  reaped  again,  its  production  will 
soon  be  seen  waving  in  the  valleys,  and  crowning  the  mountain  tops,  till  it  has 
furnished  food  sufficient  for  a  city,  a  continent,  a  world.  And  who  can  set  limits 
to  the  increase  of  grace?  Who  can  tell  what  advances  he  may  make  in  knowledge, 
in  holiness,  and  in  joy,  who  is  now  for  the  first  time  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  ? 
IL  Hold  fast  that  which  iou  have,  because  various  efforts  are  made  to 
deprive  tou  of  it.  1.  Such  efforts  are  made  by  our  own  evil  propensities.  As 
the  guards  and  the  cultivators  of  that  whidfci  we  have,  there  must  be  vigilance  and 


CHAP,  n.]  REVELATION.  181 

resistance  and  persevering  prayer ;  there  must  be  a  war  continually  waged  against 
evil  thoughts,  evil  propensities,  and  evil  actions ;  and  there  must  be  an  unceasing 
and  determined  effort  to  bring  the  whole  soul  under  the  supreme  dominion  of  gospel 
principles  and  of  gospel  influences.  2.  Such  efforts  are  made  by  the  world.  The 
mere  presence  of  material  and  worldly  objects  has  a  tendency  to  divert  our  attention 
and  our  affections  from  those  objects  which  are  spiritual  and  unseen.  The  quantity 
of  time  and  thought  and  labour  which  worldly  business  receives,  from  both  the 
master  and  the  servant,  is  often  unfavourable,  and  sometimes  fatal  to  fervency  of 
spirit.     3.  Such  efforts  are  made  by  Satan.     III.  Hold  fast  that  which  you  have, 

BECAUSE    THE    GOSPEL   FURNISHES   YOU   WITH    THE    MEANS    OF     BETAININO    IT.        1.    The 

gospel  furnishes  you  with  the  examples  of  righteous  men,  who  have  retained  their 
sniritual  possessions  even  in  the  midst  of  multiplied  difficulties  and  dangers.  2. 
The  gospel  promises  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  your  infirmities,  and  to  make  your 
strength  equal  to  your  day.  IV.  Hold  fast  that  which  you  have,  because  Jesus 
Christ  is  approaching.  1.  This  announcement,  you  perceive,  prescribes  the  term 
of  your  endurance.  It  is  to  continue  till  the  Lord  comes.  The  oath  which  Christ 
requires  from  us,  when  we  enter  His  service,  is  an  oath  of  fidelity  for  life ;  and,  in 
this  respect,  Christ's  requirements  accord  with  the  dispositions  of  all  His  faithful 
servants.  They  desire  to  persevere.  They  pray  that  they  may  persevere.  2.  The 
announcement  that  Christ  is  coming  affords  great  encouragement  to  sustain  your 
endurance  ;  for  He  is  coming  to  receive  His  people  to  Himself,  that  where  He  is, 
there  they  may  be  also.  And  as  the  shipwrecked  mariner  is  encouraged  to  hold 
fast  the  rope  which  he  has  grasped,  when  he  hears  that  the  lifeboat  is  coming  to 
convey  him  to  the  shore,  so  be  you  strengthened  and  encouraged  by  the  announced 
approaching  of  your  Lord,  who  even  now  is  walking  on  the  waters  to  conduct  you 
to  the  desired  haven.     (/.   Alexander.)  Christian    excellence  : — I.    Christian 

excellence  is  an  attainment.  1.  Christian  excellence  is  an  attainment  in  contra- 
distinction to  a  native  growth.  It  does  not  spring  up  in  the  soul  as  an  indigenous 
germ.  It  is  a  seed  that  has  been  taken  in  and  cultivated.  2.  Christian  excellence 
is  an  attainment  in  contradistinction  to  an  impartation.  In  a  sense,  it  is  the  gift 
of  God ;  not  in  the  sense  in  which  life  and  light  and  air  and  the  seasons  of  the 
year  are  the  gifts  of  God,  blessings  that  come  upon  us  irrespective  of  our  own 
efforts,  but  rather  in  the  sense  in  which  the  crops  of  the  husbandman,  the  learning 
of  the  scholar,  the  triumphs  of  the  artist,  are  the  gifts  of  God — blessings  that  come 
as  the  result  of  appropriate  labour.  We  shall  grow  neither  good  nor  be  made  good ; 
we  must  become  good ;  we  must  struggle  after  it.  II.  Christian  excellence  is  an 
attainmont  that  requires  fast  holding.  1.  Because  it  is  worth  retaining.  Its 
value  will  appear  by  considering  three  things.  (1)  The  priceless  instrumentality 
employed  to  put  man  in  possession  of  it :  the  mission  of  Christ.  (2)  Its  essential 
connection  with  man's  spiritual  well-being ;  there  is  no  true  happiness  apart  from 
it.  (3)  Its  capabiHty  of  unlimited  progress  ;  it  may  be  as  a  grain  of  mustard,  but 
it  can  grow.  2.  Because  there  is  a  danger  of  losing  it.  (1)  Men  who  have  had  it 
have  lost  it  before  now.  (2)  Agencies  are  in  constant  operation  here  that  threaten 
its  destruction.  III.  Christian  excellence  is  an  attainment  that  will  be  placed 
BEYOND  danger  AT  THE  ADVENT  OF  Christ.  1.  He  comcs  to  cvcry  Christian  at 
death.  2.  When  He  thus  comes — (1)  He  crushes  for  ever  our  enemies.  He 
bruises  the  head  of  Satan  under  our  feet.  (2)  He  removes  from  us  everything 
inimical  to  the  growth  of  goodness.  (3)  He  introduces  us  into  those  heavenly 
scenes  where  there  will  be  nothing  but  what  ministers  to  the  advancement  of 
goodness.  Take  heart.  Christian,  the  struggle  is  not  for  long.  {Homilist.)  Hold 
fast  the  good  obtained: — I.  There  is  something  "which  we  have  already";  let 
us  inquire  what  it  is.  First,  have  we  obtained  pardoning  mercy  ?  Secondly,  have 
we  obtained  justifying  grace  ?  Thirdly,  there  is  sanctifying  power.  Fourthly, 
suppose  freedom  and  comfort  in  the  ways  of  God.  Fifthly,  suppose  a  sweet  sense 
of  the  love  of  God  in  the  soul.  Lastly,  have  you  obtained  an  interest  in  the 
promises?  II.  Supposing,  then,  that  we  have  something,  "hold  fast."  And 
this  is  opposed  to  those  who  turn  round  and  go  back,  or  who  turn  aside  and  go 
astray.  Let  there  be  an  advancement  and  progress  in  holiness,  in  zeal,  in  love,  in 
conformity  to  Christ's  image.  When  it  is  said,  •'  hold  fast,"  it  implies  that  there 
are  certain  fixed  and  determinate  principles  of  truth,  which  we  are  on  no  account 
to  let  go.  There  is  a  "  form  of  sound  words,"  which  is  not  to  be  relinquished. 
The  dignity  of  Christ,  the  efficacy  of  His  sacrifice,  the  triumph  of  His  mediation, 
the  fact  of  His  advent  and  coming  again  in  glory,  we  are  to  give  up  only  with  our 
lives.     ♦•  Hold  it  fast "  implies  that  there  are  certain  means  and  instrumentalities 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  be  employed.  "  What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  Watch."  Consider  what 
you  will  lose,  if  you  hold  not  fast  the  things  which  you  have  already  obtained. 
And,  again,  if  you  lose  what  is  gained,  the  dishonour  and  shame  are  greater  than 
before.  {J.  Straiten.)  Christian  steadfastness  : — "  Hold  fast."  Here,  as  con- 
stantly, a  material  image  is  used  to  set  forth  a  spiritual  act,  or  rather  a  life-long 
series  of  spiritual  acts,  indicated  by  the  continuous  act  "  hold  fast."  It  implies, 
too,  that  there  is  something  to  lay  hold  of,  and  what  that  is  is  referred  to  before- 
hand, "  that  which  ye  have  already."  By  this  we  should  probably  understand  all 
that  is  included  in  "the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints"  ;  "  the  sum  total,"  as 
it  has  been  expressed,  *'  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  hopes,  and  privileges."  How 
much  that  is !  The  laws  of  Christ,  they  are  to  be  held  fast,  not  one  forgotten  or 
neglected ;  the  promises  of  Christ,  they  are  to  be  held  fast,  not  one  forgotten  or 
neglected ;  the  helps  of  Christ,  they  are  all  of  them  to  be  held  fast,  and  used  in  the 
varied  and  continued  necessities  of  this  mortal  life  of  temptation.  To  hold  all  these 
fast  may  be  summed  up  as  holding  Him  fast,  as  our  Divine  Lawgiver  andKedeemer, 
our  great  Priest  and  Sacrifice,  our  in-dwelling  Spirit  and  life.  We  do  not  need  to 
ask  for  a  Christ  of  higher  endowments  and  larger  resources  ;  it  is  enough  for  us  to 
hold  fast  the  Christ  we  have  already,  "  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,  wisdom,  and 
righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption."  "  Hold  fast  till  I  come."  The 
thoughts  suggested  by  the  words  "  hold  fast "  are  very  different  from  those  suggested 
by  "  I  come."  "  Hold  fast  "  tells  of  the  struggles  of  earth  ;  "  I  come  "  tells  of  the 
serene  and  abiding  peace  which  reigns  where  Jesus  is.  "Hold  fast  till  I  come." 
The  earthly  effort  till  the  heavenly  reward.  The  strenuous  life-effort,  weary, 
protracted,  often  seeming  doubtful  in  result,  is  to  continue  till  Christ  comes,  up  to  the 
hour  of  that  supreme  disclosure,  but  not  beyond  it.  Then  the  weary  hands  may  relax 
their  painful  effort,  the  weary  eyes  their  outlook  for  danger,  the  weary  heart  its  patience 
of  hope,  for  the  security  and  rest  of  victory  will  have  come.  (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.\ 
Hold  fast: — Tug  for  it  with  those  that  would  take  it  from  you.  {J.  Trapp.) 
And  he  that  overcometh,  and  keepeth  My  works  unto  the  end,  to  him  I  will  give 
power  over  the  nations. — The  service  of  God — to  be  constant : — Look  at  yon  miller 
on  the  village  hill.  How  does  he  grind  his  grist  ?  Does  he  bargain  that  he  will  only 
grind  in  the  west  wind,  because  its  gales  are  so  full  of  health  ?  No,  but  the  east 
wind,  which  searches  joints  and  marrows,  makes  the  mill-stones  revolve,  and  together 
with  the  north  and  the  south  it  is  yoked  to  his  service.  Even  so  should  it  be  with 
you  who  are  true  workers  for  God ;  all  your  ups  and  your  downs,  your  successes  and 
your  defeats,  should  be  turned  to  the  glory  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
promises  to  the  victors  : — I.  We  have  the  victok's  authority.  Now,  the  promise  in 
my  next  text  is  moulded  by  a  remembrance  of  the  great  words  of  the  second  psalm. 
The  psalm  in  question  deals  with  that  Messianic  hope  under  the  symbols  of  an 
earthly  conquering  monarch,  and  sets  forth  His  dominion  as  established  throughout 
the  whole  earth.  And  our  letter  brings  this  marvellous  thought,  that  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect  are,  somehow  or  other,  associated  with  Him  in  that 
campaign  of  conquest.  And  so,  notice,  that  whatever  may  be  the  specific 
contents  of  such  a  promise  as  this,  the  general  form  of  it  is  in  full  harmony 
with  the  words  of  the  Master  whilst  He  was  on  earth.  Our  Lord  gave  His 
trembling  disciples  this  great  promise:  "  In  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  Man 
shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  "Thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a  few  things;  I  will 
make  thee  ruler  over  many  things " ;  and,  linked  along  with  the  promise  of 
authority,  the  assurance  of  union  with  the  Master:  "Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of 
thy  Lord."  My  text  adds  to  that  the  image  of  a  conquering  campaign,  of  a 
sceptre  of  iron  crushing  down  antagonism,  of  banded  opposition  broken  into 
shivers,  "  as  a  potter's  vessel "  dashed  upon  a  pavement  of  marble.  The  New 
Testament  teaching  converges  upon  this  one  point,  that  the  Christ  that  came  to 
die  shall  come  again  to  reign,  and  that  He  shall  reign  and  His  servants  with  Him. 
That  is  enough  ;  and  that  is  all.  But  all  the  other  promises  deal  not  with 
something  in  the  remoter  future,  but  with  something  that  begins  to  take  effect 
the  moment  the  dust,  and  confusion,  and  garments  rolled  in  blood,  of  the 
battle-field,  are  swept  away.  At  one  instant  the  victors  are  fighting,  at  the  next 
they  are  partaking  of  the  Tree  of  Life.  There  must  be  something  in  the  present  for 
blessed  dead,  as  well  as  for  them  in  the  future.  And  this  is,  that  they  are  united 
with  Jesus  Christ  in  His  present  activities,  and  through  Him,  and  in  Him,  and 
with  Him,  are  even  now  serving  Him.  The  servant,  when  he  dies,  and  has 
been  fitted  for  it,  enters  at  once  on  his  government  of  the  ten  cities.     Thus  this 


C3HAP.  n.]  REVELATION.  183 

promise  of  my  text,  in  its  deepest  meaning,  corresponds  with  the  deepest  needs  of  a 
man's  nature.  For  we  can  never  be  at  rest  unless  we  are  at  work  ;  and  a  heaven 
of  doing  nothing  is  a  heaven  of  ennui  and  weariness.  This  promise  of  my  text 
comes  in  to  supplement  the  three  preceding.  They  were  addressed  to  the  legitimate 
wearied  longings  for  rest  and  fulness  of  satisfaction  for  oneself.  This  is  addressed 
to  the  deeper  and  nobler  longing  for  larger  service.  And  the  words  of  my  text, 
whatever  dim  glory  they  may  partially  reveal,  as  accruing  to  the  victor  in  the 
future,  do  declare  that  when  he  passes  beyond  the  grave  there  will  be  waiting  for 
him  nobler  work  to  do  than  any  that  he  ever  has  done  here.  But  let  us  not  forget 
that  all  this  access  of  power  and  enlargement  of  opportunity  are  a  consequence  of 
Christ's  royalty  and  Christ's  conquering  rule.  That  is  to  say,  whatever  we  have 
because  we  have  knit  to  Him,  and  all  our  service  there,  as  all  our  blessedness  here, 
flows  from  our  union  with  that  Lord.  Whatever  there  lies  in  the  heavens,  the 
germ  of  it  all  is  this,  that  we  are  as  Christ,  so  closely  identified  with  Him  that  we 
are  like  Him,  and  share  in  all  His  possessions.  He  says  to  us,  "  All  Mine  is  thine." 
II.  Note  THE  victor's  starry  splendour.  "I  will  give  him  the  morning  star." 
Now,  no  doubt,  throughout  Scripture  a  star  is  a  symbol  of  royal  dominion ;  and 
many  would  propose  so  to  interpret  it  in  the  present  case.  But  it  seems  to  me  that 
whilst  that  explanation — which  makes  the  second  part  of  our  promise  simply 
identical  with  the  former,  though  under  a  different  garb— does  justice  to  one  part 
of  the  symbol,  it  entirely  omits  the  other.  But  the  emphasis  is  here  laid  on 
•'  morning  "  rather  than  on  "  star."  Then  another  false  scent,  as  it  were,  on  which 
interpretations  have  gone,  seems  to  me  to  be  that,  taking  into  account  the  fact  that 
in  the  last  chapter  of  the  Eevelation  our  Lord  is  Himself  described  as  "  the  bright 
and  morning  star,"  they  bring  this  promise  down  simply  to  mean  "  I  will  give  him 
Myself."  Now,  though  it  be  quite  true  that,  in  the  deepest  of  all  views,  Jesus 
Christ  Himself  is  the  gift  as  well  as  the  giver  of  all  these  seven-fold  promises,  yet 
the  propriety  of  representation  seems  to  me  to  forbid  that  He  should  here  say  "  I 
wiU  give  them  Myself !  "  So  that  I  think  we  are  just  to  lay  hold  of  the  thought — 
the  starry  splendour,  the  beauty  and  the  lustre  that  will  be  poured  upon  the  victor 
is  that  which  is  expressed  by  this  symbol  here.  What  that  lustre  will  consist  in  it 
becomes  us  not  to  say.  That  future  keeps  its  secret  well,  but  that  it  shall  be  the 
perfecting  of  human  nature  up  to  the  most  exquisite  height  of  which  it  is  capable, 
and  the  enlargement  of  it  beyond  all  that  human  experience  here  can  conceive,  we 
may  peaceably  anticipate  and  quietly  trust.  Only  note  the  advance  here  on  the 
previous  promises  is  as  conspicuous  as  in  the  former  part  of  this  great  promise. 
There  the  Christian  man's  influence  and  authority  were  set  forth  under  the  emblem 
of  regal  dominion.  Here  they  are  set  forth  under  the  emblem  of  lustrous 
splendour.  It  is  the  spectators  that  see  the  glory  of  the  beam  that  comes  from  the 
star.  And  this  promise,  like  the  former,  implies  that  in  that  future  there  wiU  be  a 
field  in  which  perfected  spirits  may  ray  out  their  light,  and  where  they  may 
gladden  and  draw  some  eyes  by  their  beams.  Christian  souls,  in  the  future,  as  in 
the  present,  will  stand  forth  as  the  visible  embodiments  of  the  glory  and  lustre  of 
the  unseen  God.  Further,  remember  that  this  image,  like  the  former,  traces  up  the 
royalty  to  communion  with  Christ,  and  to  impartation  from  Him.  "  I  will  give 
him  the  morning  star."  We  are  not  suns,  but  planets,  that  move  round  the  Sun 
of  Eighteousness,  and  flash  with  His  beauty.  HI.  Lastly,  mark  the  condition  of 
THE  authority,  AND  THE  LUSTRE.  Here  I  would  say  a  word  about  the  remarkable 
expansion  of  the  designation  of  the  victor,  to  which  I  have  already  referred :  "He 
that  overcometh,  and  keepeth  My  works  unto  the  end."  We  do  not  know  why  that 
expansion  was  put  in,  in  reference  to  Thyatira  only,  but  if  you  will  glance  over  the 
letter  you  will  see  that  there  is  more  than  usual  about  works  ;  works  to  be  repented 
of,  or  works  which  make  the  material  of  a  final  retribution  and  judgment.  Bring 
your  metaphor  of  a  victor  down  to  the  plain,  hard,  prose  fact  of  doing  Christ's  work 
right  away  to  the  end  of  life.  It  is  the  explanation  of  the  victory,  and  one  that  we 
all  need  to  lay  to  heart.  "  My  works."  That  means  the  works  that  He  enjoins. 
No  doubt ;  but  look  at  tiie  verse  before  my  text :  "  I  wiU  give  unto  every  one  of  you 
according  to  your  works."  That  is,  the  works  that  you  do,  and  Christ's  works  are 
not  only  those  which  He  enjoins,  but  those  of  which  He  Himself  set  the  pattern. 
He  will  "give  according  to  works " ;  He  will  "  give  authority  "  ;  "  give  the  morning 
star."  That  is  to  say,  the  life  which  has  been  moulded  according  to  Christ's 
pattern,  and  shaped  in  obedience  to  Christ's  commandments  is  the  Ufe  which  is 
capable  of  being  granted  participation  in  His  dominion,  and  invested  with  the 
morning  star.    It  is  for  us  to  choose  whether  we  shall  share  in  Christ's  dominion 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

or  be  crushed  by  His  iron  sceptre.  {^A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Poioer  over  the 
nations : — I.  Power  is  in  many  cases  the  result  of  conquest.  Even  in  this 
life  victory  brings  new  strength.  Physical  force  is  attained  by  a  long  series 
of  efforts.  The  blacksmith's  bravray,  sinewy  arm  is  the  natural  consequence 
of  years  of  vigorous  strokes  upon  the  anvil.  Intellectual  strength  grows  in  the 
same  way.  It  is  in  great  measure  acquired  by  mental  application,  and  comes 
from  painful,  persevering  endeavours  to  master  some  of  the  branches  of  art  or 
science.  This  is  a  law  of  our  being,  the  great  principle,  according  to  which  the 
All- wise  and  Almighty  Kuler  of  the  world  dispenses  His  gifts.  It  is,  therefore,  not 
surprising  to  find  the  same  method  applied  to  the  highest  and  noblest  kind  of  power, 
known  as  moral  and  spiritual.  The  ability  to  refuse  the  evil  and  choose  the  good,  as 
well  as  to  lead  others  to  do  the  same,  is  indeed  a  special  gift  of  God's  grace,  and  yet 
it  is  the  result  of  constant,  persevering  effort.  In  short,  this  promise  to  Thyatira  is 
being  continually  fulfilled  in  the  present  life.    U.  At  the  same  time,  for  its  largest 

AND  truest  accomplishment  WE  MUST  LOOK  ON  TO  THE  GRAND  AND  GLORIOUS  FUTURE.    It 

is  to  him  that  shall  have  overcome,  and  kept  Christ's  works  to  the  end,  that  He  here 
promises  power  over  the  nations.  "  The  royalties  of  Christ,"  remarks  Archbishop 
Trench,  "  shall  by  reflection  and  communication  be  the  royalties  also  of  His  Church. 
They  shall  reign,  but  only  because  Christ  reigns,  and  because  He  is  pleased  to  share 
His  dignity  with  them.  {W.  Burnet,  M. A.)  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star. — 
Christ,  the  Morning  Star  (compared  with  chap.  xxii.  16) : — In  seeking  to  interpret 
these  words  in  the  second  chapter,  some  have  supposed  that  the  "  morning  star  "  is 
not  directly  connected  with  Christ ;  but  that  the  promise  is  only  a  general  one, 
setting  forth  the  splendour  of  the  reward  of  believers.  Upon  this  principle  there 
would  be  the  same  blessing  promised  to  the  Church  of  Thyatira  under  two  forms : 
rule  over  the  nations,  and  the  splendour  of  such  an  inheritance  here  and  hereafter. 
Had  our  Lord  meant  to  display  the  splendour  of  the  Christian's  reward.  He  would 
have  spoken  of  making  His  people  like  the  morning  star,  rather  than  of  giving  them 
the  morning  star ;  hence  I  agree  with  those  who  understand  Christ  to  promise  that 
He  will  give  Himself  to  His  faithful  ones  as  their  portion  and  reward.  But  it  is 
plain  that  Christ  will  not  for  the  first  time  become  the  morning  star  to  His  people 
when  He  bestows  Himself  as  their  final  reward,  since  He  is  so  already  in  the  present 
life ;  and  hence  we  must  understand  Him  as  promising  to  give  Himself  in  a  higher 
measure  as  the  reward  of  their  fidelity.    I.  I  remark  that  Christ  is  to  His  people 

THE  MORNING   STAR   OF   TIME,   AND  WILL  BE   TO    THEM  THE  MORNING  STAR   OF  ETERNITY, 

BECAUSE  His  light  shines  after  darkness.  It  belongs  to  the  day  star  to  appear  in 
the  midst  of  gloom  when  the  shades  of  night  are  still  thick  and  heavy,  and  to 
announce  their  departure.  It  was  in  this  sense  that  Christ  came  as  the  light  of  the 
world.  There  was  a  general  sense  in  which  the  whole  world  sat  in  darkness,  as  it 
does  stUl  where  Christ  is  not  known.  "  Darkness  covered  the  earth  and  gross 
darkness  the  people."  Take  the  altar  at  Athens,  to  which  Paul  appealed.  If  we 
understand  its  inscription  as  to  *'  The  Unknown  God,"  did  not  this  proclaim  God 
at  large  as  still  unknown  ?  When  Christ  came  the  world  was  in  the  darkness  of 
guilt,  with  only  light  enough  to  read  the  sentence  of  conscience,  but  none  to  see  how 
it  could  be  reversed.  There  was  the  darkness  of  depravity,  for  in  the  night  the 
"  beasts  of  the  forest  walked  abroad,"  and  foul  and  hideous  lusts  degraded  every 
land.  These  causes  produced  a  darkness  of  untold  misery.  "  The  people  that 
walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light:  they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light  shined."  Similar  to  this  first  coming 
of  Christ  into  the  world  is  His  first  appearing  in  His  saving  character  to  individual 
sinners.  Every  sinner  to  whom  Christ  has  not  thus  appeared  walks.in  darkness. 
Let  him  at  length  be  aroused  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  how  awful  is  the  sense  of 
darkness  that  overwhelms  him !  The  experience  of  Christians,  indeed,  is  various. 
Some  have  more  memory  of  this  darkness  than  others.  Some  wander  in  it  longer 
and  plunge  into  it  more  deeply.  Such  is  the  first  grand  deliverance  from  darkness 
which  Christ  works  for  all  His  people,  and  which  during  their  earthly  history  He 
constantly  renews  wten  the  clouds  of  ignorance,  the  shades  of  guilt,  and  the  storms 
of  afflictions  might  gather  around  them.  And  now  in  the  second  of  our  texts  He 
promises,  as  the  reward  of  their  faith  and  loyalty,  that  He  will  give  Himself  to  each 
of  them  as  the  morning  star  of  eternity.  Here  too  the  emblem  shall  be  fulfilled,  for 
His  light  will  shine  after  darkness.  To  every  Christian,  the  brightest,  the  happiest, 
the  most  devoted,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  life  ends  in  darkness.  The  passage 
from  time  into  eternity  is  a  dark  passage.  The  Christian  must  enter  it  alone, 
and  pursue  it,  it  may  be,  with  failing  eye  and  fainting  step.     There  is  no  night 


CHAP.  II.]  REVELATION.  185 

so  deep  as  that  of  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  But  here  the  last  victory  over 
darkness  is  achieved.  •'  Light  is  thus  sown  in  the  righteous  "  when  the  departing 
spirit  is  gathered  home.  And  when  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God, 
and  the  mighty  shadow  of  the  judgment  throne  falls  even  upon  the  redeemed  in  awe 
and  solemn  dread,  shall  not  this  bright  and  morning  star  rest  upon  the  head  of  Him 
who  is  at  once  their  Judge  and  Advocate,  so  that  they  shall  "  rise  to  meet  Him,  free 
of  fear"  ?  Now  has  come  a  world  of  which  it  is  written,  "  And  there  shall  be  no 
night  there,"  "  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  hght,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof." 
II.  I  remark,  that  Christ  is  to  His  people  the  morning  star  of  time,  and  will  be 

TO  THEM  THE  MORNING  STAR  OF  ETERNITY,  BECAUSE  HiS  LIGHT  TRANSCENDS  ALL  COM- 
PARISON. No  one  can  mistake  the  morning  star  in  the  firmament  or  confound  it  with 
any  other  orb.  It  shines  pre-eminent  and  alone.  In  the  words  of  Milton,  it  "  flames 
in  the  forehead  of  the  morning  sky."  Thus  it  is  with  Christ.  1.  Christ  is  pre- 
eminent in  His  titles.  Some  of  these  are  shared  with  others  ;  but  what  a  stamp  of 
peculiarity  is  set  upon  them  as  applied  to  Christ !  Is  He  the  Son  of  God  ?  Then 
He  is  His  "  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father."  Is  He  the 
Angel  of  God?  Then  He  is  "made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  He  hath 
obtained  by  inheritance  a  more  excellent  name  than  they."  Is  He  the  Mediator? 
Then  He  is  "  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men."  Is  He  the  Saviour?  Then 
there  is  salvation  in  no  other,  "  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  2.  Christ  is  pre-eminent  in  His  offices. 
As  a  Prophet,  He  brings  revelation  from  the  highest  heaven.  As  a  Priest,  He  offers 
the  alone  and  perfect  sacrifice.  As  a  King,  He  is  without  example.  3.  Christ  is 
pre-eminent  in  His  history.  To  Him  all  history  converges,  and  in  His  own  it  is 
summed  up  and  transcended.  He  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  He  is  the  Kose 
of  Sharon  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valley ;  He  is  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price  ;  He  is  the 
Plant  of  Renown ;  He  is  the  Bread  of  Life ;  He  is  the  precious  Corner-stone.  4. 
What  Christ  is  to  His  people.  He  is  alone.  We  have  many  friends,  but  only  one 
Eedeemer;  many  earthly  helpers,  but  only  One  who  delivers  our  souls  from  the 
lowest  hell.  The  succour  that  we  receive  from  others  in  the  things  of  salvation, 
so  far  from  disturbing  Christ's  pre-eminence,  only  confirms  it.  The  unity  which  the 
soul  of  man  receives  through  Christ  is  as  great  a  proof  of  adaptation  and  design  as 
anything  in  the  outer  world.  The  heart  of  man  needs  something  to  engross  it,  an 
object  on  which  it  can  concentrate  all  its  affections  without  self-reproach,  and  which 
by  its  admitted  sway  brings  unity  into  its  existence,  and  concord  into  all  its  purposes 
and  aspirations.  Now  as  Christ  has  fulfilled  this  end  in  time,  so  shall  He  yet  more 
by  His  gloriously  asserted  and  devoutly  recognised  pre-eminence  fulfil  it  to  endless 
ages.  His  supremacy  shall  then  be  disclosed  as  on  earth,  in  its  brightest  manifesta- 
tion, it  never  yet  has  been.  The  morning  star  shall  then  shine  forth  unsullied  by 
a  cloud.  What  new  displays  of  grace  and  glory  Christ  in  these  new  circumstances 
shall  make,  it  is  not  given  to  us  to  know.  And  while  the  morning  star  shall  thus 
emit  new  and  dazzling  rays,  oh,  how  different  the  impression  of  delight  and  rapture 
which  His  pre-eminence  shall  make  then  on  His  own  people  from  what  it  made  here  I 
Then  there  shall  be  no  darkness  of  ignorance  or  unbelief  to  hide  His  beams — no  sin, 
or  world,  or  self,  to  divide  the  heart  with  Him — ^no  creature  worship  to  impair  His 
ascendency — no  coldness  and  lukewarmness  even  in  the  Church  to  damp  the  rising 
flame  of  love  and  adoration!  Love  and  adoration  shaU  be  spontaneous  and 
irresistible.    IH.  I  remark,  that  Christ  is  the  morning  star  of  time,  and  will  bb 

THE  morning  star   OF  ETERNITY,  BECAUSE   HiS   LIGHT    USHERS   IN   PERPETUAL  DAY.       It 

is  the  property  of  the  morning  star  to  be  the  day's  harbinger.  Other  stars  rise  and 
shine  and  set,  and  leave  the  darkness  stLQ  behind  them.  Hence  Christ  is  not  com- 
pared to  the  evening  star,  though  it  be  in  itself  as  bright  as  that  of  the  morning,  and 
indeed  the  same ;  because  in  that  case  the  associations  would  be  too  gloomy,  and 
the  victory  would  seem  to  remain  for  a  time  on  the  side  of  darkness.  True,  the 
Christian  may  be  in  darkness  even  after  Christ  has  risen  upon  him,  but  it  is  only 
"  the  cloudy  and  dark  day  " — it  is  no  more  "  the  black  and  dark  night."  The  dawn 
may  be  overcast,  but  the  day  still  proceeds.  Day  still  penetrates  through  the 
crevices  of  your  unbelief  into  the  dungeon  of  your  despondency ;  and  you  are  startled 
in  your  self-made  gloom  and  solitude  by  rays  that  travel  from  beyond  the  icy  atmo- 
sphere from  a  higher  luminary,  though  you  refuse  to  go  forth  to  them.  {J.  Cairns,  D.D.) 
The  morning  star : — He  who  speaks  is  Jesus  Himself.  1.  He  speaks  as  a  promiser. 
It  is  to  something  future  that  He  points  the  eye  of  His  Churches — the  things  "  not 
Been,"  the  "  things  hoped  for."  2.  He  speaks  as  a  giver.  "  I  will  give."  He  has 
been  a  giver  from  the  first.    3.  He  speaks  to  the  overcomers.    Though  the  gifts  are 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

not  wages,  yet  they  depend  on  our  winning  a  battle.  They  are  something  beyond 
mere  salvation.  4.  He  speaks  of  the  morning  star.  This  is  His  promised  gift,  and 
a  very  glorious  one  it  is.  (1)  What  it  is  naturally.  It  is  not  any  star  that  appears 
in  the  morning,  but  one — one  "  bright  particular  star  " — a  star  which,  above  all  others, 
is  known  for  its  splendour,  and  is  connected  with  the  departure  of  the  night  and  the 
arrival  of  the  day.    It  says.  Night  is  done :  day  is  coming  ;  the  sun  is  about  to  rise. 

(2)  What  it  is  symbolically.  Christ  Jesus — He  is  the  Star.  He  is  the  giver  and  the 
gift ;  as  if  He  said,  "  I  will  give  him  Myself  as  the  morning  star."  Bright  and  fair  to 
look  upon ;  attractive  and  glorious  ;  joy  of  the  traveller,  or  the  sailor,  or  the  night- 
watch.  (3)  What  it  is  prophetically.  We  get  Christ,  in  believing,  just  now,  but  we 
do  not  get  Him  as  the  morning  star.  That  is  yet  to  come.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  Churches. — That 
the  terms  of  salvation  are  offered  to  all  men : — These  words  are  a  strong  and  general 
appeal  to  the  reason  and  understanding  of  all  unprejudiced  and  impartial  men.  1. 
The  phrase,  "Let  him  hear,"  is  an  authoritative  expression,  becoming  the  majesty  of 
God,  and  the  weight  and  dignity  of  what  is  spoken  by  His  command.  And  if  they 
refuse  or  neglect  to  hear,  and  will  be  at  no  pains  to  examine  into  the  true  nature 
and  end  of  religion,  it  is  no  hurt  to  Him,  but  to  themselves  only.  2.  As  these  words 
express  the  authority  of  God,  in  requiring  men  to  attend,  so  they  do  further  denote 
His  goodness  likewise,  in  proposing  to  men,  universally  and  plainly,  the  doctrine  and 
the  way  of  life.  3.  The  other  phrase  in  the  text,  "He  that  hath  an  ear,"  signifies  he 
that  hath  understanding,  that  hath  ability,  that  hath  capacity  to  apprehend  what  is 
spoken  (Matt.  xix.  12).  To  have  an  ear,  in  the  Scripture-sense,  means  to  have  an 
understanding  free  and  unprejudiced,  open  to  attend  unto,  and  apt  to  receive  the 
truth.  And  the  want  of  it  is  not  like  the  want  of  natural  parts  and  abilities,  pitiable 
and  compassionable,  but  faulty  and  deserving  of  severe  reproof  (Mark  viii.  17,  18). 
4.  The  capacity  men  have,  and  the  indispensable  obligation  they  are  under,  to 
hearken  to  and  obey  what  God  delivers  to  them.  I.  God,  the  gkeat  Creator  and 
RIGHTEOUS  Governor  and  merciful  Judge  of  the  whole  earth,  offers  to  all  men 
THE  GRACIOUS  TERMS  AND  POSSIBILITIES  OF  SALVATION.  God  spcaks  to  men  Originally, 
by  the  light  of  nature,  by  the  order  and  proportions  of  things,  by  the  voice  of  reason, 
by  the  dictates  of  conscience.    H.  This  offer,  though  graciously  made  to  all,  yet 

IN   EVENT  BECOMES   EFFECTUAL   TO    THOSE    ONLY   WHO   ARE   QUALIFIED  AND   CAPABLE    TO 

RECEIVE  IT.  Light  introduced  upon  any  object  supposes  always  that  there  be  eyes  to 
view  and  to  discern  it  by  that  light.  The  sound  of  a  voice,  or  the  use  of  speech, 
supposes  always  that  men  have  ears  to  hear  what  the  speaker  uttereth.  Ajid,  in 
matters  of  religion,  God's  ofiering  to  men  certain  terms  or  conditions  of  salvation 
supposes  in  like  manner  a  certain  moral  disposition  in  the  mind,  which  causes  it  to 
have  a  regard  to  things  of  that  nature,  to  have  a  sense  and  relish  of  things  relating 
to  morality ;  otherwise  men  would,  in  their  nature,  be  no  more  capable  of  religion 
than  beasts.  1.  That  disposition  of  mind  which  qualifies  men  to  receive  the  terms  of 
salvation  is  somewhat  which  the  Scripture  always  speaks  of  as  a  matter  of  singular 
excellency,  and  worthy  of  great  commendation.  It  is  an  eminent  gift,  or  grace,  of 
God.  2.  Wherein  consists  this  excellent  temper  and  disposition  of  mind.  (1)  Atten- 
tiveness  or  consideration.  (2)  A  delight  in  examining  into  truth  and  light,  a  taking 
pleasure  at  all  times  in  beholding  the  light  and  in  hearing  the  voice  of  reason. 

(3)  Moral  probity,  sincerity,  and  integrity  of  mind.  (4)  A  readiness  to  hearken  to 
the  voice  of  revelation  as  well  as  of  reason.  3.  What  are  the  opposite  qualities,  or 
chief  hindrances,  which  generally  prevent  the  offers  of  salvation  from  being  effectually 
embraced?  (1)  Carelessness  and  want  of  attention.  (2)  Prejudice  or  prepossession. 
(3)  Perverseness  and  obstinacy.  (4)  The  greatest  impediment  is  a  love  of  vice. 
III.  That  they  who  want  an  ear,  they  who  want  the  dispositions  necessary  to  their 
receiving  this  gracious  offer  of  salvation,  or  are  prevented  by  any  of  the  hindrances 
which  render  it  ineffectual,  are  always  very  severely  reproved  in  Scripture,  plainly 

DENOTING  IT  TO  BE  ENTIRELY  THEIR  OWN  FAULT  THAT  THEY  HAVE  NOT  EARS  TO  HEAR. 

The  reason  is  because  these  necessary  dispositions  are  not  natural  but  moral 
qualifications,  and  the  contrary  impediments  are  not  natural  but  moral  defects. 
And  though,  in  Scripture-phrase,  it  is  to  the  delusions  of  Satan  that  this  moral 
incapacity  of  men  is  frequently  ascribed,  yet  this  is  never  spoken  by  way  of  excuse, 
but  always,  on  the  contrary,  of  high  aggravation.    IV.  That,  since  the  Scripture 

ALWAYS  EXPRESSLY  LAYS  THE  BLAME  UPON  MEN'S  SELVES,  HENCE  CONSEQUENTLY  ALIi 
THOSE  PASSAGES  WHEREIN  GOD  IS  AT  ANY  TIME  REPRESENTED  AS  BLINDING  MEN'S  EYES, 
OR  CLOSING  THEIR  EARS,  OR  HARDENING  THEIR  HEARTS,  OR  TAKING  AWAY  THEIR  UNDEB- 
SXANSIKO  V&OM  XHEM,  MUSI  OF  NECESSITY  BE  U2{D£RSI00D  XO  BE  FIGXTBAXIYE  EXPRES* 


CHAP,  in.]  REVELATION,  187 

SIGNS  ONLY,  not  denoting  literally  what  God  actually  effects  by  His  power,  but  what 
by  His  providence  He  justly  and  wisely  permits.  1.  Some  of  these  sorts  of  expressions 
denote  only  the  general  analogy  or  fitness  of  the  thing  to  be  done.  2.  Some  other 
expressions  of  this  kind  are  only  figurative  acknowledgments  of  the  universal 
superintendency  of  Providence  over  all  events,  without  whose  permission  nothing 
happens  in  the  world.  3.  Some  other  expressions  of  this  kind  are  only  applications 
of  prophecies  or  declarations  of  certain  prophecies  being  fulfilled  (Jude  4 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  8). 
Not  appointed  of  God  to  be  wicked,  but  foretold  by  the  ancient  prophets  that  such 
persons  would  arise.  Of  the  like  sense  are  the  following  (Dan.  xii.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  13  ; 
Eev.  xvii.  17).  4.  To  be  denunciations  or  threatenings  or  God's  justly  and  in  a 
judicial  manner  leaving  incorrigible  men  to  themselves,  after  many  repeated 
provocations  (Ezek.  xxiv.  13).     (S.  Clarke,  B.B.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vers.  1-6.  Sardis. — Sardis — The  fickle  Church: — ^Among  all  the  messages  to  the 
Churches  there  is  no  other  which  is  appalling  like  this  to  the  Church  of  Sardis. 
The  condemnation  and  the  denunciation  are  emphatic ;  the  details,  however, 
are  obscure,  and  as  we  meditate  on  what  is  said,  it  strikes  us  that  this  obscurity 
is  due  to  intentional  reserve.  This  appears,  first,  in  the  title  given  to  Christ: 
"  These  things  saith  He  that  hath  the  seven  Spirits  of  God,  and  the  seven  stars." 
Here  we  are  bidden  think,  not  of  the  historic  Christ,  but  of  the  inhabitor  of 
eternity.  It  is  as  if,  instead  of  coming  forth  to  reveal  Himself,  Christ  were 
withdrawing  into  the  recesses  of  Deity;  He  seems  to  be  receding  from  our 
approaches,  not.  advancing  to  kindle  His  people's  adoration  and  reward  their  love. 
The  same  reserve  appears  in  the  description  of  the  Church's  sinfulness :  ♦'  I 
know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name,"  &c.  That  is  all,  but  it  is  such  an 
all  as  produces  an  impression  of  utter  condemnation.  The  call  to  repentance, 
too,  lacks  something  which  we  are  accustomed  to  find  in  God's  appeals  to  His 
people :  "  Become  watchful,  and  stablish  the  things,"  &c.  There  is  no  hint  that 
what  has  perished  may  be  restored.  More  than  once  I  have  seen  a  tree  laden 
with  fruit,  its  broad  green  leaves  betokening  vigorous  life,  while  a  formless 
lump  in  the  stock  revealed  that  once  the  tree  was  so  cankered  that  it  was  not 
expected  to  recover ;  and  I  have  read  a  parable  of  the  revival  of  dead  graces 
in  man's  life.  No  such  alleviating  hint  is  dropped  concerning  Sardis.  The 
time  has  not  come  for  it;  the  need  of  the  hour  is  for  warning,  only  warning. 
There  is  a  shortness  in  the  threat :  "  If  therefore  thou  shalt  not  watch,"  &c.  The 
Lord  does  not  condescend  to  say  more  than  is  needed.  The  Church  of  Sardis  knows, 
after  what  has  been  declared,  that  this  coming  can  only  be  for  judgment,  and  is  left 
to  meditate  on  the  nearness  and  suddenness  of  the  doom.  Even  in  the  acknowledg- 
ment that  there  are.  faithful  persons  in  Sardis,  "  a  few  names  which  did  not  defile 
their  garments,"  and  the  promise  made  to  "him  that  overcometh,"  the  reserve 
is  maintained.  So  deep  is  the  sin  of  the  Church  that  it  is  blessedness  only  to  have 
been  free  from  it.  So  dire  is  the  doom  that,  for  them  who  have  escaped  it,  to  have 
their  names  not  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life  is  enough.  The  Lord  will  confess 
their  names  in  heaven,  because  it  is  a  wonder  to  find  souls  from  Sardis  there.  How 
may  we  apprehend  the  condition  of  Sardis  ?  Perhaps  we  say,  Sardis  was  a  worldly 
Church ;  and  this  is  undoubtedly  true.  "  She  that  giveth  herself  to  pleasure  is  dead 
while  she  liveth."  Addictedness  to  things  that  "  perish  with  the  using "  is 
both  the  sign  of  a  languid  inner  life,  and  certain  destruction  of  the  little  life 
which  remains.  Or  we  may  say  that  Sardis  was  an  impure  Church.  Discipline  was 
unknown  in  it ;  even  the  pretence  of  discipline  must  have  been  wanting,  when  of 
only  a  few  could  it  be  said  that  "  they  did  not  defile  their  garments."  But  there  is 
one  touch  in  the  description  which  is  full  of  significance.  "  I  have  not  found  any 
of  thy  works  perfect  [that  is,  finished]  before  My  God."  The  image  suggested  is 
that  of  a  fickle  Church,  rushing  from  one  thing  to  another,  beginning  works  and 
growing  weary,  taking  up  and  dropping  down,  impossible  to  be  relied  on  by  God 
or  man.  Fickleness  is  a  very  common  fault ;  therefore  the  Lord's  words  to 
Sardis  need  to  be  dwelt  on.  There  is  no  graver  symptom  of  our  time  than  its 
prevailing  restlessness.     So  many  men  and  women  follow  the  ever-changing  fashion 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

— in  dress,  or  books,  or  household  decoration,  or  art,  in  science,  in  philosophy,  in 
philanthrophy,  in  scepticism,  or  in  faith.  Theirs  is  not  the  versatility  of  a  catholic 
temper,  but  of  a  shallow  soul ;  such  persons  proclaim  that  they  have  no  taste, 
that  is,  no  original  perceptions,  no  standard  of  excellence.  There  is  the  same 
instability  among  the  Churches;  the  popular  religious  catch-words  are  for  ever 
changing.  Yesterday  the  parrot-cry  was  "Orthodoxy";  to-day  it  is  "  Liberality, 
freedom  of  thought."  There  is  to  them  no  "word  of  the  Lord";  they  have  no 
profound  sense  of  duty,  no  consecrating  purpose,  nothing  about  which  they  can  say, 
"  This  one  thing  I  do  ;  this  is  what  1  believe  with  all  my  heart ;  of  this  1  am  sure  ; 
to  this  I  cleave,  I  can  no  other,  God  help  me."  And  if  fickleness  be  thus  the  sign  and 
symptom  that  underneath  all  shews  of  religious  activity  there  is  death,  so  fickleness 
works  death.  The  notion  such  people  have  that  their  great  need  is  some  new  thing, 
a  new  impulse,  a  new  call,  is  part  of  their  soul-sickness.  Their  real  want  is  the 
heart  to  stick  to  what  they  are  about.  Nearly  the  whole  discipline  of  piety  is  in  the 
fact  that  persistency  brings  lessons  which  we  can  learn  in  no  other  way.  If  we  try 
to  perfect  what  we  are  doing,  we  learn  our  defects  and  how  to  supply  them ;  we  learn 
what  we  can  do  and  how  to  do  it ;  we  strengthen  the  sense  of  duty,  and  catch  the 
meaning  of  hardness ;  sources  of  comfort  will  open  to  us  when  "  sore  weary  with  our 
work  well  done  "  ;  God  Himself  comes  to  teach  us,  and  lead  us,  and  be  our  God.  In 
Sardis,  as  inLaodicea,  there  is  a  special  word  of  comfort  to  the  faithful,  because  they 
have  found  fidelity  so  hard.  "  Thou  hast  a  few  names  in  Sardis,"  &c.  The  promise 
is  itself  an  implied  charge  against  the  many ;  they  are  defiled  as  well  as  heartless. 
So  it  must  ever  be ;  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  are  sure  to 
overtake  those  who  are  not  steadfast  in  their  piety.  All  the  more  impressive  is 
Christ's  assurance  that  He  has  not  overlooked  the  few.  He  who  has  the  seven 
Spirits  is  quick  to  discern  fidelity  in  unlikely  places ;  He  watches  to  discern  and  to 
acknowledge  them.  Fidelity  is  acknowledged  by  Christ  as  of  eternal  virtue,  how- 
ever it  may  reveal  itself  ;  and  the  company  of  those  who  overcome  is  one  company, 
whether  the  victory  have  been  won  on  a  conspicuous  or  an  ignoble  field.  It  seems  so 
reserved  an  utterance  :  "  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name  "  ;  but  the  book  in  which  the 
name  is  written  is  "  the  book  of  life."  It  is  no  small  honour  which  is  conferred  on 
the  clean  souls  in  Sardis  when  they  are  declared  "  worthy  "  to  walk  with  Christ  in 
white.  There  is  a  touch  of  exquisite  consideration,  of  appreciation  of  what  their 
life  had  been,  in  the  promise  with  which  the  message  ends  :  "  He  that  overcometh 
shall  thus  be  arrayed  in  white  garments."  Heaven  shall  be  to  them  the  consum- 
mation of  what  they  had  worked  for  and  striven  after  on  earth.  (A.  Mackennal, 
D.D.)  Chris  fs  message  to  the  formalist;  or,  feeble  because  incomplete  : — I.  Delusive 
APPEARANCES ;  OR,  THE  DEATH  THAT  SIMULATES  LIFE.  There  is  nothing  SO  Unmistakable 
as  natural  death ;  in  tree,  animal,  or  man,  it  makes  itself  fearfully  plain.  Life  may 
exist  in  a  sluggish  or  imperfect  form,  but  between  the  feeblest  life  and  death  there 
is  an  immeasurable  distance.  But  with  spiritual  death  it  is  often  otherwise.  The 
advances  are  so  stealthy,  and  so  swift,  that  sometimes  every  grace  and  gift  has 
perished  before  the  symptoms  of  the  plague  are  discerned.  Wendell  Holmes  tells  us 
that  in  the  introduction  to  "  Gil  Bias  "  it  is  said,  "  Here  lies  buried  the  soul  of  the 
licentiate."  Where  do  not  souls  lie  buried  ?  One  beneath  the  self -consciousness 
of  pride,  and  another  beneath  ceremonies  which  are  good  in  themselves,  but  which 
may  produce  evil,  if  unduly  relied  upon.  Under  what  sin  is  thy  soul  buried.  And 
let  us  look  at  the  gracious  aspect  which  is  presented  here  of  our  Lord.  When  the 
king  of  Ethiopia  of  old  heard  that  the  Persian  monarch  was  dead,  he  remarked, 
"  It  is  no  wonder  that  he  died,  when  he  lived  on  dirt."  The  allusion,  of  course,  is 
to  com,  which  at  that  period  was  unknown  in  Ethiopia.  Of  Darracott,  on  the 
contrary,  it  was  finely  said,  "that  he  looked  as  if  he  lived  upon  live  things,"  for  he 
possessed  such  abundant  vitality.  So  is  it  that  a  man  is  like  that  which  he 
mentally  feeds  upon  ;  so  that  if  he  communes  regularly  and  constantly  with  Christ, 
he  will  become  Christ-like,  and  will  live  by  the  life  of  Christ.  II.  Decaying  graces  ; 
OR,  bad  WHICH  MAY  BECOME  WORSE.  "  The  dccay  was  not  as  yet  thorough  in  the 
Church  at  Sardis ;  there  was  still  a  chance  of  regaining  the  lost  time,  and  living  by 
Christ.  But  unless  the  Church  became  vigilant,  and  took  the  needful  measures,  the 
decay  would  eventually  become  complete."  The  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  granted 
only  to  certain  conditions,  and  they  are  removed  when  these  essentials  depart  from 
us.  Incompleteness  is  decay.  "  I  have  found  no  works  of  thine  fulfilled  before  my 
God."  Their  acts  of  charity  and  faith  had  been  marred ;  they  were  introductions 
without  any  succeeding  chapters,  indeed,  but  a  series  of  failures.  And  may  not  the 
words  imply  that  one  grace  cannot  live  without  the  other,  that  they  are  mutually 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  189 

dependent,  that  if  one  be  absent,  or  be  wilfully  left  out,  the  others  will  languish 
and  perhaps  die?  In  grace  as  in  nature  the  balance  of  life  must  be  preserved.  So 
in  grace,  every  virtue  sustains  some  other,  and  they  rise  and  fall  together.  III. 
The  sukpbises  of  judgment  :  the  gracious  or  the  just  one.  "  I  will  come  as  a 
thief,"  Christ  threatens,  by  which  I  understand  that  in  reference  to  His  judgment 
He  thus  describes  its  stealthiness.  And  with  the  unexpected  nature  of  this  visita- 
tion, is  there  not  also  combined  the  idea  of  its  being  unwelcome  ?  IV.  The  true 
CITIZEN  OF  THE  WORLD  IS  A  NATIVE  OF  HEAVEN.  The  true  question  which  we  should 
ask  ourselves  and  each  other  is  not.  Are  you  prepared  to  die?  but,  Are  you  fit 
to  live  ?  Hence,  Baine  concentrates  the  meaning  of  the  passage  into  the  phrase, 
*'  Singular  piety  in  degenerate  times  is  dear  to  God."  {J.  J.  Ellis.)  The  address 
to  Sardis  : — I.  The  form  of  address.  Sardis  was  a  city  of  considerable  eminence, 
nearly  equidistant  from  Smyrna  and  Thyatira.  It  was  formerly  the  capital  of  the 
kingdom  of  Lydia,  and  is  celebrated  in  profane  history  as  the  residence  of  Croesus, 
proverbial  for  his  great  riches,  which  were  seized  by  Cyrus  in  aid  of  his  expedition 
against  Babylon.  In  the  usual  course  of  all  these  cities,  it  fell,  first  into  the  hands 
of  the  Persians,  then  of  the  Macedonians,  and  then  of  the  Koman  empire.  A 
village  only  now  remains,  near  which  are  some  ruins  of  the  ancient  city.  The 
character  in  which  Christ  appears  to  this  Church  is  taken  partly  from  the  dedica- 
tion in  the  4th  verse,  and  partly  from  the  vision  in  chap.  i.  16.  This  is  proof  that  the 
whole  book,  from  the  commencement,  is  supposed  to  be  sent  with  the  addresses  tc 
the  Churches.  U.  The  rebuke.  Here  is  no  commendation  to  the  Church 
generally.  It  is  given  afterwards,  as  an  exception  to  a  few.  This  Church  had 
formerly  been  in  a  flourishing  state.  It  was  composed,  at  first,  of  simple-hearted 
and  pious  believers.  There  was  life  in  their  ministry,  life  in  their  ordinances,  life 
in  their  social  meetings,  life  in  their  retirements,  and  life  in  their  souls.  This 
state  of  things,  however,  did  not  long  continue.  There  was  a  gradual  and 
imperceptible  falling  away  from  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  The  Spirit's  influences 
were  less  desired,  and  consequently  less  enjoyed.  Zeal  was  not  deficient,  nor  even 
fortitude  to  brave  persecution  for  the  sake  of  their  reUgion.  Their  works  were 
considerable,  and,  in  some  respects,  worthy  of  imitation  by  those  who  are  actuated 
by  better  principles.  These  are  observed  by  the  Saviour,  but  as  serving  only  to 
sustain  a  profession  of  the  vitality  of  which  they  were  destitute.  "  I  know  thy 
works,  that  thou  hast  a  name,"  (fee.  This  is  displeasing  to  Christ,  because  of  its 
gross  inconsistency,  because  of  the  false  aspect  which  it  gives  to  His  kingdom 
before  the  world,  and  because  of  the  dishonour  which  it  casts  upon  the  ofl&ce  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  A  further  complaint  preferred  against  this  Church  is,  "  I  have  not 
found  thy  works  perfect  before  God."  The  literal  meaning  is  finished,  or  complete. 
Their  works  were  imperfect  in  the  principles  from  which  they  emanated,  and  in  the 
ends  to  which  they  were  directed.  They  were  forms  without  life,  professions 
without  fruit.  Another  feature  of  their  declension  is  indirectly  asserted  in  these 
words,  "Thou  hast  a  few  names,  even  in  Sardis,  which  have  not  defiled  their 
garments."  This  sentence  to  a  Church,  which  probably  boasted  most  of  the 
Christian  name,  and  aspired  most  to  ecclesiastical  distinction,  was  pecuUarly 
humiliating.  Where  the  life  of  godliness  fails,  it  were  vain  to  look  for  its  fruits. 
The  name  of  Christianity  presents  a  feeble  barrier  to  the  corruptions  of  our  fallen 
nature.  What  safeguard  is  there  in  nominal  Christianity  against  moral  defilement  ? 
ni.  The  ADMONITIONS.  The  Saviour  exhorts  the  offenders  at  Sardis  first  of  all  to 
watchfulness.  "  Be  watchful."  Let  them  reflect  upon  their  condition,  rouse 
themselves  to  vigilant  inquiry.  They  are  exhorted  "  to  strengthen  the  things 
which  remain,  that  are  ready  to  die."  Here  is  an  acknowledgment  that  some 
genuine  piety  continued  amongst  them.  This  Church  is  reminded,  "  how  it  had 
received  and  heard,"  and  is  exhorted  to  hold  fast  its  first  instructions,  and  repent  of 
its  deviations  from  them.  IV.  The  threatening  :  "  If  therefore  thou  shalt  not 
watch,  I  will  come,"  <fec.  V.  The  exception  :  "  Thou  hast  a  few  names,  even  in  Sardis, 
which  have  not  defiled  their  garments."  There  were  some,  even  in  Sardis,  who  had 
escaped  the  general  defilement.  In  the  worse  ages  of  the  Church  a  remnant  has 
been  preserved  that  have  kept  their  garments  pure.  The  Waldenses,  Moravians, 
and  others,  will  be  found  to  authenticate  the  truth  of  this  observation.  VI.  The 
PROMISE.  The  threatening  is  to  the  many  that  have  fallen,  the  promise  to  the  few 
that  have  not  defiled  their  garments.  "  They  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for 
they  are  worthy."  VII.  The  application  :  "  He  that  overcometh,  the  same  shall 
be  clothed  in  white  raiment,"  &c.  {G.  Rogers.)  The  words  of  Christ  to  the 
congregation  at  Sardis : — I.  The  general  chabacteb  of  the  maitt.     1.  They  had 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

a  reputation  for  being  what  they  were  not.  2.  They  were  in  a  state  of  spiritual 
consumption.  3.  They  were  in  a  state  requiring  prompt  and  urgent  attention.  4. 
They  were  in  a  state  of  alarming  danger.  II.  The  exceptional  chabacteb  of  thb 
FEW.     1.  True  goodness  can  exist  under  external  circumstances  the  most  corrupt. 

2.  True  goodness,  wherever  it  exists,  engages  the  specific  attention  of  Christ.  ?1) 
Because  it  is  the  highest  manifestation  of  God  upon  earth.  (2)  Because  it  is  tne 
result  of  His  mediatorial  mission.    (3)  Because  on  it  depends  the  progress  of  humanity. 

3.  True  goodness  will  ultimately  be  distinguished  by  a  glorious  reward.  (1)  Triumph. 
(2)  Fellowship.  (3)  Progress.  III.  The  absolute  Judge  op  all.  1.  in  connection 
with  the  highest  influence.  2.  In  connection  with  the  highest  ministry.  3.  In  con- 
nection with  the  highest  Being.  "My  Father."  This  implies — (1)  Causation.  (2) 
Eesemblance.  (3)  Reciprocal  love.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Sardis : — I.  Notice 
THE  TITLE  WHICH  Jesus  Chbist  ASSUMES.  "  He  that  hath  the  seven  spirits 
of  God."  1.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  a  Spirit  of  quickening,  of  conversion,  of 
prayer,  of  holiness,  and  of  comfoit ;  for  all  these  purposes  the  Lord  Jesus 
communicates  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  hence,  He  describes  Himself  as  having 
the  "  seven  Spirits  of  God,"  2.  The  expression,  doubtless,  signifies  something 
transcendently  above  the  claim  of  the  most  exalted  creature.     II.  Observe  the 

DEPLORABLE    STATE    IN   WHICH    THE    TEXT  DESCRIBES   THE   ChURCH   IN    SaRDIS   TO   HAVE 

BEEN.  1.  In  the  visible  Church  of  Christ  there  are  many  who  have  nothing  of 
religion  but  its  lifeless  and  worthless  form.  They  bear  the  Christian  name,  but  are 
totally  destitute  of  Christian  principles,  and  Christian  tempers.  They  are  externally 
clean,  and  internally  impure.  They  employ  language  expressive  of  Christian  ex- 
perience, without  possessing  correspondent  feelings.  2.  Genuine  Christians  are 
subject  to  declension  in  religion.  III.  Notice  some  op  the  symptoms  op  thb 
APFECTiNO  state  DESCRIBED  IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  Backsliding  usually  begins  in 
remissness  relative  to  the  most  secret  exercises  of  religion.  The  first  steps  of  a  back- 
slider are  visible  only  to  God  and  the  individual  himself.  2.  The  effect  of  spiritual 
declension  soon  makes  its  appearance  in  the  domestic  circle.  3.  Another  symptom 
of  this  affecting  state  is  worldly-mindedness.  4.  A  censorious  spirit  is  a  certain 
symptom  of  lamentable  declension  in  the  things  of  God  in  the  soul.  5.  A  love  of 
novelty  is  another  symptom  of  declension  in  religion.  6.  It  is  evinced  by  irrita- 
bility and  unsubmissiveness  of  temper  under  trials  and  afflictions.     IV.    The 

SEASONABLE  EXHORTATION  WHICH  OUR  LORD  ADDRESSED   TO   THE  ChURCH  IN  SaRDIS.      V. 

This  subject  addresses  itself  to  three  descriptions  of  character.  1.  To  those 
whose  souls  are  prosperous,  and  who  enjoy  the  inestimable  privileges  of  religion. 
"  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  2.  To  those  whose  case  is  described  in  the  text. 
Your  experience  teaches  you  that  "  it  is  an  evil  thing,  and  bitter,  to  sin  against 
God."  3.  To  those  who  are  totally  destitute  of  genuine  religion.  Your  state  is  in- 
expressibly awful,  and  infinitely  dangerous.  {J.  Hyatt.)  Nominal  religion  : — I. 
The  rebuke  given  in  the  text  to  the  Church  op  Sardis.  Beware  lest  the  too 
partial  judgment  of  men  mislead  thee  as  to  the  judgment  of  God.  Bring  thyself  to 
a  Scriptural  test.  Judge  as  thou  wilt  be  judged  at  the  great  day  of  account.  U. 
The  commendation  bestowed,  in  this  address,  on  a  pew  op  the  members  of  the 
Church  of  Sardis.  1.  There  are  no  circumstances  so  bad  as  to  render  goodness 
impossible.  2.  Even  the  smallest  company  of  true  worshippers  is  not  forgotten  be- 
fore God.  HI.  The  counsel  given  to  the  Church  op  Sardis  in  this  address. 
There  are  means  of  revival  which  may  in  every  case  be  employed  with  success.  The 
page  of  history  presents  to  us  some  splendid  examples,  in  which  a  body  of  troops, 
checked  and  dispirited  for  a  time,  have  suddenly  beheld  the  banner,  or  caught  the 
voice  of  their  leader ;  and  at  once,  throwing  away  their  doubts  and  fears,  have 
returned  to  the  fight,  scaled  the  rampart,  and  crowned  themselves  with  fresh 
triumphs  and  glory.  IV.  The  threat  connected  with  these  counsels  to  the 
Church  of  Sardis.  All  the  movements  of  God,  especially  in  the  works  of  creation, 
are  so  precisely  in  order — the  sun  and  the  moon  knowing  their  place,  and  each 
season  following  in  the  train  of  the  other — that  it  is  difficult  to  persuade  ourselves 
God  will  in  any  case  interrupt  this  regular  succession  of  events,  and  astonish  the 
siimer  by  any  sudden  or  unexpected  explosion  of  His  wrath.  But  how  often  do  His 
visitations  thus  unexpectedly  arrest  the  ungodly  I  V.  The  promises  with 
which  the  text  closes.  {J.  W.  Cunningham.)  He  that  hatli  the  seven 
Spirits. — The  seven  Spirits  of  God: — By  these  seven  Spirits  of  God  is 
meant  apparently  that  One  Divine  Person,  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  whom,  with 
the  Father  and  the  Son,  we  render  homage  and  praise.  And  the  reason  for  the 
peculiarity  of  the  sevenfold  Spirit  is  because  in  this  book  that  Spirit  is  contem- 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  191 

plated,  not  so  much  in  the  unity  of  His  person  as  in  the  manifoldness  of  His 
operations.  And,  further,  that  the  number  seven,  being  a  sacred  number,  expresses 
completeness.  And  so,  "  He  that  hath  the  seven  Spirits  of  God"  represents  Jesus 
Christ  as  possessing,  and  as  possessing  that  He  may  impart,  the  whole  fulness  of 
that  quick  and  Divine  Spirit.  Thus  the  first  thought  to  be  presented  to  the  mori- 
bund Church  is  of  the  fulness  of  Divine  life  gathered  into  that  Spirit  who  is  not 
enclosed  in  inaccessible  mysteries  of  deity.^but  going  forth  like  the  flame  of  the 
torch,  like  the  glance  of  the  eye,  everywhere  where  men  are.  This  great  Life-giver 
is  waiting  for  aU  feeble  and  half-dead  Christian  hearts  to  come  surging  into  it  if 
they  will,  and  to  fill  them  with  its  own  vitality.  Notice  still  further  that  the 
second  of  the  predicates  applied  to  our  Lord  here  suggests  for  us  one  very  frequent 
way  in  which  He  cleanses  out  Churches.  He  hath  the  seven  Spirits  and  the  seven 
stars.  The  stars  are  the  symbols  of  the  angels,  and  the  angels  are  the  representa- 
tives of  the  teachers  of  the  Churches ;  taking  that  for  granted,  is  it  not  beautiful 
that  our  Lord  should  be  represented,  if  I  may  so  say,  as  holding  in  one  hand  the 
seven  Spirits  of  life  and  in  the  other  hand  the  seven  stars,  or  to  put  away  the  em- 
blem, and  to  take  another  figure  in  Scripture,  in  the  right  hand  He  held  the  golden 
vase  full  of  the  anointing  oil,  in  the  other  hand  an  empty  chaUce  into  which  it 
was  poured.  Jesus  Christ  wakes  up  a  dead  Church  by  bringing  the  seven  Spirits  of 
God  into  the  hearts  of  selected  men  :  for  the  way  in  which  great  revivals  of  rehgion 
in  little  communities  and  in  big  ones  is  usually  brought  about  is  that  some  man  or 
men  are  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God  and  become  weary  of  forbearing  and  feel 
the  Word  like  a  fire  lit  up  in  their  bones,  and  are  so  fitted  to  be  God's  instruments 
for  communicating  the  magnetism  of  life  to  the  dead  Church.  And  now  let  me 
ask  you  to  think  of  one  or  two  very  simple  lessons  from  this  vision.  1.  First  of 
all,  should  not  this  vision  shame  us  all  into  penitent  consciousness  of  our  own  dead- 
ness  ?  So  much  life  waiting  to  be  bestowed,  and  so  Uttle  actually  appropriated  and 
possessed  by  us.  The  whole  flood  of  Christ's  grace  running  by  our  doors,  and  we, 
like  improvident  settlers  in  some  new  country,  having  no  provision  for  storing  or 
for  distributing  it,  but  letting  it  all  run  to  waste.  2.  And  then,  should  not  this 
vision  set  us  upon  questioning  ourselves  as  to  what  it  is  that  keeps  the  life  of  Jesus 
Christ  out  of  our  hearts  ?  In  the  winter  time  in  our  towns,  when  the  water  stops 
in  the  houses,  why  doesn't  it  come  ?  Because  there  is  a  plug  of  ice  in  the  service 
pipe ;  and  there  is  a  plug  of  ice  in  a  great  many  Christian  hearts  in  connection 
with  their  Master.  Life  is  sustained  by  food,  by  air,  and  by  exercise.  Do  you  feed 
the  life  of  Christ  in  you  ?  Do  you  read  your  Bible  ?  You  wiU  never  be  vigorous 
Christians  unless  you  can  say,  "  I  have  desired  the  words  of  Thy  mouth  more  than 
my  necessary  food."  Life  is  sustained  by  air  breathed.  Do  you  take  that  Divine 
Spirit  into  yourselves,  expanding  that  capacity  by  desire,  and  so  oxygenating  aU 
your  life  and  cleansing  out  the  corruptions  of  sin  ?  And  life  is  sustained  by 
exercise.  Do  you  do  anything  for  Jesus  Christ  ?  Absolute  idleness  is  a  sure  way, 
and  it  is  a  very  popular  way  amongst  many  Christian  people  to  kill  the  life  of. 
Christ  within  us.  3.  And  so,  let  this  vision  draw  us  to  our  Master  that  we  may  get 
the  life  He  can  give  from  His  own  hands.  Your  Christianity  can  only  be  sustained 
by  the  repetition  continually  of  that  which  kindled  it  at  first.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
I  know  thy  works. — God  knows  the  works  of  men : — I.  The  Lord  knows  every 
man's  ill  courses.  He  knows  what  men  are,  and  what  they  have  been,  and 
what  they  will  be,  as  He  knows  all  their  thoughts,  words,  and  works.  He 
knows  all  their  dispositions,  their  persons,  their  natures,  their  qualities,  their 
affections,  and  ends  and  aims  and  motives,  and  estates;  He  knows  how  many 
are  rotten  though  they  profess  never  so  much,  how  many  are  unsound  though 
they  be  never  so  well  esteemed  in  the  Church ;  He  knows  in  what  estate  every 
man  stands  (Job  xi.  11).  The  use  of  this  is,  first — Is  it  so  that  God  knows  all 
men's  sinful  courses?  If  men  be  dead-hearted.  He  knows  it;  if  they  be  heartless 
in  good  duties.  He  knows  it;  though  they  would  be  loth  that  men  should 
know  what  they  are,  and  do  keep  it  from  them,  yet  they  cannot  daub  it  before 
God ;  He  knows  it.  Then  this  may  serve  to  confute  them  that  say,  God 
does  not  know  sin.  True,  sin  is  an  evU,  yea  the  greatest  evil  of  aU  evils  ;  yet  the 
knowledge  of  it  is  good.  God  knows  who  do  abuse  Him,  and  how  people  carry 
themselves  towards  all  His  commandments  and  worship ;  it  is  a  part  of  His  per- 
fection to  know  it.  Secondly,  another  use  is  to  condemn  the  most  sorts  of  men 
that  do  not  consider  of  this  truth ;  they  little  think  that  God  sees  all  their  doings. 
I  fear  there  is  hardly  any  among  us  that  will  seem  to  deny  but  that  God  can  see  all 
his  ways  ;  and  yet  we  see  it  is  too  apparent  by  men's  lives,  that  few  men  do  believe 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

this  indeed.  If  we  did  charge  this  upon  our  souls,  we  could  not  live  so^loosely  as 
we  do.  Thirdly,  Is  it  so  that  God  sees  all  men's  sins  ?  Then  this  is  a  terror 
to  all  that  go  on  with  a  self -condemning  heart  (1  John  iii.  20).  If  we  have  a 
self -condemning  heart,  how  much  more  shall  we  find  a  condemning  God? 
Fourthly,  this  is  comfort  to  good  people ;  for  if  God  see  all  men's  sins,  then  He 
sees  all  men's  goodness  much  rather.  Again,  what  a  comfort  is  this  ?  If  we  desire 
to  know  our  sins,  God  is  able  to  show  them  unto  us.  Fifthly,  Does  God  know  all 
men's  sins  ?  Then  this  should  make  us  afraid  to  do  evil  at  any  time,  or  in  any 
place,  yea  in  the  secretest.     II.  The  knowledge  that  God  knows  all  oub  works 

IS  THE  POWERFUL  MEANS  TO  ALL  God's  ELECT,  TO  DO  THEM  GOOD,  AND  TO  QUICKEN 
THEM    AND    TO    MAKE    THEM    TAKE    HEED    OF    ALL    MANNER    OF    SIN.        1.     BeCaUSe    the 

Lord's  knowing  of  our  works  is  not  only  a  mere  knowing  of  them,  but  also  a  marking 
and  a  pondering  them  too.  2.  Because  when  God  sees  all  our  sins,  it  is  with  a  most 
holy  and  pure  eye,  and  such  an  eye  as  cannot  abide  such  an  object  before  Him.  3. 
Because  when  God  sees  all  our  sins.  He  records  them,  He  notes  them  in  a  book  that 
He  may  never  forget  them.  4.  Because  when  God  sees  our  sins,  it  is  even  all  one 
as  if  all  the  world  should  see  them  too ;  for  let  our  sins  be  never  so  secret,  yet,  if 
God  know  it,  it  is  worse  than  if  all  the  world  knew  it ;  for  all  the  world  shall  know 
it  one  day.  5.  Our  disposition  is  such  that  we  cannot  abide  that  our  wicked- 
nesses should  be  seen  of  anybody  that  we  know  cannot  abide  them.  III.  Now  wb 
COME  TO  THE  PARTICULARS.  The  first  is  in  these  words.  Thou  hast  a  name  that 
thou  hvest.  By  "  name  "  is  meant  a  mere  name,  as  we  see  by  the  clause  follow- 
ing, "  and  art  dead  " ;  for  when  a  man  is  dead,  the  name  to  live  must  needs  be  a 
mere  name.  First,  a  name  in  regard  of  themselves,  they  took  themselves  to  be 
alive ;  as  Paul  had  a  name  to  live  before  his  conversion,  while  yet  he  was  a 
Pharisee,  he  had  then  a  name  to  live  (Kom.  vii.  9).  Secondly,  a  name  in  regard 
to  other  godly  Churches ;  others  in  the  judgment  of  charity  conceived  they  were 
alive ;  as  the  Scribes,  and  the  Pharisees,  our  Saviour  Christ  told  them,  they  had  a 
name  to  live  (Matt,  xxiii.  27),  that  is,  ye  seem  to  be  alive,  ye  have  a  name  to  live, 
but  indeed  ye  are  dead.  Thirdly,  a  name  among  poor,  ignorant,  and  simple 
people  that  are  led  away  with  shows.  Ye  know  that  there  be  abundance  of  poor, 
simple  people,  that  know  not  what  true  reUgion  is,  nay,  maybe  hate  it,  but  yet 
they  are  led  away  with  the  show  of  it.  Fourthly,  a  name  among  the  persecu- 
tors of  religion,  and  so  they  are  persecuted  too  among  them  that  live  indeed ; 
for  mockers  take  them  to  be  of  the  same  number.  Now  the  point  of  doctrine  is 
this,  that  it  is  a  horrible  thing  to  rest  in  a  mere  name  of  being  religious.  The 
reasons  are,  first — this  is  to  be  farthest  off  from  religion ;  because  himself  will 
not,  and  others  cannot  so  effectually  apply  to  him  the  means  of  recovery,  he  being 
in  his  own  and  others'  judgment  a  true  convert.  As  a  sick  man  who  thinks 
himself  well  is  of  all  others  farthest  from  cure.  Religion  is  a  real  thing,  and 
therefore  he  that  rests  in  having  the  name  of  it,  is  farthest  off  from  it.  Secondly, 
it  is  a  very  blasphemy  to  get  the  name  for  good  people,  when  we  are  not  good 
people  indeed.  The  reason  is  this — religion  hath  an  inward  dependence  upon  God ; 
it  hath  an  internal  relation  unto  God ;  it  puts  a  man  into  a  propriety  with  God 
that  God  is  his  God ;  it  puts  the  very  name  of  God  upon  a  man.  Now,  if  a  man 
take  the  name  without  the  thing,  it  must  needs  be  a  very  blasphemy.  Thirdly,  it 
is  a  flat  lie,  when  a  man  hath  the  name  of  a  good  Christian,  and  hath  not 
the  thing  signified  by  the  name.  Fourthly,  it  is  an  unreasonable  thing.  When 
a  man  hath  not  the  thing,  there  is  no  reason  that  he  should  have  the  name. 
Fifthly,  it  is  an  impudent  thing.  When  we  have  a  name  to  live  and  to  be  wrought 
upon  by  the  Word,  what  an  impudent  thing  is  it,  if  we  do  not  look  to  it  that  we  be 
so  indeed.  One  would  think  we  should  blush  to  think  what  a  name  we  have,  and 
how  little  we  make  good  our  name  between  God  and  our  own  souls.  Sixthly, 
it  is  an  inexcusable  thing.  If  we  have  a  name  to  be  alive,  we  are  without  ex- 
cuse if  we  be  not.  First,  because  out  of  our  own  mouths  God  will  judge  us ;  we 
said  we  were  His  people,  we  took  the  name  of  His  servants ;  why  then  He  will  say. 
Why  had  I  not  your  service  ?  Why  would  you  do  no  more  for  Me  ?  Secondly,  ye 
can  have  no  other  excuse.  Can  you  say  you  could  not  believe  in  My  Name  ?  Ye 
could  not  forego  such  and  such  lusts  at  My  command  ?  Why  then  would  you  go  for 
My  servants  ?  Seventhly,  it  is  an  unprofitable  thing :  a  naked  name  will  do  us  no 
good.  True  faith  alone  does  justify,  not  the  name  of  it ;  true  peace  of  conscience 
does  comfort,  not  the  name  of  it ;  true  interest  in  God  gives  a  man  a  cheerful 
access  to  God,  not  the  name  of  it.  Eighthly,  it  is  not  only  unprofitable,  but  also  it 
is  hurtful.    It  is  hurtful  unto  others.    It  is  hurtful  unto  them  that  are  without ;  for 


CHAP.iir.]  REVELATION.  193 

when  they  see  how  lazy  such  as  go  for  professors  be,  how  they  have  little  else  in 
them  but  talking  and  professing,  and  prating  and  hearing,  this  hardens  the  heart 
of  them  that  are  without,  and  makes  them  all  think  that  religion  is  a  matter  of 
nothing.  Again,  they  do  a  great  deal  of  hurt  unto  comers  on.  Many  a  man  that 
is  smitten  at  the  word,  that  begins  amendment,  and  gives  good  hopes  that  he  will 
come  to  something  in  the  end,  when  he  lights  upon  such  Sardian  saints,  that  are  so 
in  name,  but  there  is  no  life  at  all  in  them,  these  put  him  back  again.  Again,  they 
do  a  great  deal  of  hurt  unto  the  saints  of  God,  sometimes  by  deceiving  of  their  hearts 
and  cooling  of  their  zeal  and  fervour,  or  if  they  cannot  do  that,  then  they  hate 
them,  and  prove  very  shy  of  them,  and  gird  them  behind  their  backs,  and  do  them 
much  mischief.  Again,  they  do  a  great  deal  of  hurt  to  themselves,  for  it  had  been 
better  for  them  they  had  never  had  a  name,  than  having  a  name  not  to  be  as  the 
name  does  require.  No ;  the  Lord  does  not  find  fault  with  Sardis  for  having  of  a 
name  that  they  lived,  but  that  they  had  this  name  when  as  they  were  dead  ;  if  they 
had  been  alive,  the  name  to  be  alive  had  been  well.  Then  what  use  must  we  make  of 
this  point?  1.  To  show  the  misery  of  some  of  our  Churches.  They  have  only 
a  name  to  live,  though  we  might  live  well  enough,  for  we  have  the  doctrine  of 
life,  in  many  places,  yet  in  regard  of  our  conversations  for  the  most  part,  we 
may  say  it  is  but  only  a  name.  For  how  does  sin  reign  among  us  every- 
where ?  Covetousness,  profaneness,  fulness  of  bread,  lust,  security,  deadness  of 
heart,  formality — now  where  such  sins  do  abound,  there  the  power  of  godliness 
must  needs  be  away.  Generally  our  assemblies  content  themselves  with  an  outward 
profession  ;  if  they  go  so  far,  they  have  but  a  name  to  live.  Gome  we  to  the  graces 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  without  the  which  a  man  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins, 
&c.,  as  faith,  repentance,  peace  of  conscience,  and  love,  &c.,  where  are  any  of  these 
to  be  found  ?  2.  Another  use  is  of  terror  against  us.  Do  we  think  that  the  Lord 
will  endure  this  at  our  hands  ?  He  hath  endured  it  too  long,  but  He  will  not 
suffer  it  always.  He  hath  a  spiritual  thunder-clap  that  He  lets  fly  against  this  sin 
(Isa.  xxxii.  5).  That  is,  the  Lord  will  unmask  all  such  persons.  He  will  pluck  off 
all  their  names,  and  they  shall  have  a  name  fit  for  their  natures,  and  He  will 
do  this — First,  in  their  own  consciences.  Secondly,  in  the  judgment  of  others.  If 
we  rest  in  a  name,  the  Lord  will  detect  us  at  last  before  others ;  and  then  what  a 
shame  will  this  be  ?  {W.  Fenner,  B.D.)  The  state  of  all  men  known  to  Christ : — I. 
Christ  hath  a  perfect  knowledge  of  evert  one's  works.  1.  In  what  extent  we 
are  to  understand  "the  works"  which  Christ  is  said  to  know.  Works  here  are 
not  to  be  taken  as  distinguished  from  words  and  thoughts,  but  in  the  largest  sense, 
as  including  both.  2.  In  what  manner  Christ  knows  men's  works.  (1)  The  know- 
ledge Christ  has  of  the  works  of  men  is  most  clear.  He  does  not  take  up  with 
appearances,  but  sees  through  every  disguise,  and  takes  things  as  they  really  are. 
(2)  The  knowledge  Christ  hath  of  the  works  of  men  is  immediate,  not  by  report 
from  others,  but  from  His  own  all-penetrating  light  and  inspection.  (3)  The 
knowledge  Christ  hath  of  the  works  of  men  is  perfect  and  full.  Perfect  as  to 
their  number ;  none  of  them  escape  His  notice  or  regard ;  perfect  as  to  their 
nature  and  circumstances,  and  as  to  the  springs  and  aims  of  those  that  do  them. 
Works  that  we  may  have  forgotten  are  known  to  Him  and  remembered  by  Him. 
(4)  The  knowledge  Christ  has  of  the  works  of  men  is  infallible  and  Uable  to  no 
mistake.  He  cannot  be  deceived,  and  will  not  be  mocked.  (5)  The  knowledge 
Christ  has  of  the  works  of  men  is  with  approbation,  or  dislike,  according  as  they 
are  found  to  be  good  or  bad.      IL.  Whoever  he  be  that  hath  a  name  to  lpve, 

AND  TET  IS  DEAD,  IS  KNOWN  TO  ChRIST  AS  WHAT  HE  REALLY  IS.  1.  What  is  im- 
plied in  having  a  name  to  live  ?  They  that  are  really  in  a  state  of  grace  may  be 
justly  said  to  live,  as  such  souls  live  to  the  best  purpose ;  for  to  them  to  live  is 
Christ.  They  are  out  of  the  reach  of  the  sting  of  death,  and  so  need  not  through 
fear  of  it  pass  their  lives  in  bondage  ;  they  are  near  a  blessed  immortality,  in 
which  they  are  to  live  for  ever.  To  be  thus  privileged  is  to  be  alive  indeed.  And 
such  a  name  may  be  acquired — (1)  By  a  freedom  from  the  grosser  pollutions  of  the 
world.  (2)  A  name  to  live,  as  it  implies  an  open  and  visible  profession  of  sub- 
jection to  Christ,  a  joining  with  His  people  in  His  worship  and  ordinances,  and  an 
holding  on  some  time  in  such  a  course ;  so  it  may  arise  from  these.  (3)  A  name 
to  live  may  result  from  experiencing  the  common  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
which  for  a  time  may  look  hopeful  and  promising.  (4)  These  convictions  and  ex- 
ternal reformations  may  be  accompanied  with  excelling  gifts,  enlargedness  in  the 
duty  of  prayer,  joy  and  dehght  in  hearing  and  attending  upon  the  supper  of  the 
Lord,  frequency  in  acts  of  self-denial  and  mortification.    There  may  be  great  head- 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

knowledge  and  ability  to  discourse  of  hypocrisy  itself  with  appearing  abhorrence, 
and  of  sincerity  with  signs  of  love  to  it ;  and  yet  all  these  may  be  found  in  one  un- 
changed at  heart.  2.  Such  a  name  some  professors  of  Christianity  may  have, 
who  are  all  the  while  they  bear  it  spiritually  dead.  If  it  be  asked,  With  whom 
such  may  have  a  name  to  live  ?  a  negative  answer  is  obvious  :  Not  with  Him  who 
seeth  not  as  man  seeth.  But,  1.  They  may  have  a  name  to  live  with  themselves  : 
they  may  reckon  themselves  in  a  state  of  grace,  when  they  are  all  the  while  in 
the  gaU  of  bitterness,  and  bond  of  iniquity.  (1)  In  the  security  that  reigns  in 
their  souls.  They  dread  no  danger,  though  the  nearest  to  it,  but  cry,  Peace,  Peace, 
to  themselves,  when  sudden  destruction  is  coming  upon  them.  (2)  Sinners  show 
their  good  opinion  of  themselves  in  the  hope  they  keep  up  of  their  safety  with 
reference  to  their  souls  and  eternity.  (3)  They  may  have  a  superficial  joy  in 
spiritual  things  as  the  stony  ground  hearers  had  in  receiving  the  word  ;  and  thus, 
with  themselves  they  have  a  name  to  live.  2.  They  may  have  a  name  to  live 
among  others,  and  these  the  friends  and  followers  of  Christ.  3.  The  sadness  of 
the  case,  to  be  dead,  under  a  name  to  live,  or  of  being  alive.  Application :  1.  Does 
Christ  know  every  man's  works  ?  How  strange  is  it  that  it  should  be  brought  into 
dispute,  whether  He  be  truly  and  properly  God !  2.  Does  Christ  know  the  works  of 
every  man  ?  What  ignorance  or  unbelief  does  it  argue  in  such  as  sin  securely,  if 
they  can  but  do  it  secretly !  3.  What  seriousness  becomes  us  whenever  we  engage 
in  any  holy  duty  or  rehgious  worship,  as  all  our  works  are  known  to  Christ  1 
4.  What  reason  have  we  to  be  humble  in  a  review  of  our  own  works,  as  they 
are  all  known  to  Christ,  and,  as  many  of  them  are  such  as  we  have  cause  to 
fear.  He  at  once  observed  and  disapproved!  5.  How  fit  is  Christ  to  be  the 
Judge  of  all  men  at  the  last  day,  who  knows  every  man's  work  now  I  6.  How 
big  with  terror  to  hypocrites  is  this  doctrine.  7.  The  hearts  of  those  in 
whom  there  is  no  guile  allowed,  may  take  comfort  in  the  thoughts  that  Christ 
knows  their  works  and  knows  them  to  be  the  fruits  of  His  Spirit  and  grace  in 
them.  8.  May  one  that  has  a  name  to  live  be  spiritually  dead?  Hence  learn 
that  saving  religion  in  an  inward  thing.  9.  When  Christ  declares,  I  know 
thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead,  with 
what  solicitude  should  every  one  make  the  iaquiry.  Lord,  is  it  I?  10.  How 
inconsiderable  a  thing  is  it  to  be  judged  of  man  in  this  dayl  of  man  that 
looketh  only  on  the  outside.  Our  chief  concern  is  with  one  infinitely  greater: 
He  that  judges  us  is  the  Lord.  11.  How  terrible  will  the  day  of  Christ's  coming  be 
to  the  self-deceiving  hypocrite,  and  how  joyful  to  the  humble  saint.  (D.  Wilcox.) 
Works : — I.  The  wobk  of  the  body.      II.  The  work  of  the  mind.    III.    The 

WORK     OF     THE     CHARACTEB.      IV.    ThE    WORK    OF    THE     SpIBIT.        V.    ThE     WOBK     OF 

BUFFEBiNG.  {H.  H.  Goweu.)  That  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art 
dead. — On  formality  and  hypocrisy  in  religion : — I.  What  is  necessabt  to  give  a 
MAN  A  NAME  TO  LIVE  ?  1.  It  is  necessary  that  he  abstain  from  vice,  and  the  grosser 
pollutions  of  the  world.  2.  Besides  this,  there  must  be  an  external  appearance  of 
devotion.  Mere  negatives  will  not  be  sufficient.  H.  When  may  a  man  be  said  to 
have  a  name  to  live  only  ?  A  statue  may  be  so  curiously  painted  and  dressed 
as  to  be  mistaken,  at  a  distance,  for  a  man ;  and  a  hypocrite  may  borrow  so  much 
of  the  appearance  of  Christian  graces,  as  may  enable  him  to  pass  for  a  genuine 
Christian.  1.  He  has  nothing  but  a  name  who  attends  to  the  outward  part  of 
religion  only.  2.  He  that  has  but  a  name  to  live,  feels  no  satisfaction  and  joy  ia 
approaching  to  God.  3.  He  has  a  name  to  live  only,  who,  notwithstanding  all  his 
religious  exercises,  is  in  no  degree  better.  4.  He  has  a  name  to  live  only,  whom 
difficulties  or  apprehended  dangers  cause  to  turn  back,  or  who,  as  Solomon  says, 
"  faints  in  the  day  of  adversity."  IH.  The  folly  and  dangeb  of  being  satisfied 
with  a  name  to  live  while  you  ABE  DEAD.  1.  Consider  then,  that  while  this  is 
your  character  your  services  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God.  2.  Consider  again,  that 
whUe  you  indulge  this  lifeless  religion  you  will  never  attain  to  holiness.  3.  Besides, 
it  can  never  give  true  satisfaction.  It  may  silence,  but  it  cannot  satisfy  conscience. 
4.  With  nothing  but  a  name  to  live,  we  shall  never  obtain  an  admission  into 
heaven.  (S.  Lavington.)  Some  causes  of  spiritual  death : — 1.  One  cause  of 
spiritual  death  is  self-satisfaction.  A  traveller  lost  on  the  prairie,  with  the  snow 
falling  fast  and  thick,  with  his  blood  coursing  slowly,  feels  that  sense  of  ease 
which  the  opium-eater  knows.  He  lies  down  in  the  soft  white  drifts.  They  make 
an  easy  bed.  His  friends  find  him  and  try  to  arouse  him.  He  would  rather 
be  left  undisturbed.  His  self-satisfaction  works  his  death.  George  III.  was  satis- 
fied with  his  government  of  the  American  colonies ;  he  therefore  refused  to  remedy 


.CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  195 

its  abuses,  and  his  satisfaction  cost  him  these  colonies.  Upon  all  who  are  satisfied 
with  their  standing  before  God  the  chill  of  spiritual  death  has  begun  to  rest.  They 
can  no  more  draw  spiritual  life  from  themselves,  than  one  can  feed  his  body  by 
Bucking  blood  from  its  veins.  Therefore,  satisfied  with  their  relation  to  God,  they 
do  not  strive  to  gain  life  from  Him  who  is  the  source  of  the  life  spiritual,  as  He  is 
of  the  life  physical.  Their  self-satisfaction  works  the  ruin  of  their  souls.  2.  But 
more  frequently  than  by  self-satisfaction  is  the  spiritual  life  killed  by  the  indulgence 
of  some  sin.  Many  a  man  has  felt  he  could  surrender  his  entire  property  to  God  ; 
but  when  the  temptation  arose  of  making  a  hundred  dollars  by  a  trick  of  the  trade, 
he  has  chosen  to  be  dishonest.  But  the  sin  may  not  be  one  of  commission.  It  may 
consist  in  the  omission  of  some  duty.  It  may  consist  in  the  refusal  of  some  means 
of  grace.  It  may  consist  in  the  preference  of  doing  nothing  to  advance  God's 
cause.  Such  sins  of  omission  deaden  the  spiritual  life.  But  in  general  the  sin 
consists  in  the  choice  of  some  other  good  than  the  good  which  the  Christian  life 
affords.      (C  P.    Thwing.)  The  warning  voice  re-echoed  from  Sardis : — The 

evidences  of  salvation  are  various,  and  may  be  viewed  in  various  ways.  On  the 
present  occasion — looking  to  the  expression  of  the  text,  where  the  word  rendered 
"  dead  "  is  literally  "  a  dead  body,"  a  corpse — I  will  endeavour  to  work  out  the 
marks  of  a  living  as  opposed  to  a  dead  soul,  from  what  we  know  to  be  marks  of  a 
living  as  opposed  to  a  dead  body.  I.  One  great  characteristic  of  spiritual  life,  in 
the  Bible,  is  the  possession  of  sprarruAL  sight.  The  first  test,  therefore,  I  would 
propose  of  spiritual  life  is  a  perception  of  spiritual  truth.  Place  before  the  eye  of 
the  hving  body  a  scene  of  loveliness  or  of  horror,  and  from  the  eye  the  heart  is  at 
once  affected,  at  once  feels  the  attraction  or  repulsion,  and  so  feels  as  to  act  upon 
that  feehng.  Even  so,  place  before  the  vision  of  the  hving  soul  a  spiritual  truth — 
the  beauty  of  holiness,  or  the  loathsomeness  of  sin — and  at  once  does  the  heart  so 
feel  the  truth  as  to  act  upon  that  feehng.  Nay,  verily,  as  spiritual  facts  are  vastly 
beyond  all  corporeal  facts  in  importance,  so  spiritual  facts  have  vastly  more  effect 
upon  the  heart,  when  once  the  soul's  vision  is  tolerably  clear :  they  speedily  become 
its  all  in  all.  H.  The  living  soul  has  hearing  as  well  as  sight.  There  are  many, 
who  are  Usteners  to  religious  sounds  after  a  fashion,  eager  attendants  on  this  or 
that  preacher,  ready  hearkeners  to  certain  kinds  of  religious  conversation.  But 
their  hearing  is  an  empty  thing.  It  fills  their  head  with  notions  and  their  tongue 
with  words,  and  perchance  their  heart  with  a  sort  of  excitement ;  but  as  to  any 
solid  effect  on  heart  and  practice,  that  is  wanting.  How  different  with  the  soul 
that  really  lives !  This  soul,  conscious  of  God's  presence,  trembles  at  His  threaten- 
ings,  bows  in  reverence  to  His  commands,  melts  at  the  hearing  of  His  love,  and 
pants  after  His  promises  in  the  very  fervency  of  desire.  Its  spiritual  ear,  as  its 
spiritual  eye,  brings  every  impression  home  to  the  heart;  there  roots  it  a  vital 
principle,  sanctifying  the  inner  man  and  prompting  the  outer  practice.  IH.  The 
living  soul  possesses  also  the  faculty  of  speech.  Its  very  existence  is  prayer. 
Keenly  ahve  to  the  greatness  of  its  wants,  and  as  alive  to  the  willing  fulness  of  the 
Lord,  its  desires  are  continually  traveUing  upwards  from  these  wants  to  that  ful- 
ness, in  the  inward  breathings  of  prayer,  if  not  with  its  audible  words.  IV.  I  will 
continue  the  analogy  but  one  step  further,  and  that  is  in  growth.  True,  spiritual 
life,  as  it  is  a  quickening,  so  is  it  an  impulsive  principle.  As  it  gives  action  to  the 
spiritual  eye,  ear,  and  tongue,  so  does  it  give  growth  to  the  whole  inner  man. 
Slow  growth  it  may  be  ;  still  grow  the  living  soul  must  and  will.  It  is  a  growth 
in  knowledge ;  but  that  is  not  the  sure  test.  It  is  a  growth  in  holiness,  and  that  is 
th£  test ;  the  one  clear,  decisive  test  of  the  soul's  life  (Matt.  vii.  20).  True  Christian 
holiness  is  not  the  honesty  of  the  worldhng  ;  nor  the  honour  of  the  gentleman  ;  nor 
the  temperance  of  the  philosopher  ;  nor  the  kindness  of  the  good-natured  ;  nor  yet 
is  it  the  mechanical  observance  of  the  formalist,  nor  the  bustling  vehemence  of  the 
religionist.  True  Christian  holiness  is  a  hearty  conformity  to  God's  whole  will, 
acting  in  a  loving  obedience  to  all  God's  commandments.  It  works  in  two  great 
lines  of  feeling  and  operaton — in  a  deep-rooted  horror  of  sin,  as  God's  utter  hate,  and 
a  perfect  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness,  as  God's  supreme  delight, 
both  springing  from  entire  love  to  God  as  their  one  grand  source  and  motive.  Con- 
clusion :  What  is  the  result  of  this  inquiry  for  you  ?  As  mark  after  mark  of 
spiritual  life  has  been  brought  forward,  have  you  been  able  to  say,  "  This  mark  I 
have ;  if  not  in  the  highest  degree,  still,  God  be  thanked,  most  assuredly  I  have 
it  "  ?  But  are  there  any  who  can  find  no  such  marks  in  their  soul  ?  Then,  whatever 
else  you  may  have,  you  are  destitute  indeed.  You  may  be  very  amiable  in  men's 
eyes.    Death  has  sometimes  its  momentary  beauty.    A  shadowy  loveliness  is  seen 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

to  linger  on  the  lifeless  features.  Yet  the  work  of  decay  and  destruction  is  just  as 
busy  beneath.  You  may  be  gifted  with  great  talents  and  great  energy  ;  you  may  gain 
high  distinction  and  honour  in  the  world  ;  but  if  your  soul  be  not  "  alive  in  Christ," 
what  is  all  this  but  a  fading  garland  on  the  head  of  a  corpse  ?  {John  Gibson,  B.D.) 
A   living    Church: — I.  A  Church  may  be  said  to  live  while  she  is  dead,  when 

SHE   has    the    name    OF    ChBISTIAN   WITHOUT    THE    DOCTRINES    OF    THE    GoSPEL.        1. 

The  most  important  discovery  in  the  Word  of  God  is  that  of  redemption  by  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  sin  and  death  and  misery.  One  of  the  most  vital  doctrines 
must  therefore  be  what  relates  to  the  Person  of  the  Redeemer.  2.  The  second 
doctrine  upon  which  depends  the  life  of  the  Church,  is  the  Atonement  or  Sacrifice 
which  Christ  our  Lord  has  offered  for  sin.  The  supreme  deity  of  our  Saviour 
demonstrates  His  power  to  save  if  He  would.  3.  The  third  doctrine  upon  which 
depends  the  life  of  the  Church,  is  that  which  relates  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  His 
influences.  4.  In  the  sum  of  these  doctrines  we  discover  the  fourth  principle 
upon  the  influence  of  which  the  life  of  the  Church  depends,  the  doctrine  of  Free 
Grace.  The  practical  reception  of  this  doctrine  in  the  Church  lies  at  the  founda- 
tion of  a  religion  for  sinners.  H.  The  Church  may  have  a  name  to  live,  and  be  in 
reality  dead,  when  orthodoxy  in  opinion  is  substituted  fob  morality  in  prac- 
tice,   ni.   The    Church  may  have  a  name   to   live,   while  in  reality  dead, 

FROM  HAVING  AN   EXTERNAL  MORALITY  WITHOUT   HUMILITY  AND  PIETY.       (H.Cooke,D.D.) 

That  a  minister  may  he  in  fault  that  the  people  are  dead : — I  say  the  minister 
may  be  in  the  fault ;  the  point  is  very  clear  from  this  place.  The  Lord  being  to  reprove 
the  people  here  of  Sardis,  for  their  deadness  in  religion.  He  directs  His  reproof  to 
their  minister.  The  good  or  bad  estate  of  a  people  dependeth  much  upon  the 
minister.  Commonly  we  see  it  fall  out,  as  the  Prophet  Hosea  said,  "Like  people,  like 
priest "  (Hos.  iv.  9).  Such  as  the  builder  is,  such  is  the  building ;  as  is  the  husband- 
man, so  is  the  husbandry.  {Wm.  Fenner,  B.D.)  Moral  death  : — By  dead  I 
mean  five  things.  1.  Deadness  of  guilt;  when  a  man  is  guilty  of  any 
offence,  that  is  death  by  the  law.  Now  when  a  man  is  not  pardoned  of  God,  he 
is  dead,  though  he  have  never  so  many  hopes  and  conceits  of  forgiveness. 
2.  Deadness  of  mind,  when  the  mind  is  ignorant  of  God  in  regard  of  saving 
knowledge.  3.  Deadness  of  heart,  when  the  heart  is  not  inclined  towards  God, 
then  we  say  it  is  dead  towards  God  and  all  goodness.  4.  Deadness  of  con- 
science, when  the  conscience  hath  no  force ;  it  may  be  it  finds  fault  with  such 
and  such  ways,  but  it  hath  no  power  over  the  man  to  make  him  to  leave  them. 
5.  Deadness  of  affection ;  when  the  affections  are  clumsy,  and  will  not  stir 
towards  God  and  all  heavenly  things.  Should  a  man  have  all  Christianity 
in  him,  and  yet  be  dead  and  dull  and  without  life,  it  is  even  all  one  as  if  he 
had  just  nothing.  First,  for  conversion.  Should  a  man  seem  to  be  converted,  O 
what  a  changed  man  is  this  I  He  was  a  drunkard,  and  now  he  is  sober.  This  is 
well.  Ay,  but  if  thou  beest  dead  to  the  ways  of  God  this  is  nothing  towards  heaven  ; 
except  a  new  life  be  put  into  this  man,  to  be  alive  in  all  these  good  ways  ;  except 
he  be  quickened  together  with  Christ.  Secondly,  faith.  Should  a  man  lean  him- 
self upon  Gofl,  and  upon  Christ,  should  a  man  apply  all  the  promises  of  the  gospel 
to  his  soul ;  alas,  what  of  this  ?  If  this  man  be  dead  still,  without  such  a  faith  as 
produces  life,  it  is  little  better  than  nothing.  Thirdly,  to  be  a  member  of  the 
visible  Church  of  God,  to  be  a  stone  in  God's  building,  put  in  by  baptism,  kept  in 
by  profession  of  the  Christian  faith.  This  is  a  poor  thing,  if  this  man  now  be  not  a 
lively  stone.  Fourthly,  for  hope.  It  may  be  thou  hast  hope  that  thou  art  a  good 
Christian,  thou  hast  a  hope  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  ;  now  if  thy  hope  be  a  dead 
hope,  if  it  does  not  quicken  thee  up  to  trample  on  the  world,  to  carry  thee  on 
through  thick  and  thin,  this  is  not  a  gracious  hope.  Fifthly,  for  repentance. 
Whatever  thou  hast  to  say  for  repentance,  canst  thou  plead  a  thousand  changes  and 
reformations,  yet  if  thou  hast  not  gotten  out  of  a  dead  temper,  thou  art  yet  under 
an  impenitent  heart.  Again,  to  go  over  all  duties  of  religion — they  must  be  done 
with  life ;  to  do  them  with  a  dead  heart,  is  as  good  as  not  to  do  them  at  all . 
Religion  is  a  very  irksome  thing  unto  us,  as  long  as  we  are  dead-hearted. 
What  is  it  that  takes  away  the  grievousness  of  it,  but  a  lively  heart?  {ibid.) 
Death  in  the  Church  : — I  need  scarcely  remind  you  that  all  the  seven  epistles  to 
the  Churches  are  cast  in  one  mould ;  each  of  them  begins  with  setting  forth  some 
aspect  of  the  ascended  Christ's  power  or  glory  or  relation  with  His  Churches,  which 
aspect  is  generally  drawn  from  the  great  vision  in  the  first  chapter.  It  is  to  this 
correspondence  between  the  aspect  in  which  our  Lord  is  revealed  here  and  the 
state  of  the  Church  of  which  the  vision  is  given,  that  I  venture  to  ask  your  atten- 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION,  197 

tion.  First  of  all,  then,  let  us  try  to  understand  what  sort  of  a  Church  it  is  that 
■wants  this  vision.  It  was  dead.  One  smiting  word  stands  in  the  place  of  all 
characterisation  ;  it  had  no  persecutions  like  the  faithful  band  at  Smyrna.  Why 
should  it  ?  It  had  not  life  enough  to  be  obnoxious !  What  was  there  in  such  a 
Church  as  that  to  provide  any  antagonism  ?  It  exactly  suited  the  world's  purpose,  and 
was,  in  fact,  only  a  bit  of  the  world  under  another  name.  A  dead  Church  is  on  the 
best  possible  terms  with  a  dead  world.  When  the  frost  binds  the  ground,  weeds 
and  flowers  alike  cease  to  be  put  forth.  There  is  a  worse  condition  than  when 
many  people  are  thinking  earnestly  about  religion,  and  some  of  them  are  thinking 
wrongly.  And  so  the  Church  at  Sardis  had  no  heretics  because  there  was  nobody 
in  it  that  cared  enough  about  the  principles  of  Christianity  to  think  earnestly  about 
them.  And  it  had  no  immoralities  either — most  respectable.  And  yet  one  Eye 
looked  at  it  and  said,  "  Thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  are  dead."  About 
how  many  of  our  Churches  and  of  the  individual  Christians  who  take  up  the  pro- 
fession of  Christ  and  connect  themselves  with  ecclesiastical  arrangements  with  such 
light  hearts,  may  the  same  be  said !  Life  is  the  condition  of  union  with  Jesus 
Christ,  and  death  is  the  grim  alternative  that  waits  upon  separation  from  Him. 
That  Church  had  lost  the  tenacity  of  its  hold  and  the  intimacy  of  its  union  with 
Jesus  Christ.  Now  note  further,  as  brought  out  in  this  letter,  that  such  a  condition 
is  not  final  and  irreversible.  They  were  not  so  utterly  dead  as  moribund,  and  so  in 
another  part  of  the  letter  we  read  about  things  which  remain  and  are  ready  to  die, 
and  about  works  which  were  done  but  were  not  perfect  or  fulfilled.  Ay  1  effects 
last  after  causes  cease  ;  institutions  live  when  all  the  reality  is  out  of  them.  Habit, 
use  and  wont,  forms,  ceremonies,  keep  up  the  appearance  of  vitality  when  the 
reality  is  almost  gone.  There  are  creatures  of  a  low  organisation  where  you  can 
get  muscular  contractions  after  life  is  extinct  ;  you  will  find  gardens  round  many  a 
deserted,  roofless  house  in  the  country  where  the  weeds  have  not  killed  all  the  roses, 
and  a  vagrant  flower  or  two  still  remains  to  testify  the  culture  that  was.  And  so  in 
thousands  of  our  communities  there  is  enough  left  of  the  living,  lingering  effect  of 
the  primitive  impulse  to  keep  up  a  ghastly  mockery  of  life  which  would  be  far  better 
if  it  knew  itself  to  be  what  it  is — dead !  And  that  brings  me  to  say  again  that  such 
a  condition  may  be  absolutely  concealed  from  every  eye  but  the  Eye  that  is  as  a 
flame  of  fire.  A  great  many  of  our  communities  I  am  afraid  are  living  on  the 
past.  John  Wesley  had  a  great  name,  but  you  cannot  live  because  there  was  once 
John  Wesley  with  you.  Unconsciousness  is  the  surest  sign  of  spiritual  decline.  I 
suppose  a  man  paralysed  has  no  sense  in  his  limbs,  and  might  put  his  feet  into  a 
tub  of  scalding  water  and  take  the  flesh  off  the  bones  and  never  know  it.  Frost- 
bitten limbs  are  perfectly  comfortable  :  it  is  the  waking  that  is  the  pain.  Like  the 
hero  of  the  Old  Testament  Book  with  his  locks  cropped,  they  go  out  as  of  old  to 
exercise  themselves,  and  they  wist  not  that  their  strength  has  departed  from  them 
till  they  try  a  death-grapple  with  the  Philistines,  and  then  they  find  it  out  fast 
enough.  What  is  it  that  has  in  the  course  of  ages  worn  into  indistinctness  the 
sharp-cut  granite  features  of  the  Sphynx  that  looks  out  over  the  Egyptian  desert  ? 
The  perpetual  attrition  of  microscopic  grains  of  sand  blown  against  it  by  the 
vagrant  winds !  And  so  the  multitudinous  trivialities  of  life,  coming  in  contact  with 
the  image  of  Jesus  Christ  in  our  hearts,  will  efface  its  fair  features  and  leave  but  a 
dim  outline.  II.  Now,  let  me  ask  you  to  look  at  the  vision  which  such  a  Church 
NEEDS.  "  He  that  hath  the  seven  spirits  of  God  and  the  seven  stars."  It  is  a 
distinct  reference  to  the  personal  spirit  of  God  conceived  of  in  the  manifoldness  of 
His  operations  rather  than  in  the  unity  of  His  Personality.  That  spirit  comes  per- 
meating, enlightening,  illuminating,  vivifying,  discerning,  and  strengthening  all  of 
us  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  it.  There  is  the  antidote  for  a  dead  Church,  a  living 
spirit  in  the  sevenfold  perfectness  of  His  operations.  He  is  the  spirit  of  consolation, 
of  adoption,  of  supplication,  of  holiness  and  wisdom,  of  power  and  of  love,  and  of 
a  sound  mind,  and  into  all  our  deadness  there  will  come  the  life-breath  which  shall 
surely  quicken  it  all.  That  which  is  unique  in  the  history  of  Christianity  as  com- 
pared with  all  other  religions,  its  power  of  self-recuperation,  and  when  it  is 
apparently  nearest  extinction,  the  marvellous  way  in  which  it  flames  up  again 
because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  poured  forth.  Other  teachers — what  can  they 
do  ?  They  can  impart  a  system,  they  can  train  a  little  group  of  dwindled  imitators, 
who  generally  imitate  their  weaknesses,  and  think  they  are  imitating  their  strength, 
but  to  give  the  spirit  that  animated  the  originator  is  exactly  what  none  of  them  can 
do.  III.  The  words  of  my  text  suggebt  one  of  the  ways  in  which  this  bestow- 
MENT  of  the  seven  SPIRITS  IS  ACCOMPLISHED.      One  w^j  by  which  that  Spirit  of 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.m. 

God  is  shed  abroad  upon  His  moribund  Church  is  by  raising  up  men  in  it  filled 
with  the  Spirit,  and  whose  intense  vitality  communicates  life  to  that  which  is 
almost  dead.  Let  us  all  go  back  to  Him  for  quickening.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Uselessness  of  mere  profession : — Many  content  themselves  with  the  name  of 
Christians ;  as  if  many  a  ship  hath  not  been  called  "  Safeguard  "  or  "  Good-speed  " 
which  yet  hath  fallen  into  the  hands  of  pirates.  {J.  Trapp.)  A  dead  Church : — A 
pastor  of  a  Church  in  a  western  town  went  to  his  prayer-meeting  on  Thursday  even- 
ing as  usual,  where  the  attendance  was  very  small ;  but  that  evening  no  one  came ; 
even  the  sexton  went  away  after  lighting  the  church.  After  waiting  half  an  hour 
for  his  members  to  put  in  their  appearance,  and  finding  that  he  was  the  sole 
worshipper,  he  went  to  the  bell-cord  and  slowly  tolled  the  bell,  as  the  custom  was 
when  any  one  died  in  the  town.  The  alarm  was  magnetic.  All  over  the  town  the 
inquiry  was  made,  "  Who  is  dead  ?  "  A  number  of  the  members  of  the  Church 
hastened  there  to  ascertain  who  was  the  unfortunate  one.  Just  then  the  minister, 
descending  the  steps,  was  interrogated  by  several  of  his  flock,  "  Who  is  dead  ?  " 
"This  Church  is  dead,"  was  his  response,  and  then  and  there  he  resigned  the 
pastorate.  (D.  Tasker,  D.D.)  Semblances  of  life  : — Nature  presents  us  with  many 
affecting  illustrations  of  the  semblance  of  life,  where  death  is  reigning;  the  flowers 
in  your  garden  may  for  a  time  retain  the  form,  when  life  is  extinct ;  the  ancient 
oak  in  the  forest  may  stand  for  years  erect,  while  life  has  long  since  passed 
away ;  the  tiny  shell  on  yonder  beach  may  attract  your  notice,  when  its  once 
little  tenant  can  nowhere  be  found :  so  do  we  often  think  we  find  the  form 
of  godliness,  when  the  power — the  reality — the  life  are  wanting.  (C.  Bowes.) 
A  name  to  live : — I  have  seen  a  graft  bound  to  the  bleeding  tree.  It  was  inserted 
into  its  wounded  side,  that  both  might  become  one. ,.  Yet  no  incorporation  followed. 
There  was  no  Hving  union.  Spring  came  singing,  and  with  her  fingers  opened  all 
the  buds ;  summer  came,  with  her  dewy  nights  and  sunny  days,  and  brought  out 
all  the  flowers ;  brown  autumn  came  to  shake  the  trees  and  reap  the  fields,  and 
with  music  and  dances  and  mirth  to  hold  harvest-home ;  but  that  unhappy  branch 
bore  no  fruit,  nor  flower,  nor  even  leaf.  Held  on  by  dead  clay  and  rotting 
cords,  it  merely  stuck  to  the  living  tree,  a  withered  and  unsightly  thing.  And  so, 
alas  !  it  is  with  many ;  having  a  name  to  live,  they  are  dead.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
A  show  of  life  : — God  abhors  and  man  despises  the  fair  colours  of  a  religious  pro- 
fession that  stand  out,  as  it  were,  above  the  surface  of  the  nature,  like  the  appliquee 
of  the  embroiderer,  instead  of  being  interwoven  with  the  stuff  so  as  to  become  a 
part  of  it.  Mere  outward  decorum  and  religious  decency  are  not  what  God 
requires,  though  they  are  too  often,  alas  !  what  is  presented  to  Him  in  lieu  of  the 
beauties  of  holiness.  It  is  easy  to  assume  the  character  of  God's  people,  to 
imitate  their  manners,  to  use  their  language,  to  conform  to  their  habits.  It  is 
easier  to  paint  a  flower  than  to  grow  one.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  semblance 
of  life  : — How  like  to  a  Christian  a  man  may  be  and  yet  possess  no  vital  godliness  I 
Walk  through  the  British  Museum,  and  you  will  see  all  the  orders  of  animala 
standing  in  their  various  places,  and  exhibiting  themselves  with  the  utmost  possible 
propriety.  The  rhinoceros  demurely  retains  the  position  in  which  he  was  set  at 
first,  the  eagle  soars  not  through  the  window,  the  wolf  howls  not  at  night ;  every 
creature,  whether  bird,  beast,  or  fish,  remains  in  the  particular  glass  case  allotted  to 
it ;  but  we  all  know  these  are  not  the  creatures,  but  only  the  outward  semblances  of 
them.  So  in  the  Churches  of  Christ,  many  professors  are  not  living  believers,  but 
stuffed  Christians.  They  possess  all  the  externals  of  religion,  and  every  outward 
morahty  that  you  could  desire ;  they  behave  with  great  propriety,  they  keep  their 
places,  and  there  is  no  outward  difference  between  them  and  the  true  believer, 
except  upon  the  vital  point,  the  life  which  no  power  on  earth  can  possibly  confer. 
There  is  this  essential  distinction,  spiritual  life  is  absent.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
life  akin  to  death : — I  was  reading  in  Humboldt's  "  Cosmos,"  the  other  day,  a  very 
remarkable  thing.  He  tells  us  that  he  went  with  some  Indians  into  a  number  of 
huge  caverns  in  South  America,  which  were  locked  in  perpetual  darkness  ;  but  in 
them  certain  fruit-eating  bats  were  accustomed  to  go  to  dwell.  They  had  brought 
there  the  seeds  of  different  plants,  and  when  Humboldt  and  his  guides  entered 
with  their  torches,  there  were  trees  and  plants  of  every  kind  that  had  grown  in  the 
utter  darkness.  Just  as  you  have  seen  a  potato  grow  in  your  cellar,  and  send  out 
its  yellow  sickly  shoots,  so  the  whole  cavern  was  like  a  great  forest  or  garden,  full 
of  these  ghastly  ghosts  of  plants.  Oh,  you  may  work  in  your  Churches,  and  you 
may  sow,  and  you  may  labour,  but  if  the  blessed  light  of  God's  own  truth  does 
not  come  in,  it  will  be  a  sickly  vegetation  akin  to  death.     {Ibid.)        Formalism 


CHAP,  in.]  REVELATION.  199 

and  true  Christianity : — The  other  day  I  was  at  a  railway  station  with  a  friend, 
and  looking  at  a  couple  of  engines.  As  we  were  talking  the  engine-driver  came  up, 
and  I  remarked,  •'  We  have  just  been  admiring  the  engines ;  very  splendid  ones 
they  are.  I  should  think  they  are  just  alike."  The  man  looked  at  me  significantly. 
•*  Yes ;  they  are  much  alike  outside,  but  that  one  there  has  no  fire  burning,  and  it 
cannot  even  move  itself ;  but  this  one  here  has  the  fixe  burning  and  the  steam  up, 
and  I  am  just  going  to  jump  upon  it,  and  you  will  see  it  run  away  with  the  whole 
train  behind  it."  Well,  I  thought,  there  is  just  that  difiference  between  the  for- 
malist and  the  true  Christian.  The  formalist  is,  to  all  appearance,  a  splendid 
engine ;  but  there  is  no  fire  and  the  steam  is  not  up.  The  Christian  may  not  be  so 
powerful-looking  or  so  showy,  but  then  the  fire  is  burning,  and  the  steam  is  up ; 
and  while  the  one  cannot  help  himself,  the  other  will  by  his  zeal  affect  a  whole 
neighbourhood.    (C.  Garrett.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things  which  remain,  that  are 
ready  to  die. — The  evidences  and  causes  of  the  decay  of  religion  in  the  soul : — 
I.  When  one's  religion  is  decayed  to  dying  remains.  1.  Some  things  from  whence 
one's  religion  may  seem  to  be  brought  to  dying  remains,  while  really  it  is  not  so. 
(1)  The  wearing  away  of  violent  affections  and  commotions  of  heart  in  religion, 
or  the  settling  of  flashes  of  affection.  (2)  One's  not  being  able  to  go  through  with 
duties  with  that  ease  that  sometimes  they  have  done  before.  (3)  The  marks  of 
the  decay  of  natural  vigour  left  on  religious  duties.  (4)  More  felt  stirring  of 
corruption  than  before.  2.  Some  things  that  will  evince  one's  religion  to  be 
brought  to  dying  remains,  whether  they  think  it  or  not.  (1)  When  the  conscience 
boggles  not  but  at  gross  outbreakings.  (2)  When  one's  conscience  is  strait  in  the 
circumstantials  of  religion,  but  lax  in  the  substantials  of  it.  (3)  When  there  is 
any  one  thing  lacking  to  the  perfection  of  one's  religion  in  parts.  (4)  When  folks' 
strength  against  sin  and  temptation  is  abated :  that  is  a  plain  indication  of  a 
decay,  for  ♦*  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and 
more  unto  the  perfect  day  (Prov.  iv.  18).  (5)  When  the  work  of  mortification  is  at 
a  stand ;  the  man's  not  watching  his  heart,  and  noticing  the  lusts  rising  there, 
and  setting  himself  to  mortifying  them  (Eom.  viii.  13).  (6)  When,  though  the 
duties  of  religion  be  kept  up,  yet  spirituality  in  duties  is  gone.  (7)  When  one  is 
become  a  stranger  to  the  life  of  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  what  is  left  but  dying 
remains.  II.  What  are  the  causes  that  bring  one's  religion  to  dying 
remains.  1.  Unwatchfulness  (Kev.  iii.  2).  Carelessness  about  one's  body  is  oft- 
times  fatal  to  it ;  about  one's  substance,  breeds  a  consumption  in  their  estate ;  and 
unwatchfulness  over  the  heart  breeds  a  spiritual  decay.  2.  Spiritual  sloth 
(Eccles.  X.  18).  This  is  a  bewitching  sin,  and  if  once  Satan  get  men  asleep  on  this 
enchanted  ground,  be  sure  they  shall  be  robbed  there.  3.  Quenching  of  the 
Spirit  (1  Thess.  v.  19).  4.  Slacking  in  diligence  about  the  duties  of  religion 
(Prov.  xix.  15).  5.  Doing  anything  with  a  doubting  conscience,  doubting  whether 
the  practice  be  lawful  or  not.  6.  Worldliness  and  carnality.  When  one  goes  aside 
from  God  to  the  world,  he  lies  down  among  the  lions'  dens,  and  how  can  he  come 
away  without  loss?  7.  The  entertaining  of  any  one  lust,  or  idol  of  jealousy 
(Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  in.  Wherein  lies  the  strengthening  of  things  vra[iCH  remain, 
that  are  ready  to  die  ?  1.  In  blowing  up  the  remaining  spark  that  is  ready  to 
die  out  (2  Tim.  i.  6).  2.  In  adding  to  the  remains  (2  Peter  i.  5-7).  {T.  Boston, 
D.D.)  The  decline  of  religion — its   causes   and  remedies: — I.  Causes.      1.  A 

culpable  inattention  to  the  things  which  are  necessary  to  preserve  the  spirit 
and  life  of  religion.  (1)  Inattention  to  the  characteristic  spirit  of  the  gospel 
is  highly  injurious  to  the  life  of  religion.  (2)  Inattention  to  the  means 
which  God  has  appointed  to  preserve  the  life  of  personal  religion,  is  a  cause 
of  its  declension.  (3)  The  next  thing  necessary  to  maintain  personal  religion, 
is  serious  attention  to  the  motives  which  the  gospel  inspires,  the  neglect  of 
which  forms  a  powerful  cause  of  its  decline.  (4)  It  is  necessary  also,  in 
order  to  maintain  the  life  of  religion  in  the  soul  of  individuals,  that  they 
should  keep  the  principal  design  of  the  gospel  in  view;  the  neglect  of  this 
is  one  cause  of  its  declension.  2.  The  pernicious  influence  of  erroneous  senti- 
ments. (1)  One  of  the  pernicious  effects  of  erroneous  sentiments  is,  that  they 
induce  those  who  are  under  their  influence  to  be  more  attentive  to  speculative 
opinions  than  to  personal  religion.  (2)  Their  tendency  is  to  make  the  Church  less 
solicitous  about  the  conversion  of  sinners  to  God,  than  the  establishment  of  some 
favourite  notions.    (3)  Erroneous  sentiments  produce  evU  passions,  and  prevent 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

unity  of  exertion,  and  thus  tend  towards  the  decline  of  the  Church.  Peace  and 
unity  are  of  high  importance  to  the  prosperity  of  a  religious  community ;  what- 
ever tends  to  engender  evil  tempers  is  therefore  very  injurious,  and  hastens  its 
decline.  (4)  The  introduction  and  prevalence  of  pernicious  sentiments  tend  to  fix 
an  unfavourable  character  on  the  Church,  and  thus  to  prevent  its  prosperity,  and 
hasten  its  decline.  (5)  The  Spirit  of  God  is  grieved,  and  withholds  His  gracious 
presence  from  the  people.  3.  The  destructive  influence  of  a  worldly  spirit. 
(1)  A  worldly  spirit  is  manifested  when  individuals  or  families  struggle  for  pre- 
eminence. (2)  When  property  is  suffered  to  have  an  undue  influence  in  the 
affairs  of  the  Church.  (3)  When  the  members  of  the  Church  are  attempted  to  be 
directed  or  governed  more  by  the  power  and  authority  of  its  officers  than  by  reason 
and  Scripture — by  love  and  persuasion.  (4)  When  there  is  a  want  of  suitable 
submission  and  subordination  in  the  members  of  the  Church.  (5)  The  spirit  of 
the  world  is  manifested  in  a  way  very  injurious  to  the  Church,  when  its  most 
prominent  members  so  comply  with  the  maxims  and  customs  of  the  world  as  to 
have  their  Christian  characters  involved  in  that  of  the  worldling  and  people  of 
fashion.  4.  The  neglect  of  those  Scriptural  principles  which  were  given  by  Christ 
for  the  direction  and  government  of  His  Church.  (1)  The  neglect  of  the  nature 
and  importance  of  the  Scriptural  principles  given  for  the  guidance  of  the  Church, 
often  involves  in  it  consequences  injurious  to  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the 
body.  (2)  One  of  the  most  important  cases  which  imperatively  requires  an 
attention  to  right  principles,  is  the  choice  of  a  minister.  The  decline  of  some 
Churches  may  be  traced  to  imprudent  steps  taken  on  such  an  occasion.  (3) 
Another  thing  which  leads  to  the  decline  of  religion  and  the  Church,  is  the  neglect 
of  Scriptural  principles  in  the  admission  of  members.  (4)  The  neglect  of  Scrip- 
tural principles  in  the  conduct  of  the  Church  toward  its  minister  sometimes 
operates  as  a  cause  of  the  decline  of  religion  in  that  congregation.  (5)  The  neglect 
of  Scriptural  principles  by  the  Church  with  regard  to  their  conduct  towards  each 
other,  is  often  a  cause  of  its  decline.  5.  The  next  general  cause  is  the  prevalence 
of  a  fastidious  and  a  false  taste  in  matters  of  religion.  A  false  taste  may  effect 
(1)  the  simplicity,  (2)  the  unity,  and  (3)  the  energy  of  the  gospel.  6.  The  last, 
and  often  the  principal  cause  of  the  decline  of  religion  in  a  Church,  is  an  ineffi- 
cient ministry.  II.  Eemedies.  1.  That  all  the  individuals  in  the  congregation 
should  use  every  means  in  their  power  to  impress  upon  their  own  minds,  and 
upon  the  minds  of  others,  a  sense  of  the  necessity  and  importance  of  revival. 
2.  Endeavour  to  discover  and  remove  the  obstacles  to  its  success.  3.  Adapt  the 
means  of  revival  to  the  circumstances  of  the  place.  4.  Unite  and  combine  the 
diversified  talents  of  the  people  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  end.  (John  Griffin.) 
The  true  method  of  securing  a  revival : — In  an  age  when  so  much  is  said  and 
thought  about  revivals,  the  passage  before  us  is  peculiarly  appropriate.  The  great 
secret,  after  all,  consists  in  rightly  cherishing  those  things  that  are  already  possessed. 
I.  What  ake  the  things  which  bemain  in  such  a  Church  ?  1.  Some  degree  of 
Church  organisation.  There  was,  in  the  case  of  Sardis,  a  "  name  to  live  " ;  they  had 
*'  received  "  the  oracles  of  God.  It  was  a  Church,  although  a  weak  one.  2.  Some 
of  the  Church  ordinances.  They  had  the  Word  of  God.  The  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  if  not  accompanied  by  the  saving  power  of  former  days,  was  still  a  privilege 
in  their  possession.  3.  Some  of  the  undertakings  to  which  a  Christian  Church  may 
address  itself.  "  I  know  thy  works."  4.  The  presence  of  a  few  godly  men.  II. 
What  is  the  Divine  method  of  securing  a  bevival  ?  1.  Human  ingenuity  would 
probably  resort  to  one  or  other  of  these  two  methods :  (1)  Some  would  suggest  entire 
reconstruction.  They  would  remove  the  weak  and  sickly  plants,  and  till  the  ground 
afresh.  (2)  Others  would  seek  to  accomplish  the  end  desired  by  introducing  some 
powerful  revival  element,  such  as  they  have  heard  of  as  successful  elsewhere — 
revival  preaching,  revival  services,  revival  hymns.  2.  God's  plan  differs  from  both 
these.  He  neither  destroys  nor  calls  in  the  aid  of  foreign  excitement.  He  simply 
says,  "Strengthen  the  things  that  remain."  Literally,  "Make  fast  the  surviving 
things  that  are  about  to  perish."  Here  then  we  have — (1)  Church  organisation 
consolidated.  (2)  Church  ordinances  more  diligently  observed.  (3)  Church 
work  more  actively  performed.  (4)  Godly  men  multiplied.  {F.  Wagstaff.) 
The  weak  things  of  the  soul,  and  the  way  in  which  they  should  be  strengthened : — I. 
The  weak  things  of  the  soul  that  need  to  be  strengthened.  1.  The  graces 
of  the  soul.  2.  The  activities  of  the  soul.  Work  is  the  best  medicine  for  a  weak 
soul.  3.  The  best  talents  of  the  soul.  Grace,  energy,  thought,  generosity,  love,  and 
enterprise — these  gifts  need  culture,  or  they  will  perish.    II.  The  method  by  which 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  201 

THE    WEAK    THINGS    OF    THE    SOUL    SHOULD    BE     STBENGTHENED.       1.    They    are   to    be 

strengthened  by  quiet  meditation.  2.  They  are  to  be  strengthened  by  earnest 
prayer.  3.  They  are  to  be  strengthened  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
m.  The  beason  why  the  weak  things  of  the  soul  should  be  immediately 
STBENGTHENED.  The  Weak  things  of  the  soul,  being  ready  to  die,  are  in  imminent 
danger,  and  require  immediate  attention.  This  death  should  be  avoided,  because  it 
is  the  extinction,  not  of  the  body,  but  of  the  invaluable  energies  of  the  soul ;  of  its 
faith  and  love.  Men  cannot  afford  to  let  these  things  die ;  they  have  nothing  to 
substitute  in  their  place.  Lessons:  1.  That  the  soul  of  man  has  vitalities  which 
require  to  be  nourished  by  appropriate  food  and  care.  2.  That  if  this  attention  is 
withheld  they  will  perish.  3.  That  heaven  is  anxious  for  the  quickening  of  the 
energies  of  the  soul.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Methods  to  be  taken  for  the  revival  of 
religion : — I.  We  should  have  a  constant  begaed  to  the  fbame  and  tempeb  of 
cub  own  spibits.      II.  We   should  take  heed  also  to   our  doctbine,  that  oub 

PREACHING  MAY  HAVE  THE  MOST  DIEECT  TENDENCY  TO  DO  GOOD.  III.  PuBLIO 
catechising  of  young  persons  is  a  PBOPEB  method  to  EEVIVE  and  SUPPOBT  THE 
INTEBESTS  OF  BELIGION.  IV.  We  SHOULD  FBEQUENTLY  VISIT  OUB  PEOPLE,  AND 
MANAGE  OUB  VISITS  IN  SUCH  A  MANNEB  AS  WILL  MOST  EFFECTUALLY  PBOMOTE  THEIR 
SPIBITUAL  IMPROVEMENT.  V.  I  FURTHER  PROPOSE  THAT  WE  TAKE  A  PARTICULAR 
KOTICE  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  UNDER  RELIGIOUS  IMPRESSIONS.  VI.  ADMONITION  AND 
REPROOF  MUST  NOT  BE  NEGLECTED,  IF  WE  DESIRE  RELIGION  SHOULD  FLOURISH  UNDER 
OUR  CARE.  Vn.  We  should  BE  MUCH  IN  PRAYER  FOR  THE  BLESSING  OF  GOD  UPON 
OUR  ENDEAVOURS.  VEII.  We  MUST  TAKE  THE  GREATEST  CARE  TO  SUPPORT  THESE 
ATTEMPTS    BY   A   REGULAR   AND    EXEMPLARY    BEHAVIOUR.       1.    Considcr   what   it   Is   that 

is  dying;  it  is  vital  and  practical  religion,  the  glory  of  our  Churches.  2.  The  revival 
of  religion  among  us  may  prevent  the  growth  of  infidelity  and  bigotry.  3.  A  regard 
to  our  reputation  should  engage  us  to  attempt  the  revival  of  religion.  4.  Our 
support  in  life  depends  upon  the  regard  which  our  people  have  to  true  religion.  5. 
A  consciousness  of  our  having  done  our  utmost  for  the  revival  of  religion  will  be  a 
noble  support  in  our  dying  moments.  6.  Our  degree  of  glory  in  the  future  state 
will  be  proportionable  to  our  present  zeal  for  the  revival  of  religion.  (D.  Some.) 
Indifference : — I.  We  may  begin  by  defining  what  we  mean  by  "  Indifference." 
Now  there  are  always  two  great  periods  of  difficulty  in  the  history  of  individual 
religious  belief.  The  first  is  the  difficulty  of  accepting  a  new  faith.  The 
greatness  of  St.  Paul's  conversion  lies  here,  that  it  was  the  turning  not  of 
a  bad  man  into  a  good,  but  of  a  sincere  bigot  from  the  faith  in  which  he 
had  been  nurtured  to  a  faith  which  he  had  despised.  But  there  is  a  second  trial 
belonging  to  more  quiet  times.  If  they  who  have  inherited  a  settled  form  of  religion 
are  spared  much  which  probes  those  whose  lot  it  is  to  have  a  new  creed  proposed  to 
them,  they  have  a  different  danger  of  their  own  to  face — the  danger  of  holding 
loosely  what  they  have  been  familiar  with  from  childhood.  Persons  belong  to  the 
Christian  Church  by  birth,  by  compliance  with  certain  external  usages,  but  the 
subject-matter  inspires  them  with  little  interest.  Their  religion  is  unto  them  a 
matter  of  propriety,  an  element  of  the  social  system,  but  it  does  not  stir  the  depths 
of  their  nature.  But  now,  why  may  not  a  man  whose  tastes  so  incline  him  preserve  as 
it  were  this  state  of  neutrality,  without  taking  any  part  in  the  conflicts  of  thought 
around  him,  or  the  struggles  of  the  kingdom  to  overcome  the  ignorance  and  the  sin 
of  the  world?  It  might  be  answered  that  a  perfect  neutrality  amid  conflicting 
principles  and  practices  is  almost  an  impossibility.  "  Indifference  "  is  generally 
the  result  of  one  of  two  causes — pride  of  intellect  or  mental  sloth.  But  the  noblest 
argument  against  "  Indifference,"  is  that  indicated  in  the  text.  "  I  have  not  found 
thy  part  fulfilled  before  God."  In  those  solemn  words,  as  they  thrill  across  the 
border-line  between  eternity  and  time,  I  seem  to  hear  of  a  part  assigned  to  every 
individual,  not  to  accomplish  which  to  the  full  is  a  disappointing  the  very  end  of 
our  creation.  How  vast  soever  be  the  Divine  plan,  whatever  circles  of  the  universe- 
it  may  embrace,  your  life  and  mine  has  been  knit  up  therewith.  Every  child  born 
into  the  world  is  designed  to  contribute  to  the  evolution  of  the  purposes  of  the  ever- 
lasting will.  And  this  holds  good  more  especially  of  religion.  There  is  nothing 
more  remarkable  than  the  manner  in  which,  in  all  that  concerns  God's  revelation, 
man  has  been  assumed  as  a  fellow- worker  with  God.  As  in  the  great  fundamental 
truth,  the  Incarnation,  so  in  every  after  detail  of  the  eternal  plan,  the  everlasting 
decree  changed  not,  that  the  work  of  religion  in  the  world  must  be  accomplished  by 
and  through  man.  And  similarly  with  the  Church  of  Christ ;  we  may  almost  trace 
in  its  history  the  part  allotted  by  God  to  each  generation.    It  was  the  task  of  the 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

early  Church  to  lie  hid,  like  leaven,  in  the  midst  of  this  polluted  mass,  breathing 
into  the  dry  bones  of  this  dead  civilisation  a  new  and  healthier  life.  It  has  not 
perhaps  been  adequately  noted  how  the  existence  of  the  Eoman  empire  was  pro- 
tracted by  the  fresh  vigour  which  Christianity  was  secretly  throwing  into  the  worn- 
out  system.  And  now  a  new  work  was  to  be  done  in  God's  world.  There  is  no 
more  wonderful  chapter  of  man's  history  than  that  which  records  how  tribe  after 
tribe  poured  down  from  the  north,  and  upon  every  one  as  it  drew  near,  while  civil 
institutions  crumbled  before  them,  the  Church  of  the  living  God  laid  its  hand  and 
moulded  out  of  their  fierceness  a  second  and  more  vigorous  civilisation.  May  we 
venture  to  indicate  the  work  which  seems  allotted  to  ourselves?  It  is  impossible  not 
to  observe  two  special  features  of  our  own  age,  the  concentration  of  the  population 
in  a  few  centres  of  industry,  and  the  general  diffusion  of  knowledge.  Both  these 
bring  with  them  their  trials ;  both  oppose,  each  its  own  hindrance  to  faith  and  good 
living.  When  these  obstacles  are  mastered,  and  the  truth  of  God  has  won  yet 
another  triumph  over  what  is  now,  as  every  trial  once  was,  an  unknown  difficulty, 
doubtless  some  other  form  of  evil  will  present  itself  until  the  victory  of  the  Son  of 
Man  is  complete.  But  now,  if  every  generation  be  thus  indeed  God's  appointed 
agency  for  winning  some  fresh  triumph  for  Him,  if  we  are  a  link  in  that  chain 
which  connects  the  beginning  with  the  end,  what  an  argument  is  here  against  that 
cold  philosophic  indifference  in  which  so  many  stand  aside  from  the  work  of  God  in 
their  day.  Shall  I  hold  in  my  hand  an  instrument  imparted  by  my  Creator,  and  not 
use  it  to  the  utmost?    II.  But  secondly,  "  indiffebence  "  is  the  consequence 

AND  proof  of  an  IMPERFECT  CULTIVATION  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  MIND  AND  CHARACTER. 

God  has  implanted  in  us  two  sets  of  faculties,  those  by  which  we  deal  with  our 
present  existence,  and  those  by  which  we  apprehend  things  unseen.  Keason,  pru- 
dence, foresight — these  are  the  endowments  which  qualify  us  to  act  upon  this  world. 
But  there  are  other  endowments  vouchsafed  unto  man.  To  him  alone,  of  all  that 
walks  the  earth,  is  given  the  pov?er  of  looking  beyond  the  earth.  The  one  grand 
note  of  difference  between  man  and  the  beasts  lies  in  the  simple  power  to  utter  the 
familiar  words,  "  I  believe  in  God."  And  this  high  gift  carries  with  it  a  variety  of 
gifts.  It  is  the  Divine  ordination  which  sets  the  whole  race  apart  as  the  priests  of 
creation.  The  direction  and  exercise  of  these  spiritual  instincts,  neither  on  the  one 
hand  to  allow  them  to  degenerate  into  bigotry  and  superstition,  nor  on  the  other 
hand  to  let  them,  as  we  may  let  them,  die  out  of  the  soul,  is  perhaps  the  loftiest  task 
which  God  has  set  us.  The  man  who  cultivates  only  those  faculties  which  are 
called  into  play  by  the  affairs  of  this  life  cultivates  only  half  of  his  being.  And 
hence  another  characteristic  of  "  indifference."  To  stand  aloof  from  the  questions 
which  have  to  do  more  immediately  with  the  revelation  of  God,  to  have  an  acute 
interest  in  all  except  the  truths,  the  worship,  the  progress,  the  influence  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  is  to  present  the  sure  marks  of  an  imperfect  manhood,  to  evidence 
a  one-sided  development  of  the  powers  of  the  soul.  We  wiU  not  speak  now  of  the 
selfishness  of  the  attempt  to  isolate  ourselves  from  the  struggles  of  our  contem- 
poraries, to  withdraw  from  the  warfare  of  God,  filling  up  the  vacancy  of  the  mind 
and  the  life  with  a  thousand  self-chosen  imaginations  and  pursuits.  It  is  to  the 
secret  world  of  the  human  soul  that  we  would  now  carry  down  your  gaze,  and  as 
you  gather  in  the  mightiness  of  its  organisation  and  walk  through  the  chambers  of 
its  imagery,  summing  up  all  the  powers  with  which  its  Maker  hath  equipped  it,  we 
bid  you  note  how  m  the  case  of  the  man  who  lives  on  in  indifference,  one  portion  of 
the  stately  fabric  lies  hopelessly  in  ruins  ;  how  the  part  that  is  strongest,  is  in  close 
contact  with  that  which  is  weak ;  how  around  the  well- wrought  halls  of  thought, 
memory,  reason,  imagination,  lie  in  disjointed  fragments  the  kindred  gifts  of 
reverence,  and  love,  and  self-sacrifice,  and  faith,  uncared  for  and  unbuilt  up,  and  so 
whatever  admiration  among  men  the  exhibiting  some  rare  mental  faculty  may 
procure,  the  man's  part,  when  set  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  is  seen  to  be 
but  half  performed,  the  work  imperfect  before  the  Lord,  {Bp.  Woodford.) 
Spintual  consumption  : — I.  Its  symptoms.  They  are  analagous  to  those  of  corporeal 
consumption.  1.  Loss  of  strength  to  resist  the  wrong  and  to  do  the  right.  2.  Loss 
of  appetite  for  holy  service,  wholesome  doctrine.  3.  Loss  of  enjoyment.  All  com- 
plaint ;  no  pleasure  in  anything.  11.  Its  causes.  Neglect  of  proper  conditions  of 
health.  1.  Wholesome  food.  2.  Suitable  exercise.  Inaction  must  lead  to  disease. 
"Exercise  thyself  "  rather  unto  godliness.  3.  Pure  atmosphere.  III.  Its  cures. 
1.  Appropriate  remedial  elements.  "  Balm  in  Gilead."  "  The  tree  of  life  whose 
fruit  is  for  the  healing  of  the  nations."  2.  Suitable  applications  of  these  elements. 
The  medicine  is  of  no  service  unless  taken  according  to  truly  scientific  prescription. 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION,  203 

(Homilist.)  Spiritual  graces  need  invigoration  : — Would  you  have  and  keep  up 
ardent  desires  ?  Do  as  they  that  would  keep  in  the  fire,  cherish  the  sparks,  and 
blow  them  up  to  a  flame.  There  is  no  man  lives  under  the  means  of  grace,  and 
under  the  discoveries  of  God  and  religion,  but  has  his  good  moods  and  very  lively 
motions.  The  waters  are  stirred  many  times,  take  hold  of  this  advantage. 
Strengthen  the  things  that  remain  and  are  ready  to  die,  and  blow  up  these  sparks 
into  a  flame.  God  has  left  us  enkindling  means — prayer,  meditation,  and  the  Word. 
Observe  where  the  bellows  blow  hardest,  and  ply  that  course.  The  more  super- 
natural things  are,  there  needs  more  diligence  to  preserve  them.  A  strange  plant 
needs  more  care  than  a  native  of  the  soil.  Worldly  desires,  like  a  nettle,  breed  of 
their  own  accord,  but  spiritual  desires  need  a  great  deal  of  cultivating.  (Thomas 
Manton.)  I  have  not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  God. — God  will  search 
whether  we  he  perfect : — First,  man's  search  may  be  without  finding ;  but  now  when 
God  searcheth  men.  He  is  sure  to  find  men  out  (Psa.  cxxxix.  1).  Secondly,  man's 
searching  hath  ever  ignorance  foregoing,  though  after  search  maybe  he  comes  to 
know,  yet  before  searching  he  knows  not  (Job  xxix.  16).  God  searcheth  because  He 
doth  know,  man  because  he  doth  not.  Thirdly,  man's  searching  is  properly  so 
called ;  but  when  searching  is  spoken  of  God,  it  is  after  the  manner  of  men ;  God 
doth  rather  act  a  kind  of  searching,  then  search  indeed.  Fourthly,  it  is  man's  duty 
to  search  if  he  know  not  any  particular  passage  of  his  life,  whether  it  be  warrantable 
or  no.  Fifthly,  man's  searching  is  for  himself,  that  things  may  appear  to  himself ; 
but  when  God  searcheth  it  is  that  it  may  be  manifest  abroad,  that  a  man's  seii  and 
others  may  see  it.  The  reasons  of  this  are,  first,  because  it  is  God's  prerogative  thus 
to  do,  because  the  perfection  of  men's  works  ;  though  men  may  give  a  guess  at  it, 
yet  it  is  a  secret.  Secondly,  as  this  is  God's  prerogative  royal,  so  of  all  things  in  the 
world  He  will  bring  that  which  is  secret  out,  whether  men  be  sincere  or  no.  Thirdly, 
because  it  is  for  the  glory  of  God  to  search  men  out.  Fourthly,  it  is  for  the  truth  of 
God;  He  hath  said  He  will  search  every  one  out,  as  you  may  see  (Job  xxxiv.  22). 
Fifthly,  this  is  for  the  justice  of  God,  that  God  should  search  out  every  one  what 
he  is,  and  what  his  works  be  ;  how  should  God  judge  the  world  else?  The  first  use 
may  serve  to  reprove  most  men  generally ;  we  do  not  consider  that  God  will  search 
us.  What  a  company  of  pleas  are  there  to  do  evil  ?  What  a  company  of  put  offs  to 
do  good  duties  ?  The  second  use  is  to  bid  us  take  heed  how  we  hide  our  sins  from 
others,  or  from  ourselves.  The  last  use  is  for  exhortation.  Will  God  search  us  out  ? 
then  we  should  search  ourselves  what  our  works  are,  whether  good  or  evil ;  as  the 
apostle  saith  (2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  First,  consider  we  can  never  repent  of  what  is  amiss 
in  ourselves,  or  in  our  works,  except  we  search  ourselves  (Lam.  i.  43).  Secondly, 
consider  it  is  a  mark  of  the  child  of  God  that  he  doth  desire,  and  is  one  that  doth 
search  himself;  nay,  he  doth  not  only  use  all  the  means  he  can  to  do  it,  but 
he  doth  cry  to  God  to  help  him  (Psa.  cxxxix.  23).  Thirdly,  consider,  if  we 
do  not  search  ourselves,  it  will  be  the  worse  for  us.  {Wm.  Fenner,  B.D.) 
Perfect  the  work  of  grace  in  the  soul: — "We  shall  not,"  says  Thomas  Manton, 
*'  keep  what  we  have  received  if  we  do  not  labour  to  increase  it,  as  a  house  begun 
to  be  built  goeth  to  decay,  and  droppeth  down  more  and  more,  if  we  do  not  go  on 
to  finish  it."  Have  we  not  all  seen  what  are  commonly  called  house-carcases 
standing  in  desolation,  a  blot  upon  the  street,  and  a  dead  loss  to  the  builder? 
To-day  the  slates  are  falling,  to-morrow  the  windows  are  broken,  and  anon  timber 
after  timber  falls.  (0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Remember,  therefore,  ho"W  thou  hast 
received  and  heard. — Sardis  : — I.  The  means  pkescbibed  for  the  bestoration 
OF  those  backsliders  which  were  found  in  the  Church  at  Sardis.  Our  Lord 
exhorted  them  to  compare  the  past  with  the  present  state  of  their  religious 
experience,  in  which  they  would  perceive  a  distressing  contrast.  Such  an  exercise 
has  a  tendency  to  check  arrogance.  1.  Kemember  how  you  received  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  when  He  was  first  revealed  to  your  faith  as  a  suitable  and  all-sufficient 
Saviour.  2.  Eemember  how  you  heard  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  H.  Our  Lord 
exhorteth  the  Church  at  Sardis  to  "hold  fast."  1.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel. 
2.  The  profession  of  their  faith.  3.  Their  hope.  HI.  Our  Lord  called  upon  the 
Church  at  Sardis  to  *'  repent."  True  repentance  includes  hope  of  being  restored 
to  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  prosperity.  IV.  The  exhortation  of  our  Lord  to  the 
Church  at  Sardis,  is  urged  by  an  awakening  threatening  :  '•  If  therefore  thou 
shalt  not  watch,"  &c.  Promise  and  threatening  unite  to  rouse  backsliders. 
{J.  Hyatt.)  And  hold  fast. — The  duty  of  holding  fast  the  truth: — I.  What  yoxt 
are  called  upon  to  hold  fast.  To'  are  exhorted  to  hold  fast  the  truths  of  the 
gospel ;  to  lay  to  heart  those  precepts,  and  commands,  and  promises,  which  the 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

great  God  hath  condescended  to  utter  on  your  account.  II.  How  you  are  to  hold 
THESE  THINGS  FAST.  1.  With  the  assent  of  your  judgment,  holding  fast  that  which 
is  good,  not  suffering  the  sophistries  and  false  arguments  of  others  to  blind  and  to 
confound  you.  2.  With  the  consent  of  the  heart.  3.  With  faith.  Not  a  mere 
historical  faith  ;  not  a  mere  speculative  faith ;  but  a  faith  apprehending  the  great- 
ness of  the  Son  of  God.  4.  In  our  lives  and  conversations ;  walking  in  the  truth  of 
Jesus.  5.  With  meekness,  but  with  resolution.  6.  With  prayer  and  perseverance. 
ITT.  Why  you  abe  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  delivebed  unto  you.  1.  Because 
of  its  excellency ;  the  incomparable  value  of  Divine  truth.  Truth  reflects  the 
Divine  image;  truth  attempers  the  glories  of  the  great  God,  and  exhibits  His 
perfections.  2.  Because  of  the  violence  and  the  wrong  which  were  otherwise 
offered  to  God.  3.  Because  of  its  blessed  tendency ;  for,  by  making  us  holier,  even 
in  this  life,  that  which  we  hear  makes  us  happier.  4.  You  must  hold  fast  the  words 
of  sound  doctrine,  because  they  affect  the  great  and  the  coming  destinies  of  the 
imperishable  soul.     {J.  T.  Judkin,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  Thou  hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis. — A  solemn  warning  for  all 
Churches : — I.  General  defilement.  1.  A  vast  deal  of  open  profession,  and  but 
little  of  sincere  religion.  You  can  scarcely  meet  with  a  man  who  does  not  call 
himself  a  Christian,  and  yet  it  is  equally  hard  to  meet  with  one  who  is  in  the  very 
marrow  of  his  bones  thoroughly  sanctified  to  the  good  work  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  We  meet  with  professors  by  hundreds ;  but  we  must  expect  still  to  meet 
with  possessors  by  units.  2.  A  want  of  zeal.  Ah !  we  have  abundance  of  cold, 
calculating  Christians,  but  where  are  the  zealous  ones  ?  Where  are  those  who  have 
an  impassioned  love  for  souls  ?  3.  The  third  charge  against  Sardis  was  that  they 
did  not  "  look  to  the  things  that  remained  and  were  ready  to  die."  This  may 
relate  to  the  poor  feeble  saints.  And  what  does  the  Church  do  now  ?  Do  the 
shepherds  go  after  those  that  are  wounded  and  sick,  and  those  that  are  weary? 
Yes,  but  how  do  they  speak  ?  They  tell  them  to  perform  impossible  duties — instead 
of  "  strengthening  the  things  that  remain  and  are  ready  to  die."  4.  Another 
charge  which  God  has  brought  against  the  Church  is,  that  they  were  careless 
about  the  things  which  they  heard.  He  says,  "Remember,  therefore,  how  thou 
hast  received  and  heard,  and  hold  fast ;  and  repent."  If  I  am  wrong  upon  other 
points,  I  am  positive  that  the  sin  of  this  age  is  impurity  of  doctrine,  and  laxity  of 
faith,  n.  Specie  preservation.  •'  Thou  hast  a  few  names."  Only  a  few ;  not 
so  few  as  some  think,  but  not  as  many  as  others  imagine !  There  is  not  a  church 
on  earth  that  is  so  corrupt  but  has  "  a  few."  Since  there  are  bat  a  few,  there  ought 
to  be  great  searchings  of  heart.  Let  us  look  to  our  garments  and  see  whether  they 
be  defiled.  The  fewer  the  workmen  to  do  the  work  the  greater  reason  is  there  that 
you  should  be  active.  Be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  because  there  are  so 
few.  III.  A  peculiar  reward.  "  They  shall  walk  with  Me  in  white,  for  they  are 
worthy."  That  is  to  say,  communion  with  Christ  on  earth  shall  be  the  special 
reward  of  those  who  have  not  defiled  their  garments.  Go  into  what  company  you 
please,  do  you  meet  with  many  men  who  hold  communion  with  Christ?  Oh, 
Christian !  if  thou  wouldst  have  communion  with  Christ,  the  special  way  to  win 
it  is  by  not  defiling  thy  garments,  as  the  Church  has  done.  "  They  shall  walk  with 
Me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy."  1.  This  refers  to  justification.  "  They  shall 
walk  in  white  "  ;  that  is,  they  shall  enjoy  a  constant  sense  of  their  own  justification 
by  faith ;  they  shall  understand  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  ihem, 
that  they  have  been  washed  and  made  whiter  than  snow,  and  purified  and  made 
more  cleanly  than  wool.  2.  Again,  it  refers  to  joy  and  gladness  :  for  white  robes 
were  holiday  dresses  among  the  Jews.  Let  thy  garments  be  always  white,  for  God 
hath  accepted  thy  works."  3.  And  lastly,  it  refers  to  walking  in  white  before  the 
throne  of  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  believers  at  Sardis  : — I.  Those  persons 
WHO  ARE  here  SPOKEN  OF  WERE  TRULY  HOLY.  Those  men  wcre  the  glory  of  their 
Church  ;  and  we  might  have  expected  that  the  heavenly  purity  of  their  principles 
and  their  conduct  would  have  shed  around  them  a  highly  beneficial  influence,  and 
would  have  induced  many  others  to  have  pursued  along  with  them  a  course  so 
splendid  in  itself,  and  so  happy  and  brilliant  in  its  termination.  H.  The  passage 
represents  these  truly  holy  persons  as  only  few  in  number.  The  truly  holy,  in 
every  age  of  the  world  have  borne  but  a  very  small  proportion  to  the  great  mass 
of  mankind.  HI.  These  holy  persons  were  found  in  a  placb  where  great 
DEGENERACY  PREVAILED.  Religion  is  like  the  snowdrop  that  flowers  amid  the  colds 
and  frosts  of  winter,  or  hke  the  violet  that  blooms  in  all  the  beauties  of  its  varied 


CHAP,  ni.]  REVELATION.  205 

and  vivid  tints,  and  breathes  all  the  richness  of  its  fragrance  unhurt  by  the  foul 
and  noxious  weeds  that  flourish  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  IV.  The  few  holy 
persons  in  the  church  at  Sardis  had  the  promise  of  great  honour  being  con- 
ferred UPON  THEM.  White,  in  the  inspired  volume,  is  frequently  used  to  denote 
the  holiness  of  the  Christian  character,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  represent  the 
success,  the  prosperity,  and  the  honour  which  all  enjoy  who  possess  it.  {John 
Johnstone.)        Sardis  : — I.  The  commendation  and  the  honour  which  our  Lord 

BESTOWED     UPON     THE     FEW     EXEMPLARY     CHARACTERS     IN     THE      CHURCH     AT      SaRDIS. 

1.  Garment  is  put  for  a  holy  life  answerable  to  a  profession  of  discipleship  to  Jesus 
Christ.  There  were  a  few  disciples  in  the  church  at  Sardis  who  were  clothed 
with  the  garment  of  humility  :  "  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,"  they  had 
"put  on  bowels  of  mercies,  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,"  and  "long- 
suffering,"  and  had  been  enabled  "  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God,"  their  "  Saviour," 
by  a  holy  and  uniform  consistency  of  conduct.  2.  When  we  consider  the  power, 
the  subtlety,  the  enmity,  and  the  vigilance  of  Satan  ;  and  the  innumerable  sources 
of  seduction  by  which  the  people  of  God  are  constantly  surrounded ;  and  the  many 
sinful  propensities  that  lodge  within  their  own  hearts,  we  are  surprised  that  any 
of  them  pass  through  life  without  defiling  their  garments.  Nothing  could  be 
more  unaccountable,  did  we  not  know  the  cause  of  their  preservation.  They 
"  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God,"  or  it  would  be  impossible  they  could  stand 
secure  from  falling,  even  for  a  moment!  II.  The  distinguished  honour  which 
OUR  Lord  promised  to  confer  upon  those  Christians  in  Sardis  who  had  not 
DEFILED  their  GARMENTS.  3.  Our  Lord  gives  encouragement  to  His  faithful 
disciples,  by  assuring  them  of  His  final  testimony  of  approbation.  "  I  will 
confess  His  name  before  my  father,  and  before  His  angels."  {J.  Hyatt.) 
Christian  life  has  power  to  resist  adverse  influences  : — There  is  nothing  on  earth  that 
has  such  power  to  destroy  Christian  life  as  a  society  of  men  who  bear  the  name  of 
Christ  without  manifesting  His  spirit  and  life.  A  dead  Church  is  a  mightier 
obstacle  to  Christian  vitality  than  the  influences  of  the  world  or  the  sneers  of  the 
keenest  infidelity ;  it  freezes  the  influence  of  truth,  it  paralyses  the  power  of  prayer, 
it  lays  its  cold  hand  on  the  pulses  of  the  Christian's  faith,  chilling  them  into  a 
death-like  sleep.  But  yet,  with  that  fact  before  us,  we  shall  try  to  show  that  every 
Christian  may  overcome  those  influences  which  hinder  his  life.  We  shaU  try  to 
show  that  we  have  no  right  to  be  weak  Christians,  moulded  by  social  circumstances, 
but  are  bound  to  be  Christians  whose  deep  life  makes  circumstances  its  servants. 

1.  True  Christianity  can  conquer  adverse  social  influences.  Now  here  it  must 
be  granted  as  an  obvious  fact  that  some  men  are  more  liable  to  be  swayed  by  social 
influences  than  others.  Those  whose  character  is  weak,  and  whose  feelings  are 
strong  and  undisciplined,  are  doubtless  more  easily  carried  away  by  mere  impulse 
than  men  of  naturally  strong  character  and  power  of  self-control.  But  yet  it  is 
possible  for  us  to  gain  an  elevation  above  such  influences,  for  in  Christianity  we  can 
discern  the  elements  of  a  power  which  will  confer  it.  We  shaU  perceive  this  by 
glancing  briefly  at  the  manner  in  which  circumstances  and  social  influences  attain 
their  greatest  sway  over  men  ;  and  then  by  showing  how,  in  a  true  Christian  life, 
the  sources  of  that  power  are  overcome.  1.  The  absence  of  a  ruling  emotion  is 
one  great  element  in  the  power  of  circumstances.  Now  true  Christianity  is  essen- 
tially the  enthronement  of  one  feeling  in  the  heart — the  love  of  God  through 
Christ,  and  because  that  feeling  ascends  to  the  eternal  and  unchanging,  it  must 
pre-eminently  give  a  firmness  to  the  character  that  defies  the  force  of  circumstances. 

2.  The  absence  of  purpose  in  life  is  the  other  element  in  the  power  of  circumstances, 
for  it  is  too  obvious  to  need  illustration,  that  a  purposeless  life  must  be  the  creature 
of  circumstances,  and  at  the  mercy  of  every  influence.  Now  a  true  Christian  life- 
purpose  is  a  life-surrender  to  God ;  it  is  to  Hve  constantly  as  in  the  eye  of  the 
Eternal  King,  to  exist  that  we  may  be  self-consecrated  to  Christ  and  attain  a 
resemblance  to  Him  ;  a  purpose  not  visionary  but  sublime — a  purpose  not  attained 
in  the  middle  of  life  nor  at  life's  close,  but  going  onward  into  the  life  of  boundless 
ages.  But  it  will  be  more  obvious  that  such  an  aim  in  life  must  shut  out  the  force 
of  circumstances,  from  the  fact  that  it  can  only  be  lived  through  an  independent 
and  individual  conviction  of  Christian  truth.  We  want  men  who  are  not  echoes, 
but  voices  ;  men  who  draw  their  inspiration  from  prayer  rather  than  from  preach- 
ing, from  individual  self-consecration,  and  not  from  collected  sympathy.  Then 
should  we  feel  less  that  external  things  can  effect  the  grandeur  and  earnestness  of 
our  Christian  life.  And  one  other  fact  will  bring  all  this  to  a  personal  and  direct 
application.    We  must  be  thus  conquerors  over  circumstances  and  opposing  forces, 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

or  our  Christianity  will  ever  be  weak.  We  must  be  men,  not  spiritual  infants,  or 
we  shall  lose  our  Christian  mission  in  life.  11.  This  conquest  contains  in  itselt 
THE  ELEMENTS  OF  EVERLASTING  BLESSEDNESS.  Who  does  uot  feel  it  better  to  be  alone 
with  Christ  in  struggling  with  opposing  influences  than  to  be  up-borne  by  the 
current  of  popularity  and  stimulated  by  the  flattery  or  friendship  of  men  ?  And 
when  thus  we  gain,  through  our  own  battle,  a  deeper  insight  into  the  mystery  of 
that  life  of  Jesus,  and  have  the  consciousness  of  a  growing  fellowship  with  Him,  we 
are  already  being  clothed  in  the  white  garments  of  eternity,  and  walking  with  the 
Son  of  God.     {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The  undejiled  few  : — I.  The  unoefiled  few. 

n.  The  pbesent  power  of  Christ's  undefiled  few.  It  would  appear  to  be  one  of 
the  Divine  arrangements  that  the  many  should  be  blessed  in  the  power  and 
influence  of  the  few.  No  single  phase  of  human  life  but  has  been  lifted  up  into 
dignity  for  ever  through  the  example  of  some  noble  moral  hero.  There  are  ever 
the  few  in  poUtical  Hf e  who  see  clearly,  grasp  principles  vigorously,  and  lead  aright 
the  unthinking  many.  There  are  many  students  in  the  walks  of  science  and 
literature  who  never  reach  beyond  the  common  level,  and  in  each  age  there  are  a 
few  men  of  genius  like  Bacon,  and  Butler,  and  Newton,  and  Herschell,  who  rise 
high  up  above  their  fellows,  the  giants  of  the  intellectual  world.  The  principle 
may  even  be  seen  working  within  the  Church.  III.  The  future  glory  of  Christ's 
TJNDEFiLED  FEW.  1.  They  who  struggle  after  goodness  now  shall  find  themselves 
then  settled  in  goodness  for  ever.  He  who  tries  to  reach  Christlike  purity  daily 
finds  his  dangers  growing  less,  his  temptations  becoming  fewer,  his  struggles  ever 
more  surely  ending  in  the  victory  of  the  good.  2.  Above  all,  these  undefiled  few 
shall  have  a  communion  with  Christ  of  an  extraordinary  intimacy  and  precious- 
ness.       •'  With    Me."       {R.    Tuck,    B.A.)  The    two    garments  : — The    words 

**  garment,"  "  robe "  and  "  raiment "  are  used  in  the  Scriptures  to  typify 
character.  When  a  man  repents  of  sin  and  joins  himself  by  faith  to  Jesus 
Christ,  he  is  clothed  with  a  new  nature.  He  "  puts  on  Christ,"  so  that  there 
is  not  only  an  inward  faith  in  Christ,  but  some  good  degree  of  outward  resem- 
blance in  daily  conduct.  This  may  be  called  the  garment  of  grace.  It  means 
Christian  character.  Now  character  is  not  determined  by  a  single  act,  but  by 
habitual  conduct.  It  is  a  fabric  made  up  of  thousands  of  .threads,  and  put  together 
by  uncounted  stitches.  However  thorough  may  be  the  cleansing  process  wrought 
upon  the  heart  at  the  time  of  conversion,  yet  no  one  becomes  absolutely  spotless. 
We  hve  also  in  a  defiling  world.  If  we  walk  thr9ugh  certain  streets  in  this  city  we 
must  be  on  the  lookout,  or  our  clothes  will  become  besmirched.  A  good  man  goes 
to  his  place  of  business  and  finds  himself  in  the  atmosphere  of  Mammon.  It  is 
every  citizen's  duty  to  take  a  citizen's  part  in  politics  ;  but  when  he  becomes  a 
zealous  partisan  there  is  plenty  of  "  pitch  "  around  in  the  caucus  and  the  conven- 
tion, and  unless  he  is  a  conscientious  man  he  is  apt  to  be  defiled.  In  social  life  he 
encoimters  the  prevailing  trend  for  show  and  self  indulgence  and  expensive  living. 
On  a  white  surface  the  slightest  spot  shows  painfully  ;  and  it  is  no  easy  thing  to 
keep  the  spiritual  raiment  clean.  Yet  by  the  indwelling  power  of  Christ's  grace 
there  are  those  "  even  in  Sardis"  who  keep  their  spiritual  garments  comparatively 
clean.  If  a  true  follower  of  Christ  becomes  soiled  with  impurity,  he  grieves  over  it, 
repents  of  it,  and  hastens  to  that  Saviour  who  pardons  and  restores.  By  such 
processes  can  only  the  garment  of  grace  be  kept  from  utter  disfigurement  and 
defilement.  By  and  by  this  garment  of  grace  shall  be  laid  aside  for  the  garment  of 
glory.  The  one  is  for  time  ;  the  other  is  for  eternity.  The  first  garment  is  a 
Christian  character  formed  by  the  regenerating  Spirit  of  God  in  this  world.  The 
other  is  a  Christian  character  completed,  consummated,  and  glorified  in  that  world 
wherein  entereth  nothing  whatsoever  that  defileth.  They  "  walk  with  Jesus  in 
white,  for  they  are  worthy."  Determine  that  whatever  others  may  do  you  will  be 
a  thorough  and  consecrated  servant  of  your  Master,  "  even  in  Sardis."  Determine 
that  you  will  keep  the  garment  of  character  undefiled.  If  all  Sardis  is  infected 
with  the  lust  of  gold,  let  not  the  canker  eat  into  your  soul.  However  many  in  Sardis 
rush  off  into  frivolities  and  into  these  scenes  of  folly  that  make  deathbeds  terrible, 
do  you  choose  rather  the  joys  of  holy  converse  with  the  Master  in  the  "  upper 
chamber."      (T.  L.   Cuyler,  D.D.)  The  few  in  Sardis: — I.   The    rarity  of 

those  who  are  the  true  saints  on  the  earth.  Sadly  the  truth  presses  on  every 
mind  that  it  is  the  many  who  are  sluggish  and  fruitless,  it  is  only  the  few 
who  are  faithful.  A  little  band  of  executive  Church  labourers  produce  what 
each  year  gathers.  II.  Their  purity.  They  "have  not  defiled  their  garments." 
Holiness  of  life  is  more  than  vividness  of  experience.      HI.  The  prospect  of 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  207 

the  saints.  1.  The  word  here  rendered  "  walk  "  means  to  accompany  around. 
Thence  it  is  applied  to  sharing  the  continuous  lot  of  one  with  whom  we  dwell.  2. 
"  They  shall  walk  with  Me."  The  companionship  is  that  of  Christ  Himself,  for  it 
is  He  that  is  here  speaking.  3.  It  is  the  symbol  of  glory  hereinafter  to  be  revealed 
to  believers.  Here  are  two  thoughts  distinctly  suggested,  each  of  which  has  great 
value.  The  one  is  that  the  glory  of  that  future  state  is  not  so  much  in  its  triumphs 
and  trophies  as  in  its  graces.  The  glory  is  its  sinlessness,  its  perfect  freedom  from 
all  pollution.  So  it  is  of  much  more  importance  what  we  shaU  be  than  what  we 
shall  have.  Then  the  other  thought  is  that  holiness  here  is  its  own  reward,  here 
and  yonder  too.  IV.  The  prerogative  of  the  saints.  "  They  are  worthy."  The 
significance  of  this  statement  takes  its  force  from  the  connection  in  which  it 
stands.  One  prerogative  is  asserted  in  their  behalf ;  they  are  proper  companions 
for  God's  Son.  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D,)  The  duty  of  maintaining  an  unsullied 
character : — L  Consider  the  great  DimcuLTY  of  preservino  innocence  amidst 
SURROUNDING  CORRUPTION.  1.  The  natural  abhorrence  which  rises  in  the  breast  at 
the  first  appearance  of  its  detestable  form  is  insensibly  weakened  and  effaced  by 
repeated  views  of  it.  There  is,  besides,  in  the  view  of  a  multitude  running  to  do 
evil,  a  temptation  of  peculiar  force.  2.  Amidst  the  universal  infection  of  vice  some 
men  there  are  whose  particular  constitution,  or  want  of  experience  in  the  ways  of 
the  world,  expose  them  greatly  to  its  deadly  influence.  The  man  of  good  nature, 
and  of  an  easy,  pliable  temper,  who  suspects  not  the  treachery  of  others,  becomes 
an  easy  prey  to  the  temptations  of  the  wicked.    U.  The  dignity  and  ExcELiiENCE 

OF  THAT  MAN  WHO,  NOTWITHSTANDING  EVERY  ASSAULT,  MAINTAINS  AN  UNSULLIED 
CHARACTER.  HI.  ENFORCE  THE  IMITATION  OF  ChRIST's  EXAMPLE  BY  THE  GREAT 
MOTIVE    MENTIONED     HERE.        IV.    ThE    REASON    FOR    CONFERRING      SUCH    HONOURS    ON 

THE  GOOD  AND  VIRTUOUS.  "They  are  worthy."  {J.  Main,  D.D.)  God's 
little  remnant  keeping  their  garments  clean  in  an  evil  day : — ^I.  Offer  a  few 
PROPOSITIONS  CONCERNING  THIS  REMNANT.  1.  God's  remnant  are  a  holy  people. 
They  are  a  set  of  men  that  study  to  keep  clean  garments.  2.  God  has  a 
special  eye  of  favour  and  kindness  on  this  remnant  in  a  sinful  and  decUning 
time.  n.  Show  that  Christ  has  a  high  value  for  this  remnant.  1.  Con- 
sider what  an  account  He  makes  of  them  when  compared  with  the  rest  of  the 
world  (Isa.  xliii.  4 ;  Psa.  cxix.  119 ;  Lam.  iv.  2).  2.  That  this  little  remnant 
are  worthy  on  Christ's  account  will  appear  if  we  consider  the  names  and  compella- 
tions  that  He  gives  them  (Mai.  iii.  17).  3.  Consider  the  endeared  relations  they 
stand  under  unto  Him.  There  is  a  legal,  a  moral,  and  a  mystical  union  between 
Him  and  them.  4.  That  they  are  worthy  in  His  esteem  appears  from  what  He 
does  for  them  (Eev.   i.   5 ;   Heb.   viii.   12,  iv.  16).    HI.  Inquire  into  what  is 

IMPORTED    IN    THE    REMNANT    KEEPING    THEIR   GARMENTS    CLEAN.       1.    That   CVCU    God'S 

remnant  are  not  without  danger  of  defiling  themselves  with  the  sins  and  defections 
of  their  day.  2.  That  foul  garments  are  very  unbecoming  and  unsuitable  unto 
God's  remnant.  A  careful  study  of  universal  obedience  unto  all  known  and  com- 
manded duties.  A  holy  caution  and  tenderness  in  guarding  against  all  sin, 
especially  the  prevailing  sins  of  the  day.     IV.  Inquire  into  the  import  of  the 

CONSOLATORY  PROMISE  MADE  UNTO  THE  REMNANT  THAT  KEEP  THEIR  GARMENTS  CLEAN.       1. 

What  is  imported  in  walking  with  Him  ?  (1)  It  necessarily  supposes  the  soul's 
subsistence  in  a  separate  state,  or  after  its  separation  from  the  body,  otherwise  it 
could  not  be  said  to  walk  with  Him.  (2)  Its  activity.  (3)  Perfect  peace  and 
agreement  between  Christ  and  men.  (4)  Intimacy.  (5)  Full  pleasure,  satisfaction, 
and  complacency.  2.  What  is  imported  in  walking  with  Him  in  white  ?  (1)  That 
then  aU  their  black  and  beggarly  garments  shall  be  laid  aside.  (2)  That  perfect 
holiness  shall  then  be  their  adornment.  (3)  Victory  over  aU  their  enemies, 
whether  outward  or  inward.  (4)  High  honour.  (5)  Priestly  service.  (6)  A 
blessed  conformity  between  Christ  and  them.  (7)  The  beauty  of  the  Lord  their 
God  will  then  be  upon  them.    V.  Inquire  into  the  connection  between  the  duty 

AND    THE    privilege,    BETWEEN    KEEPING    THE    GARMENTS    CLEAN    AND    WALKING    WITH 

Christ  in  white.  1.  Negatively  there  is  no  connection  of  merit,  as  if  our  keeping 
of  clean  garments  did  deserve  that  we  should  walk  with  Christ  in  white.  2.  Posi- 
tively there  is — (1)  A  connection  of  decree  or  purpose  in  this  matter.  (2)  A  con- 
nection of  promise.  (3)  A  connection  of  meetness  or  congruity.  (4)  A  connection 
of  evidence.  Application :  1.  Holiness  is  to  be  studied  and  pursued,  however  it 
may  be  ridiculed  and  mocked  at  by  a  profane  world.  2.  They  labour  under  a 
mistake  who  think  or  say  that  it  is  a  vain  or  "  unprofitable  thing  to  serve  the  Lord" 
and  to  keep  His  way.     3.  Gospel  purity  and  holiness  is  not  such  a  common  thing 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

as  the  world  apprehends.    4.  See  hence  what  it  is  that  sweetens  the  pale  coun- 
tenance of  the  king  of  terrors  to  believers :  it  is  this,  they  see  that  upon  the  back  of 
death  they  will  be  admitted  to  walk  with  Christ  in  white.     {John  Erskine,  D.D.) 
Sardis  : — In  the  case  of  the  Church  at  Sardis,  we  observe — I.  The  sad  spectacle  of 
SPiBiTUAL  DECLENSION.     The  Church  is  represented  as  having  only  a  name  to  live. 
The  world  sometimes  sees  the  worst  side,  and  God  the  best,  but  in  Sardis  it  was  the 
opposite.     The  word  *'  dead,"  however,  is  not  used  absolutely,  but  comparatively, 
for  there   were   certain  rare  plants  in   this  desert  of   decaying   vegetation  that 
required  to  be  watched  and  strengthened.     Yet  the  faith  and  virtue  of  these  were  in 
danger.     1.  There  were  some  things  ready  to  die.    What  things  ?  Faith,  love,  zeal, 
hope.    2.  Things  requiring  to  be  strengthened.    Weak  and  incipient  virtue,  languish- 
ing graces,  and  faint  desires.     Things  that  are  decaying  need  cherishing.     Learn 
a  lesson  of  the  gardener,  and  nurse  the  exotics  of  the  soul.     Give  thy  soul  room  and 
stimulus  and  appropriate  exercise.   3.  Things  that  needed  remembrance.   Appeal  to 
experience,  to  the  memory  of  former  days  and  old  associations.    We  may  forget 
our  past  history  and  so  live  a  sort  of  fragmentary  life.    4.  Things  that  needed  to  be 
repented  of.     Dereliction  of  duty,  loss  of  faith,  decay  of  love.    II.  The  cheerino 
SPECTACLE  OF  RELIGIOUS  FIDELITY.     "  Thou  hast  a  fcw  namcs,"  &c.     1.  Kedeeming 
features  in  the  most  sombre  landscapes.    There  is  always  a  green  spot  in  the  desert. 
2.  The  saints  in  Sardis  were  in  striking  contrast  to  the  society  around  them.    They 
were  pure  amidst  impurity,  holy  among  the  vile.     They  closed  their  eyes  to  the 
briUiant  illusions,  their  ears  to  the  flattering  enticements,  or  corrupt  pagan  society. 
m.  The  glorious  spectacle  of  the  coronation  and  triumph  of  faith.     "  They 
shall,"  &c.     Weigh  the  reward  thus  symbolically  described.     1.  Heaven's  purity 
for  the  pure  on  earth.     2.  Enrolment  in  the  register  of  heaven  for  those  who  have 
held  fast  the  faith  of  the  saints.     3.  Eecognition  before  God  and  the   angels  for 
those  who,  though  scorned  of  men,  are  eternally  honoured  by  God.     {W.  E.  Daly, 
B.A.)        Purity  rewarded  : — True,  all  our  lives  long  we  shall  be  bound  to  refrain 
our  soul  and  keep  it  low ;  but  what  then  ?     For  the  books  we  now  forbear  to  read, 
we  shall  one  day  be  endued  with  wisdom  and  knowledge.    For  the  music  we  will 
not  listen  to,  we  shall  join  in  the  song  of  the  redeemed.    For  the  pictures  from 
which  we  turn,  we  shall  gaze  unabashed  on  the  beatific  vision.    For  the  companion- 
ship we  shun,  we  shall  be  welcomed  into  angelic  society  and  the  communion  of 
triumphant  saints.    For  the  pleasures  we  miss,  we  shall  abide,  and  evermore  abide, 
in  the  rapture  of  heaven.    (Christina  G.  Rossetti.)        Pure  amidst  defilement  : — ^A 
writer  tells  of  going  with  a  party  down  into  a  coal  mine.     On  the  other  side  of  the 
gangway  grew  a  plant  which  was  perfectly  white.      The  visitors  were  astonished 
that  there,  where  the  coal-dust  was  continually  flying,  this  little  plant  should  be  so 
pure  and  white.    A  miner  who  was  with  them  tpok  a  handful  of  the  black  dust  and 
threw  it  upon  the  plant ;  but  not  a  particle  adhered.      Every  atom  of  the  dust 
rolled  off.     The  visitors  repeated  the  experiment,  but  the  coal-dust  would  not  cling. 
There  was  a  wonderful  enamel  on  the  folds  of  the  white  plant  to  which  no  finest 
specks  could  adhere.    Living  there  amid  clouds  of  black  dust,  nothing  could  stain 
the  snowy  whiteness.      (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)         They  shall  walk  with  Me  in 
white. — Walking  in  white : — I.   The    promise  of    continuous    and    progressive 
activity.      "  They  shall  walk."      "  There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of 
God."      "  They    shall  walk "  in  all  the    energies  of    a  constant    activity,  far 
more  intense  than  it  was  at  its  highest  here,   and  yet  never,   by  one  hair's 
breadth,  trenching  upon  the  serenity  of  that  perpetual  repose.      And  then  there 
is  the  other  thought  too  involved  in  that  pregnant  word,  of  continuous  advance- 
ment, growing  every  moment  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  true  centre  of  our  souls, 
and  up  into  the  loftiness  of  perfection.     11.  The  promise  of  companionship  with 
Christ.      If  there  be  this  promised  union,  it  can  only  be  because  of  the  com- 
pleteness of  sympathy  and  the  likeness  of  character  between  Christ  and  His  com- 
panions.    The  unity  between  Christ  and  His  followers  in  the  heavens  is  but  the 
carrying  into  perfectness  of  the  imperfect  union  that  makes  all  the  real  blessedness 
of  life  here  upon  earth.     HI.  The  promise  of  the  perfection  of  purity.    Perhaps 
we  are  to  think  of  a  glorified  body  as  being  the  white  garment.    Perhaps  it  may  be 
rather  that  the  image  expresses  simply  the  conception  of  entire  moral  purity,  but  in 
either  case  it  means  the  loftiest  manifestation  of  the  most  perfect  Christlike  beauty 
as  granted  to  all  His  followers.    IV.  The  condition  of  all  these  promises.     There 
is  a  congruity  and  proportion  between  the  earthly  life  and  the  future  life.     Heaven 
is  but  the  life  of  earth  prolonged  and  perfected  by  the  dropping  away  of  all  the 
evil,  the  strengthening  and  lifting  to  completeness  of  all  the  good.     And  the  only 


CHAP,  in.]  REVELATION.  209 

thing  that  fits  a  man  for  the  white  robe  of  glory  is  purity  of  character  down  here  on 
earth.  There  is  nothing  said  here  directly  about  the  means  by  which  that  purity 
can  be  attained  or  maintained.  That  is  sufficiently  taught  us  in  other  places,  but 
what  in  this  saying  Christ  insists  upon  is  that,  however  it  is  got,  it  must  be  got, 
and  that  there  is  no  life  of  blessedness,  of  holiness  and  glory,  beyond  the  grave, 
except  for  those  for  whom  there  is  the  life  of  aspiration  after,  and  in  some  real 
measure  possession  of,  moral  purity  and  righteousness  and  goodness  here  upon 
earth.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  He  that  overcometh  .  .  .  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment. — The 
battle,  the  victory,  and  the  reward  : — I.  A  conflict  engaged  in.  The  Christian  has 
the  peace  of  God,  and  is  at  peace  with  God  ;  but  just  because  he  is  so,  he  is  at  war 
with  everything  that  wars  with  God.  1.  The  first  of  the  Christian's  enemies  is  his 
own  sinful  nature.  And  I  am  not  sure  but  that  is  the  most  dangerous  of  all  his 
enemies.  A  foe  in  the  citadel  is  a  thousand  times  worse  than  an  enemy  without. 
The  particular  form  which  this  warfare  may  assume  in  the  individual  depends  very 
much  upon  the  natural  temperament  and  previous  habits  of  the  man.  We  have  all 
some  sin  which  most  easily  besets  us.  This  is  the  key  to  the  position,  like  the 
farmhouse  on  the  field  of  Waterloo ;  and,  therefore,  each  principle  is  anxious  to 
secure  it  as  its  own.  Nay,  not  only  this ;  it  is  here  that  the  new  nature  is  weakest ; 
for  as,  when  one  has  had  a  severe  inflammation,  it  leaves,  on  recovery,  a  local 
weakness,  which  makes  itself  felt  on  the  least  exposure  to  cold  or  damp  ;  so,  when 
a  man  has  been  addicted  to  some  sin,  then,  even  after  his  conversion,  there,  where 
he  formerly  was  worst,  is  now  his  weakest  point,  and  it  is  in  connection  with  it  that 
his  sorest  conflicts  are.  In  the  light  of  these  things,  we  cannot  wonder  that  our 
life  is  called  a  fight.  2.  But  there  are  other  enemies  without  the  fortress,  cunningly 
seeking  to  tempt  us  to  yield  to  their  entreaties.  I  mention,  therefore,  secondly, 
among  our  adversaries,  the  evil  men  of  the  world,  who  approach  us  ever  in  a  most 
insidious  style.  They  come  under  colour  of  being  our  servants,  and  ministering  to 
our  pleasure ;  but  alas !  it  is  only  that  they  may  remain  to  be  our  lords.  3.  I 
mention  as  another  foe  the  great  arch-enemy  of  God  and  man — Satan.  His  efforts, 
indeed,  are  inseparably  connected  with  those  other  two  of  which  I  have  spoken. 
He  is  the  general  by  whom  evU  men  are  marshalled  for  the  fight ;  and  as  a  spiritual 
being,  intimately  acquainted  with  our  spiritual  nature,  he  knows  how  best  to  take 
advantage  of  our  still  remaining  sin.  II.  A  victory  won.  1.  The  agent  by  whom 
this  victory  is  won.  In  one  sense  it  is  the  believer  who  wins  it ;  in  another,  it  is 
won  for  him  ;  and  it  is  to  the  latter  aspect  of  it  that  I  would  first  look.  This  con- 
quest is  obtained  for  us  by  the  Great  Captain  of  our  Salvation,  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
there  are  two  ways  in  which  He  vanquishes  our  enemy.  In  the  first  place,  He  has 
already  overcome  him  on  the  cross ;  so  that  we  have  not  now  to  deal  with  a  foe  in 
his  pristine  strength,  but  rather  with  one  crestfallen  and  defeated.  Nor  is  this  all ; 
it  was  as  our  representative  that  Jesus  vanquished  him ;  and  so  he  cannot  really 
harm  us,  however  much  he  may  annoy  and  disturb.  Then  this  death  of  Christ  has 
also  slain  the  enmity  of  our  hearts  ;  for,  if  we  really  believe  in  Him,  "  our  old  man 
is  crucified  with  Him,  that  the  body  of  sin  should  be  destroyed."  Hence  our  union 
to  Jesus  Christ  ensures  our  victory.  But  Jesus  vanquishes  our  enemy  for  us, 
secondly,  by  the  gift  and  gracious  indwelling  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  He  so  quickens 
our  conscience,  that  we  shrink  from  sins  of  which  formerly  we  would  have  thought 
but  little  ;  and  He  works  in  us  a  kind  of  instinctive  intuition,  by  which  we  know 
that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  evil,  and  hasten  away  from  its  influence.  Thus,  in 
Christ  for  us,  and  Christ  in  us,  the  victory  is  won !  2.  But  a  word  or  two  as  to  the 
means  on  our  part  by  which  the  agency  of  Christ  and  His  Spirit  is  secured  on  our 
behalf.  That  means  on  our  part  is  faith.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  case  of 
one  travelling  in  a  foreign  land.  He  is  a  British  subject,  and  as  such  he  has  the 
weight  and  influence  of  the  whole  British  empire  at  his  back,  so  that  he  is  safe  from 
injury  or  insult,  and  sure,  if  any  such  be  offered  to  him,  that  it  will  be  promptly 
and  efficiently  checked.  But  if  he  cannot  plead  that  he  is  a  citizen  of  this  favoured 
land,  and  has  to  stand  alone,  he  is  sure,  in  a  despotic  country,  to  be  very  cavalierly  and 
even  crueUy  dealt  with,  if  he  should  have  the  misfortune  to  fall  out  with  its 
authorities.  Now  it  is  just  so  here  ;  by  faith  the  beUever  is  connected  with  Christ 
— one  with  Him — and  a  citizen  of  heaven.  Hence,  in  his  warfare,  he  has  all  the 
power  of  heaven  behind  him ;  and  the  man  who  has  God  on  his  side  is  sure  to  be 
victorious.  But  in  yet  another  aspect,  faith  is  seen  as  the  means  of  victory ;  for  it 
is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  by  which  the  things  of  the  spiritual  world  are  beheld  ;  and  by 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 


bringing  the  soul  under  the  influence  of  "  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,"  it 
encourages  it  in  the  battle,  and  determines  it  not  to  yield.     It  shows  him  the 
recompense   of  the  reward:   the   white   raiment;   the  victor's  palm;   the  hero's 
crown  ;  and  the  throne  of  royal  honour.    And  thus  it  raises  him  above  the  sphere 
of  earth's  temptations,  and  makes  him  proof  against  the  voice  of  the  charmer, 
charming  never  so  wisely.     3.  But  now  let  us  look  at  the  time  when  this  victory  is 
obtained.     In  one  sense,  the  beUever  is  daily  winning  victories.      Israel,  of  old, 
crossed  the  Jordan  to  fight ;  but  we  cross  it  to  reign ;  and  from  the  moment  of  our 
dissolution  we  have  no  more  to  do  with  temptation.      III.  The   blessing  hebe 
PROMISED.     1.  The  victor  shall  be  "  clothed  in  white  raiment."     This,  then,  imports 
that  the  conqueror's  condition  will  be  one  of  pure  joy,  and  joyful  purity.     2.  '•  I 
will  not  blot  his  name  out  of  the  book  of  life."     The  allusion  of  this  phrase  is 
supposed  to  be  to  the  genealogical  tables  of  the  Jews,  out  of  which  a  man's  name 
was  blotted  when  he  died ;  and  the  meaning  is,  that  Jesus  will  not  blot  such  a 
victor's  name  out  of  the  register  of  His  redeemed  ones.     Now  this  phrase  speaks 
of  many  things  comforting  to  the  Christian.    It  tells  of  salvation  assured  to  him  ; 
and  it  declares,  moreover,  that  Jesus  has  a  care  for  him  as  an  individual,  and  has 
his  name  enrolled  among  the  denizens  of  bliss.     3.  "  I  will  confess  his  name  before 
my  Father  and  His  angels  "  ;  that  is,  He  wiU  own  the  conqueror  as  His,  and  claim 
salvation  in  His  name.     Nay,  it  is  more  than  this ;  it  is  a  public  introduction  of  the 
believer  to  heaven,  and  a  proclamation  there  of  the  victory  which  he  has  obtained. 
Compared  with  this,  what  are  earthly  decorations  for  valour  ?     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  blessedness  of  overcoming  : — I.  What  are  we  to  overcome  ?     1.  Self.     (1)  In 
its  hostility  (Rom.  viii.  7).     (2)  In  its  indifference  (Acts  ixiv.  25).     (3)  In  its 
insincerity  (Jer.  xvii.  9).     2.  World.     (1)  In  its  frowns  (James  iv.  4).     (2)  In  its 
flatteries  (Prov.  i.  10).     (3)  In  its  applauses  (Acts  xii.  22).     3.  Death.     (1)  In  the 
fears  of  his  approach  (Heb.  ii.  15).     (2)  In  the  pains  of  his  attack  (1  Cor.  xv.  55). 
(3)  In  the  desolations  of  his  triumph  (John  xi.  25,  26).     II.  How  are  we  to  over- 
come?    1.  By  thought.     *' I  thought  on  my  ways."     2.  By  purpose.     3.  By  faith. 
(1)  Lively.     (2)  Progressive.     (3)  Saving.     4.  By  effort.     (1)  Cheerful.     (2)  Con- 
tinual.    (3)  Mighty.    III.  The  results  of  overcoming.     1.  A  pure  and  spotless 
nature.     2.  An  enduring  name.     3.  A  public  honour.     (C.  L.  Bur  dick.)        Earnest- 
ness in  religion : — Such  a  topic  has  great  difficulty  to  lay  any  hold  on  the  mind — 
almost  even  to  engage  the  attention.    We  all  know  the  effect  of  perfect  familiarity 
and  endless  reiteration.    But  more  than  so; — this  great  familiar  truth  seems  to 
suffer  in  its  power  of  interesting  men  by  the  very  fulness  of  its  evidence,  and  of  the 
conviction  with  which  it  is  admitted.    Whatever  be  the  explanation,  the  fact  is 
evident,  that  the  actual  power  of  this  great  principle  of  truth  (namely,  the  absolute 
necessity  of  being  in  earnest  about  our  highest  interest)  seems  to  be  repressed,  in 
consequence  of  the  ready  and  complete  acknowledgment  it  obtains  in  the  mind.    It 
seems  to  go  to  sleep  there,  because  it  holds  its  place  certainly — is  not  contradicted — 
and  cannot  be  expelled.    If  some  serious  doubts  could  be  raised  upon  it,  they  might 
make  the  matter  interesting — they  might  turn  and  fix  thought  upon  it.    Perhaps 
another  thing  that  causes  this  general  solemn  admonition  (to  be  in  earnest  about  our 
highest  interests)  to  come  with  less  force,  is  the  circumstance  that  it  is  applicable 
and  pertinent  to  all.     It  concerns  me,  not  more  than  all  these  millions.     Again, 
there  is  far  too  little  of  the  serious  practice  of  bringing  as  near  together  in  view  as 
thought  can  do  it,  the  two  orders  of  things  which  both  belong  to  us — so  belong  to 
us  that  they  must  both  be  taken  into  our  practical  adjustment.     There  is  the  world 
we  are  in,  the  object  of  our  senses ;  and  a  world  to  which  we  are  to  go,  the  object 
of  our  faith.     There  is  this  short  Ufe  —  and  an  endless  one.     There  are  the  pains 
and  delights  of  mortality — and  the  joys  or  woes  of  eternity.    Now  unless  a  man 
really  will  set  himself,  in  serious  thought,  to  the  comparative  estimate  of  these,  and 
that  too  as  an  estimate  to  be  made  on  his  own  account,  how  powerless  on  him  must  be 
the  call  that  tells  him  he  must  be  "  in  earnest  I  "    Another  thing  may  be  added  to 
this  account  of  causes  tending  to  frustrate  the  injunction  to  be  in  earnest  about  our 
highest  concerns ;  namely,  that  the  mind  willingly  takes  a  perverse  advantage  of 
the  obscurity  of  the  objects  of  our  faith,  and  for  the  incompetence  of  our  faculties 
for  apprehending  them.     There  is  a  willingness  even  to  make  the  veil  stUl  more 
thick,  and  reduce  the  ghmmering  to  utter  darkness,  as  strengthening  the  excuse. 
"  We  do  not  know  how  to  carry  our  thoughts  from  this  scene  into  that.     It  is  like 
entering  a  mysterious  and  visionary  wilderness.    It  is  evidently  implied  to  us,  by 
the  fact  as  it  stands,  that  the  opening  of  that  scene  upon  us  now  would  confound  us 
in  all  our  business  here.     Were  it  not  best  to  be  content  to  mind  chiefly  our  duty 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  211 

here ;  and  when  it  shall  be  God's  will  and  time,  He  will  show  us  what  there  is 
yonder !  "  Partial  truth  thus  perversely  applied,  tends  to  cherish  and  excuse  an 
indisposition  to  look  forward  in  contemplations  of  hereafter ;  and  this  indisposition, 
excused  or  protected  by  this  allegation,  defeats  the  force  of  the  call,  the  summons, 
to  be  in  earnest  about  our  highest  interests.  There  is  another  pernicious  practical 
deception,  through  which  the  force  of  this  call  to  earnestness  is  defeated,  and  the 
strong  necessity  which  it  urges  is  evaded  :  that  is,  the  not  recognising  in  the  parts 
of  life,  the  grand  duty  and  interest  which  yet  is  acknowledged  to  belong  to  it  as 
a  whole.  "  This  day  is  not  much,"  a  man  thinks,  "  nor  this  week — a  particle  only 
in  so  ample  a  thing  as  all  life."  We  add  only  one  more  description  of  delusive 
feeling  tending  to  frustrate  the  admonitions  to  an  earnest  intentness  on  the  great 
object — namely,  a  soothing  self-assurance,  founded  the  man  can  hardly  explain  on 
what,  that  some  way  or  other,  a  thing  which  is  so  essentially  important,  will  be 
effected,  surely  must  be  effected,  because  it  is  so  indispensable.  A  man  says,  "  I  am 
not  mad.  I  surely — surely — shall  not  lose  my  soul."  As  if  there  must  be  some- 
thing in  the  very  order  of  nature  to  prevent  anything  going  so  far  wrong  as  that. 
Sometimes  particular  circumstances  in  a  man's  history  are  suffered  to  excite  in 
him  a  kind  of  superstitious  hope.  Perhaps,  for  instance,  in  his  childhood  or 
since,  he  was  saved  from  peril  or  death  in  some  very  remarkable  manner.  His 
friends  thought  that  this  must  surely  be  a  propitious  omen ;  and  he,  too,  is  willing 
to  persuade  himself  so.  Perhaps  very  pious  persons  have  taken  a  particular 
interest  about  him ;  he  knows  he  has  been  the  subject  of  many  prayers.  So  many 
deceptive  notions  may  contribute  to  a  vague  sort  of  assurance  that  a  man  will  not 
alway  neglect  religion,  though  he  is  doing  so  now,  and  is  in  no  serious  disposition 
to  do  otherwise.  And,  in  addition  to  all,  there  is  that  unthinking  and  unscriptural 
manner  of  considering  and  carelessly  throwing  ourselves  upon  the  infinite  goodness 
of  God.  {J.  Foster.)  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name  out  of  the  Book  of  Life. — The 
Book  of  Life  : — I.  The  Book.  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  Apocalypse  about  this 
book  of  the  living,  or  "  of  life."  And,  hke  the  rest  of  its  imagery,  the  symbol 
finally  reposes  upon  the  Old  Testament  cycle  of  metaphor  (Exod.  xxxii.  32 ; 
Psa.  Ixix.  28,  Ixxxvii.  6  ;  Isa.  iv.  3;  Dan.  xii.  1).  Coming  to  the  New  Testament, 
we  find,  outside  of  the  Apocalypse,  comparatively  few  references.  But  see  Luke  x. 
20 ;  Phil.  iv.  3  ;  Heb.  xii.  23).  So  then,  to  be  "  written  m  the  Book  of  Life  "  is  to 
be  included  amongst  those  who  truly  live.  St.  John,  in  his  Gospel  and  Epistle, 
dwells  with  even  more  emphasis  than  the  other  writers  of  the  New  Testament  on  the 
great  central  thought  that  the  deepest  conception  of  Christ's  work  to  men  is  that 
He  is  the  Source  of  life.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  Ufe ;  he  that  hath  not  the 
Son  hath  not  life."  This  symbol  implies,  too,  that  they  who  truly  hve,  live  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  by  Him  alone.  It  is  "the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life."  In  His 
character  of  the  Lamb — that  is,  of  the  Sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world — slain  for 
us  all.  He  has  made  it  possible  that  any  names  should  be  written  on  that  page. 
Then,  again,  note  how  this  symbol  suggests  to  us  that  to  be  enrolled  in  the  Book 
is  to  be  a  citizen  of  heaven.  The  name  being  "  written  in  heaven  "  implies  that 
the  true  native  soil  of  the  man  is  where  his  name  is  written.  He  is  inscribed  on 
the  register  of  the  community  to  which  He  belongs.  He  Hves  in  a  far-away  colony, 
but  he  is  a  native  of  the  metropolis.  Again,  let  me  remind  you  that  to  be  written 
in  that  Book  implies  being  the  objects  of  Divine  energy  and  Divine  love.  "  I  know 
thee  by  name  "  said  the  Divine  voice,  through  the  prophet,  to  the  Great  Conqueror 
before  He  was  born.  "  I  know  thee  by  name,"  saith  the  Lord,  to  each  of  us,  if  our 
hearts  are  humbly  trusting  in  His  Divine  power.  II.  The  inscription  of  the 
NAMES.  Now  there  are  two  passages  in  this  Book  of  the  Revelation  which  seem  to 
Bay  that  the  names  are  written  "before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  I  am  not 
going  to  plunge  into  discussions  far  beyond  our  reach,  but  I  may  remind  you  that 
Buch  a  statement  says  nothing  about  the  inscription  of  the  names  which  is  not  true 
about  all  events  in  time.  So,  leaving  that  ideal  and  eternal  inscription  of  the 
names  in  the  obscurity  which  cannot  be  dispelled,  we  shall  be  more  usefully 
employed  in  asking  what,  so  far  as  concerns  us,  are  the  conditions  on  which  we 
may  become  possessors  of  that  Divine  life  from  Jesus  Christ,  and  citizens  of  the 
heavens  ?  Faith  in  Christ  brings  us  into  the  possession  of  eternal  life  from  Him, 
makes  us  citizens  of  His  kingdom,  and  objects  of  His  care.  Jesus  calls  us  all  to 
Himself.  Do  like  the  man  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  who  went  up  to  the  writer 
at  the  table,  with  the  ink-horn  before  him,  and  said  to  him,  "  Set  down  my  name," 
and  so  subscribed  with  his  hand  to  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  IH.  The  purging  of 
THE  RoLii.     It  seems  to  me  that  the  fair  impUcation  of  the  words  of  my  text  is  that 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

the  victor's  name  remains,  and  the  name  of  the  vanquished  is  blotted  out.  Why 
should  we  be  exhorted  to  "hold  fast  our  crown,  that  no  man  may  take  it,"  if  it  is 
impossible  for  the  crown  ever  to  drop  from  the  brow  upon  which  it  was  once  laid? 
No  man  can  take  it  unless  we  •'  let "  him,  but  our  letting  him  is  a  conceivable 
alternative.  And  therefore  the  exhortations  and  appeals  and  warnings  of  Scripture 
come  to  us  with  eminent  force.  And  how  is  that  apostasy  to  be  prevented,  and 
that  retention  of  the  name  on  the  roll-call  to  be  secured  ?  The  answer  is  a  very 
plain  one — "  To  him  that  overcometh."  The  only  way  by  which  a  man  may  keep 
his  name  on  the  effective  muster-roll  of  Christ's  army  is  by  continual  contest  and 
conquest.  IV.  The  confession  of  the  names.  There  comes  a  time  of  blessed 
certainty,  when  Christ's  confession  will  transform  all  our  hesitations  into  peaceful 
assurance,  when  He  shall  stoop  from  His  throne,  and  Himself  shall  say,  in  the  day 
when  He  makes  up  His  jewels,  "  This,  and  that,  and  that  man  belong  indeed  to  Me." 
Men  have  thrown  away  their  lives  to  get  a  word  in  a  despatch,  or  from  a  command- 
ing  officer ;  and  men  have  lived  long  years  stimulated  to  efforts  and  sacrifices  by 
the  hope  of  having  a  line  in  the  chronicles  of  their  country.  But  what  is  all  other 
fame  to  Christ's  recognising  me  for  His?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  Book  of 
Life : — I.  As  its  name  implies,  this  is  the  roll  of  the  living  members  of  His 
Church.  Very  much  as  in  some  of  our  ancient  cities  there  is  a  register  kept  of  the 
freemen,  from  which  their  names  are  struck  off  at  death,  so  the  true  citizens  of  the 
heavenly  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  are  registered  on  high.  There  is  only  this 
important  difference  between  the  two  cases.  Christ's  freed  men  never  die.  They 
shall  not  be  hurt  by  the  second  death.  II.  Perhaps  we  long  to  obtain  one  glance  at 
its  contents,  and  think  it  would  afford  us  exceeding  comfort  if  we  might  read  our 
own  name,  and  the  names  of  those  dear  to  us,  inscribed  on  its  pages.  But  this  may 
not  be.  The  discovery  would  probably  lead  to  self-confidence  and  presumption 
as  regards  ourselves,  and  a  fatal  indifference  to  the  eternal  welfare  of  others.  We 
might  cease  to  watch  and  pray,  and  might  neglect  the  appointed  means  of  grace. 
Is,  then,  that  Book  so  high  above  our  present  reach  that  we  have  practically  nothing 
to  do  with  it  at  all  ?  If  so,  why  should  it  be  so  often  mentioned,  and  what  is  the 
value  of  this  promise  ?  Assuredly  there  is  one  way  in  which  we  may  obtain  some 
insight  into  its  contents.  The  Lord,  as  it  were,  writes  a  duplicate  of  them  on  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  His  people.  III.  This  now  mysterious  record  will  be  referred  to 
by  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  and  read  out  before  the  assembled  myriads  of 
mankind.  What  astounding  disclosures  will  then  be  made!  {W.  Burnett,  M.A.) 
Written  in  heaven  : — I.  Theke  are  names  written  in  heaven  which  are  unknown  on 
EARTH.  Who  are  the  world's  greatest  men?  Those  who  are  doing  the  noblest  acts, 
living  the  purest  lives,  suffering  the  most  for  righteousness'  sake,  making  the 
greatest  sacrifices  for  the  common  good  ;  the  greatest  men  are  not  necessarily 
notorious  politicians,  vocalists,  tragedians,  capitalists,  orators,  and  soldiers.  Now 
of  these  really  greatest  men  we  know  little  or  nothing ;  they  live  in  simplicity, 
obscurity,  and  poverty ;  the  world  is  not  aware  of  them,  bestowing  upon  them 
neither  titles  nor  rewards.  But  they  are  known  by  Him  whose  eye  seeth  every 
precious  thing.  A  true  art"  critic  entering  a  second-hand  shop  will  detect  a  master- 
piece when  it  is  nearly  buried  in  confusion  and  rubbish.  It  may  be  covered  with 
dust,  the  colours  blackened  by  neglect,  boasting  no  gold  frame,  and  the  crowd  pass 
it  by  with  contempt,  as  not  worth  sixpence,  but  the  true  critic  discerns  it  at  a  glance. 
So  God  recognises  merit  before  it  gets  into  a  gold  frame  ;  He  knows  the  glorious 
work  of  His  own  hand  when  found  in  obscurity,  want,  suffering,  and  deepest 
obloquy  and  humiliation.  Thousands  of  names  are  written  in  heaven  as  heroes 
■which  are  not  found  on  Fame's  eternal  bead-roll.     II.  If  our  names  are  written 

IN  HEAVEN,  WE  NEED  CARE  LITTLE  WHETHER  THEY  ARE   WRITTEN  ELSEWHERE.      We  have 

a  name.  That  is  a  grand  thing,  it  means  much.  We  are  not  numbered,  we  are 
all  called  by  our  names.  We  have  a  distinct  and  an  immortal  personality,  we  are 
not  merely  links  in  a  series.  We  require  that  our  name  shall  be  written  some- 
where ;  we  are  not  content  to  drop  out  of  the  universe,  and  be  lost ;  we  must  be 
registered,  recognised,  remembered.  To  be  written  in  heaven  is  supreme  fame.  It 
is  high  above  all  earthly  peerages  as  the  stars  are  above  the  mountain  tops.  To  be 
written  in  heaven  is  immortal  fame.  By  strange  accidents  a  man's  name  once 
written  in  great  bead-rolls  may  get  obliterated.     III.  If  our  names  are  written  in 

HEAVEN,  they  OUGHT  TO  BE  WRITTEN  THERE  AS  LABOURERS.  IV.  If  OUR  NAMES  ARE 
WRITTEN  IN  HEAVEN,  LET  US  TAKE  CARE  THAT  THEY  ARE  NOT  BLOTTED  OUT.   Let  US 

watch  lest  our  name  should  be  struck  from  the  roll  of  honour.     V.  If  our  names 

ABE  NOT   WRITTEN   IN  HEAVEN,   LET  US   AT  ONCE  GET  THEM  WRITTEN  THERE.      HoW  near 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION,  213 

many  people  come  to  the  kingdom,  and  yet  never  get  into  it!  Some  of  these  are 
written  in  the  reports  of  the  Church,  and  yet  do  not  get  their  names  inscribed  in 
the  book  of  life.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  6.  Heax  what  the  Spirit  saith. — The  message  to  the  Churches : — I.  Every 
CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  HAS  AN  ORGANIC  LIFE  OF  ITS  OWN.  This  is  not  Only  distinct  from 
the  life  of  any  other  church,  but  even  distinct  from  the  life  of  its  members.  It  is 
perhaps  one  of  the  most  noticeable  of  the  faults  of  modern  Christians,  that  they  are 
trying  to  lose  their  individuality  in  the  mass,  hoping  thereby  to  evade  responsibility 
and  to  shirk  duty.  To  sink  a  Christian  out  of  responsibility  by  absorbing  him  into 
a  church,  is  like  sinking  a  soldier  in  an  army ;  he  only  passes  under  more  rigid 
rules  and  only  shows  more  conspicuously.     II.   Every  church  has  an   organic 

HISTORY    OP    ITS    OWN,    WHICH   VERY    LIKELY    MAKES    UP    ITS    ANNALS.       Get   SOmC   aged 

people  together  on  an  anniversary,  and  a  quiet  stranger  might  soon  ascertain  that 
every  church  has  a  special  history  just  as  striking  as  these  had  in  Asia  Minor,  and 
as  precious.  In  one  year,  doubtless,  there  was  a  man  whose  behaviour  or  mis- 
fortunes gave  the  people  a  world  of  trouble ;  in  another  year,  there  was  a  man  who 
gave  them  a  world  of  help.  One  man  failed  in  business,  and  that  shook  the  church 
badly ;  then  a  man  grew  suddenly  wealthy,  and  that  saved  the  church.  Let  us  stop 
and  think  how  vital,  how  positively  alive  and  instinct  with  nervous  and  palpitating 
existence,  every  established  organisation  comes  eventually  to  be.  "  This  and  that 
man  was  born  in  her."  III.  Every  church  has  an  organic  characteristic  of  its 
OWN,  and  this  is  derived  from  the  social  and  personal  life  of  those  who  compose  and 
manage  it.  Just  as  when  we  split  a  rock  in  a  quarry  into  layers,  traces  will  be 
found  in  it  of  lines  which  the  sea  waves  made  there  ages  ago  while  the  sand  was 
washed  into  place  by  the  tides  and  compacted  into  stone ;  so  when  we  read  the 
annals  of  any  old  congregation,  we  shall  find  how  certain  epochs  were  fashioned. 
Sometimes  it  was  the  half-dozen  elders  that  gave  form  to  all  the  church  life. 
Sometimes  the  deacons  drew  a  line  of  demarcation.  Sometimes  a  few  restless 
women,  sometimes  a  few  uncomfortable  men,  set  the  congregation  on  fire.  Some- 
times it  was  the  sewing-society,  and  very  often  it  was  the  choir.  IV.  Every  church 
has  an  organic  power  of  its  own.  This  ability  for  usefulness  is  entirely  distinct 
from,  and  superadded  to,  the  influence  exerted  by  individuals.  In  union  there  is 
strength.  V.  Finally,  there  is  given  us  here  the  lesson  that  every  church  has  an 
organic  mortality  of  its  own.  It  is  possible  for  it  to  become  actually  extinct, 
whenever  it  is  cast  out  by  God.  They  say  there  is  a  star-fish  in  the  Caledonian 
lakes,  sometimes  dredged  up  from  the  deep  water.  It  looks  firm  and  strong,  most 
compactly  put  together.  But  the  moment  you  pull  off  one  of  its  many  branching 
limbs,  no  matter  how  small  it  may  be,  the  singular  creature  begins  itself  to  dis- 
locate the  rest  with  wonderful  celerity  of  contortions,  throwing  away  its  radiate 
arms  and  jerking  from  their  sockets  its  members,  until  the  entire  body  is  in  shape- 
less wreck  and  confusion  of  death,  and  nothing  remains  of  what  was  one  of  the 
most  exquisitely  beautiful  forms  in  nature,  save  a  hundred  wriggling  fragments, 
each  repulsive,  and  dying  by  suicide.  Those  seven  fair  churches  went  into  sudden 
and  remediless  ruin.  So  any  church  may  go.  Once  rejected  of  God,  congregations 
generally  hurry  themselves  into  dissolution  with  reckless  bickerings  and  quarrels ; 
and  the  end  comes  swiftly.     (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-13.  Philadelphia. — Philadelphia — the  patient  Church  : — Philadelphia 
furnishes  us  with  the  exemplar  of  the  patient  church ;  the  exercise  and  training  of 
patience  is  its  pecuUar  call,  and  the  perfection  of  patience  is  its  reward.  This 
message  is  one  of  high  commendation  and  encouragement;  although  in  its  own 
consciousness,  and  in  the  regard  of  others,  the  condition  of  the  church  might  seem 
pitiful,  even  deserving  of  rebuke.  Those  who  have  a  wide  experience  of  Christian 
churches  and  a  sympathetic  spirit  will  know  how  Philadelphia  felt.  The  con- 
sciousness of  their  feebleness  was  dominant.  Their  resources  seemed  insufficient 
for  the  demand  made  on  them.  Theirs  was  a  great  occasion,  and  a  distressing 
inability  to  meet  it ;  overtaxed  energy,  urgent  necessity,  and  poor  means ;  it  was  a 
burden  which  seemed  more  than  life  could  bear.  Even  the  Lord's  words  of 
encouragement,  "  Behold,  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,"  appeared  to  bring 
with  them  a  special  aggravation.  The  prospects  of  service  were  unusually  attractive ; 
80  much  could  be  done  if  there  were  only  the  strength  to  do  it.  Former  prayers  were 
answered ;  the  longed-for  opportunity  had  come ;  men  were  eager  for  the  gospel ; 
the  way  to  preach  was  lying  open ;  Christ  Himself  was  calling,  and  at  this  critical 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

hour  there  was  paralysing  inability.  This  last  feature  of  the  description  lends  a 
peculiar  pathos  to  the  message.  It  must  have  been  hard  for  the  church  to  rid  itself 
of  the  sense  of  sin  in  that  it  was  doing,  could  do  so  little.  The  faculty  of  spiritual 
self-tormenting,  so  subtle,  in  many  persons  so  deep-seated,  thrives  in  sorrowful 
experiences  like  this.  The  Lord's  message  supplies  the  comfort  the  church  is  in 
need  of ;  corrects  the  error  of  its  self -judgment.  The  whole  meaning  of  the  message 
is  that  to  bear  quietly  may  be  as  Divine  a  call  as  to  hope  largely,  or  to  be 
enthusiastic  in  resolve.  There  is  a  discipline  of  disappointment,  and  that  discipline 
must  be  borne.  We  are  trained  for  future  usefulness  through  pains  and  self- 
questionings,  and  the  endurance  of  insufficiency.  In  all  the  clauses  of  this  message 
we  can  read  the  endeavour  to  put  heart  into  Philadelphia ;  the  Lord  gives  Himself 
to  awaken  and  sustain  the  self-respect  of  His  troubled  people.  At  first  sight  the 
images  appear  to  lack  tenderness ;  that  is  only  because  the  tenderness  is  veiled  in 
images  of  strength.  A  striking  illustration  of  this  feature  of  the  message  is  in  the 
title  given  to  the  Lord  with  which  it  opens,  "  These  things  saith  He  that  is  holy, 
He  that  is  true,  He  that  hath  the  key  of  David,  He  that  openeth  and  none  shall 
shut,  and  that  sliutteth  and  none  openeth."  The  peculiar  affliction  of  Philadelphia 
was  the  occurrence  of  favourable  opportunities  for  doing  Christ's  work  just  when 
the  church  was  at  the  far  end  of  its  possibilities.  And  the  Lord  says,  "  I  know  all 
about  that."  It  is  one  of  the  ironies  of  life  that  the  occasion  we  have  longed  for, 
and  in  our  enthusiasm  ceaselessly  but  fruitlessly  tried  to  make  for  ourselves,  may 
come  with  no  effort  of  ours  at  the  very  time  we  can  do  nothing.  This,  says  the 
Lord  of  Truth,  is  no  mockery  of  fate ;  it  is  of  the  Divine  appointment.  "  I  have 
set  before  thee  a  door  opened,  and  it  shall  continue  open  until  you  are  able  to  enter 
in.  You  wiU  enter  in  sooner  than  you  think,  and  when  your  moment  of  invigora- 
tion  comes,  your  strength  will  not  be  wasted  in  efforts  to  make  the  conditions 
favourable ;  you  shall  enter  at  once  where  I  have  prepared  the  way."  Even  in  our 
times  of  waiting,  we  can  often  do  a  little ;  and  all  that  little  tells  if  the  Lord  has 
been  beforehand  with  us.  There  is  recognition,  moreover,  in  the  message,  honour- 
able recognition,  of  the  actual  achievement  of  the  church.  The  faith  had  been 
kept;  Christ's  name  had  not  been  denied.  Philadelphia  ranks  with  Pergamum, 
the  martyr-church.  And  then  there  is  promised  to  Philadelphia  a  public  vin- 
dication of  its  fidelity,  a  vindication  to  which  even  its  enemies  shall  bear  hearty 
witness,  "  Behold,  1  give  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan,  of  them  which  say  they  are 
Jews,  and  they  are  not,  but  do  lie ;  behold,  I  wiU  make  them  to  come  and  worship 
before  thy  feet,  and  to  know  that  I  have  loved  thee."  They  who  had  mocked  the 
patience  of  the  church  in  its  affliction  will  not  be  able  to  withhold  their  admiration ; 
they  are  drawn  out  of  reluctant  into  willing  acknowledgment  that  God  had  loved 
His  suffering  people.  Thus  does  Christ  encourage  the  patient  church.  As  there  is 
no  trial  harder  than  that  of  prolonged  inactivity  and  wasting  strength,  so  none  has 
consolations  loftier  and  more  direct.  The  way  of  access  to  God  is  intended  to  lie 
all  open  to  those  so  sorely  tried.  The  Divine  approval  is  set  over  against  accusations 
of  self,  the  taunts  of  the  ungodly,  and  the  ironies  of  life.  And  out  of  this  should 
come  a  steadfastness  holding  fast  to  the  end.  A  twofold  reward  is  promised  to 
Philadelphia ;  there  is  a  promise  for  time,  there  is  also  a  promise  for  eternity ;  and 
each  is  set  before  us  as  the  direct  result  of  the  sore  discipline  through  which  the 
church  has  had  to  pass,  according  to  those  far-reaching  words  of  James,  the  Lord's 
brother,  "  Let  patience  have  its  perfect  work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire, 
lacking  in  nothing."  (1)  There  is  the  temporal  promise.  "  Because  thou  hast  kept 
the  word  of  My  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee,"  &c.  This  church  shall  emerge  from 
the  general  tribulation,  having  lost  nothing  of  her  virtue,  with  her  sense  of  the 
Divine  protection  confirmed  and  justified.  When  the  shews  of  things  are  passing 
away,  and  the  strong-seeming  are  as  children,  the  tried  shall  prove  the  trusty.  (2) 
...There  is  also  an  eternal  reward;  and,  as  in  some  other  of  these  messages,  the 
eternal  reward  is  not  simply  a  personal  blessedness,  it  is  the  high  honour  of  being 
of  service  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  "  He  that  overcometh,  I  wiU  make  him,"  &c. 
There  is  in  this  image  a  note  of  personal  consideration,  of  that  tenderness,  veiled  in 
strength,  which  marks  the  whole  message.  Just  as  the  Lord  draws  from  the  enmity 
of  the  Jews  occasion  to  assure  Philadelphia  that  the  most  gracious  promises  made 
to  Israel  are  hers,  so  He  introduces  a  touch  of  local  colour  which  reveals  sympathy. 
The  city  of  Philadelphia  was  exposed  to  earthquakes  ;  its  geological  formation  was 
of  lava,  with  trap-dykes  intervening,  and  earthquakes  were  common  occurrences  in 
the  people's  experience.  "  The  walls  were  not  to  be  trusted,  but  every  day  some 
mischance  made  them  tremble  and  gape.    The  inhabitants  were  on  the  constant 


CHAP,  ra.]  REVELATION.  215 

look-out  for  faults  in  the  ground,  and  were  always  attending  to  their  buildings." 
The  image  of  an  unshaken  pillar  would  have  a  special  meaning  for  men 
with  such  an  experience ;  and  the  Church  was  to  be  such  a  pillar.  Not  only 
was  there  prepared  for  them  a  city  of  sure  foundations ;  they  were  to  be 
among  the  foundations.  This  was  the  destiny  for  which  their  discipline  had 
fitted  them ;  this  was  their  reward.  But  the  promise  goes  further ;  it  is  an 
inscribed  pillar  which  is  presented  to  our  view.  "  I  will  write  upon  him  the  name 
of  my  God,"  <fec.  Patience  is  the  substruction  of  the  godly  character ;  on  it  may  be 
reared  all  the  graces  of  the  heavenly  life.  It  is  a  manly  virtue,  and  needs  but  the 
touch  of  Christ's  finger  to  be  transformed  into  a  Divine  grace.  It  is  a  social  virtue, 
conspicuously  commemorated  in  the  city  of  God.  It  is  an  onward-looking  virtue ; 
our  "  forward  movements "  are  founded  on  it ;  it  has  promise  of  the  future, 
"I  will  write  on  him  My  new  nav^e."  {A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  The  address  to 
Philadelphia  : — I.  The  introduction.  Philadelphia  was  a  city  not  far  from  Sardis, 
founded  by  Attains  Philadelphus,  king  of  Pergamos,  a  few  centuries  before  the 
Christian  era.  Its  situation  was  upon  the  side  of  a  mountain,  which  had  a  com- 
manding view  of  a  fertile  and  extensive  country.  It  was  a  place  of  considerable 
importance  in  the  time  of  the  apostles.  It  is  still  populous,  but  in  a  mean  con- 
dition. The  character  which  Christ  assumes  to  this  church  is,  "  He  that  is  holy. 
He  that  is  true.  He  that  hath  the  key  of  David,  He  that  openeth  and  no  man 
shutteth,  and  shutteth  and  no  man  openeth."  It  was  needful  that  the  church  in 
Philadelphia  should  know  that  He  was  "  the  Holy  One,"  and  consequently  that  a 
low  degree  of  piety  was  not  sufiicient  in  His  esteem.  It  was  further  needful  to 
remember,  that  He  was  "  the  True  One,"  that  is,  "the  Truth,"  or  the  God  of  Truth, 
and  consequently  that  sincerity  of  motive  was  required,  as  well  as  purity  of  conduct. 
Truth  and  hohness  are  inseparably  allied.  Every  deviation  from  rectitude  is  a  lie. 
The  more  specific  aspect  in  which  Christ  appears  before  the  church  in  Philadelphia 
is,  "  He  that  hath  the  key  of  David,"  &g.  This  alludes  to  part  of  the  representation 
of  His  person  in  the  first  chapter.  The  imagery,  however,  is  more  extended  in  its 
present  application,  and  has  a  more  extensive  signification.  He  now  represents 
Himself  as  having  the  key  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  upon  the  earth  as  well  as  in 
the  invisible  state.  H.  The  declaration.  "  I  know  thy  works."  This  is  the 
usual  commencement  of  these  addresses.  The  declaration  is,  "Behold,  I  have  set 
before  thee  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it."  The  Christians  in  Philadelphia 
are  comforted  with  the  assurance  that  the  design  of  their  enemies  would  not  be 
permitted  to  succeed ;  that  their  cause  would  survive ;  and  that  many  from  that 
city  would  continue  to  enter  into  the  Kedeemer's  fold.  That  there  are  certain 
places  and  seasons  in  which  the  way  is  open  for  the  spread  of  gospel  truth,  and 
others  in  which  it  is  closed,  the  history  of  the  church  and  daily  observation  and 
experience  abundantly  prove.  Nor  is  it  less  evident  that  this  depends  not  upon  any 
peculiarity  of  circumstances  in  relation  either  to  the  church  or  to  the  world,  but  to 
causes  uncontrollable  by  human  agency  and  design.  As  a  general  rule,  indeed, 
where  means  are  most  used,  and  the  prayers  of  the  churches  are  most  directed,  the 
door  is  eventually  thrown  open ;  but  occasionally  all  such  efforts  become  ineffectual, 
and  a  door  unexpectedly  and  unsolicited  is  opened  in  another  direction.  Some- 
times a  wide  door  is  suddenly  closed,  and  at  other  times  a  narrow  door  is  opened 
wide.  The  prosperity  which  attends  the  preaching  of  the  word  in  some  places,  and 
the  discouragement  in  others,  are  not  to  be  attributed  to  the  different  gifts  and 
graces  of  men,  so  much  as  to  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  Him  who  has  the  key  of 
David,  who  openeth  and  no  man  shutteth,  and  shutteth  and  no  man  openeth.  Use- 
fulness often  depends  upon  a  wise  and  prayerful  observation  of  times  and  seasons, 
as  much  as  upon  actual  labour.  Many  have  succeeded  by  a  readiness  to  discern  and 
avail  themselves  of  an  opened  door ;  and  many,  with  greater  energy  and  zeal,  have 
failed,  from  striving  to  keep  open  a  door  which  He  has  closed.  HI.  The  com- 
mendation. "  For  thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  My  word,  and  hast  not 
denied  My  name."  The  strength  of  this  church  was  small,  but  it  was  strength  of 
the  right  kind.  The  strength  of  a  church  does  not  consist  in  worldly  wealth,  or 
wisdom,  or  power,  but  in  its  fidelity  to  the  word  and  profession  of  the  name  of 
Christ.  This  strength  is  termed  "  little,"  not  with  an  intention  to  censure,  so  much 
as  to  show  what  a  little  strength  of  this  kind  can  effect  against  the  united  powers  of 
earth  and  hell,  and  how  greatly  a  Uttle  of  such  strength  is  prized  by  "  Him  that  i3 
holy  and  true."  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  designed  by  this  epithet  to  teach  us,  that 
even  such  strength,  under  such  circumstances,  is  small  in  comparison  of  that  which 
from  the  full  exercise  of  faith  and  prayer  might  and  ought  to  be  attained.    lY.  Thk 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

THBEATENiNG.  This  is  addressed,  through  the  church,  to  a  party  which  professed 
to  be  the  true  church,  and  the  only  objects  of  Divine  favour.  "Behold,  I  will 
make  them  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan,  which  say  they  are  Jews  and  are  not,"  &c. 
The  Jews,  here  referred  to,  opposed  Judaism  to  Christianity.  The  name  of  Jew  was 
far  greater,  in  their  esteem,  than  that  of  Christian.  V.  The  promise.  This  is  to 
the  whole  church,  "Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  My  patience,"  &c.  VI.  The 
admonition.  "  Behold  I  come  quickly :  hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no 
man  take  thy  crown."  VII.  The  application.  A  pillar  is  a  needful  as  well  as  an 
ornamental  part  of  a  spacious  building.  It  was  so  in  the  Jewish  temple.  It  is 
the  symbol  therefore  of  a  secure  and  prominent  place  in  the  temple  of  the  new 
Jerusalem.  It  is  not  improbable  that  names  were  given  to  the  pillars  of  the 
temple,  and  inscribed  upon  them.  In  1  Kings  vii.  we  are  told,  that  when 
Solomon  set  up  the  two  main  pillars  of  the  porch,  he  called  the  name  of  one 
Jachin,  and  the  other  Boaz,  both  of  which  chiefly  denoted  stability.  (G.  Rogers.) 
The  words  of  Christ  to  the  congregation  at  Philadelphia: — I.  A  character  to 
BE  ADORED.  1.  Holy.  2.  True.  3.  Supreme.  All  the  doors  to  human  usefulness, 
dignity,  and  happiness,  are  at  the  disposal  of  Christ.  11.  An  energy  to  be 
COVETED.  1.  The  energy  of  true  usefulness.  2.  The  energy  of  loyal  obedience. 
3.  The  energy  of  true  courage.  4.  The  energy  of  moral  sovereignty.  6.  The 
energy    of    Divine    approval  and   protection.      III.   A    destiny    to   be   sought. 

1.  A  crown  lies  within  their  reach.  2.  Divine  security  is  assured.  3.  Sublime 
distinction  is  promised.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  church  small  in  its  temporal 
resources,  but  great  in  its  fidelity  to  the  name  of  Christ : — I.  This  church  was  small 
IN  size,  and  poor  in  its  temporal  resources.     1.  Its  numerical  power  was  small. 

2.  Its  social  power  was  small.  3.  Its  financial  power  was  small.  II.  This  church 
WAS  faithful  to  the  word  and  name  of  Christ.  III.  This  church  had  opened 
TO  IT  MANY  opportunities    OF    EXTENDED    USEFULNESS.     Thcsc  Openings  are : — 

1.  Providential.  2.  Welcome.  3.  Progressive  and  useful.  4.  Largely  dependent 
upon  the  moral  condition  of  the  church.    IV.  This  church  would  be  honoured  by 

THE  subjugation  OF  ITS  ENEMIES,  AND  BY  A  TRUE  RECOGNITION  OF  THE  DiVINE  LOVB 
CONCERNING  IT.  V.  ThIS  CHURCH  WAS  TO  BE  FAVOURED  WITH  THE  KINDLY  GUARDIAN- 
SHIP OF  Christ  in  the  hour  of  trial.  1.  Times  of  trial  will  come  upon  the  church. 
(1)  The  extent  of  the  trial.     (2)  The  time  of  the  trial.     (3)  The  design  of  the  trial. 

2.  In  times  of  trial  to  the  church,  faithful  souls  shall  be  favoured  with  the  Divine 
guardianship.  (1)  This  safety  is  Divinely  promised.  (2)  This  safety  is  a  recom- 
pense. (3)  This  safety  is  welcome.  3.  That  a  church  may  be  poor  in  its  temporal 
circumstances,  and  yet  faithful  to  Christ.  4.  That  a  church  may  be  poor  in  its 
temporal  circumstances,  and  yet  vigorous  in  Christian  enterprise.  5.  That  a 
church,  poor  in  its  temporal  circumstances,  but  rich  in  faith,  will  experience  the 
guardian  care  of  Heaven.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  True  moial  strength: — I.  Its 
CONNECTION  WITH  Christ.  1.  Christ  recognises  it.  2.  Christ  honours  it.  3. 
Christ  imparts  it.  Power  over — (1)  Circumstances.  (2)  Society.  (3)  Temptation. 
II.  Its  influence  over  error  (ver.  9).  The  general  idea  is,  that  false  religion 
shall  pay  homage  to  the  moral  power  of  Christians.  How  is  this  done?  The 
moral  power  of  Christianity  comes  in  contact  with  corrupt  human  nature  in  three 
forms : — 1.  As  a  morality.  It  is  a  regulated  system,  and  its  laws  commend 
themselves  both  to  man's  natural  love  of  his  own  rights,  and  his  natural  love  of  his 
own  interests.  2.  As  an  institution.  The  mind  must  have  worship,  must  have  a 
dietary  and  a  ritual  of  devotion.  Christianity,  as  an  institution,  appeals  to 
that.  3.  As  a  theology.  It  is  a  system  of  belief,  and  thus  appeals  to  man's  craving 
after  truth.  III.  Its  future  reward.  1.  Preservation.  2.  Visitation.  3.  Exalta- 
tion. (1)  Stability.  (2)  Utility.  (3)  Divinity.  {Caleb  Morris.)  He  that  hath  the 
key  of  David. — The  key  of  David: — The  reference  here  is  to  Isa.  xxii.  22:  "The 
key  of  the  house  of  David  will  I  lay  upon  his  shoulder."  This  was  said  of  Eliakim, 
who  was  thus  set  up  as  a  type  of  a  greater  than  himself — a  greater  than  David. 
Eliakim  was  royal  chamberlain,  keeper  of  the  house,  like  Joseph  in  Pharaoh's 
palace.  So  Christ  is  represented  as  not  only  being  the  royal  possessor  of  the 
house,  but  He  also  to  whom  the  keeping  of  its  gate  was  entrusted.  I.  The  key  of 
David's  house.  The  palace  is  His,  and  He  keeps  the  key  of  it,  as  the  Father  has 
given  it  to  Him.  He  opens  and  shuts  according  as  He  will.  II.  The  key  op 
David's  castle.  Besides  his  palace  David  had  a  fort  on  Zion,  which  he  took  from 
the  Jebusites — a  stronghold  against  the  enemy.  So  has  our  David  a  strong  tower 
and  fortress,  into  which  we  run  and  are  safe.  III.  The  key  of  David's  city. 
Yes,  the  key  of  Jerusalem,  both  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly.    IV.  The  key  or 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  2l7 

David's  treasure-house.  That  storehouse  contains  all  we  need.  The  unsearchable 
riches  are  here.  V,  The  key  of  David's  banqueting-house.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
Opened  doors : — I.  Christ  is  the  providence  of  our  lives.  What  we  call 
chances  are  not  chances.  The  opportunities  that  come  to  us  are  God-given  oppor- 
tunities. The  doors  that  open  before  us  He  flings  wide  open.  The  doors  that  are 
shut  He  bars  and  bolts.  II.  It  is  ours  to  see  the  open  door  and  enter  in 
THEREAT.  There  is  a  certain  significance  in  the  very  word  "  Philadelphia,"  lover  of 
man.  This  is  a  true  designation  of  those  that  are  pre-eminently  workers  among 
their  fellow  men,  the  type  represented  in  this  Epistle.  He  is  one  who  sees  the  door 
that  God  opens,  takes  the  key  which  God  hands  to  him,  enters  in  at  the  door,  and 
takes  charge  of  that  which  God  has  put  before  him.  Such  an  one  must  have  two 
qualities :  power  to  perceive  the  opportunity,  and  the  courage  to  avail  himself  of  it ; 
and  these  two  qualities  make  what  we  call  in  secular  forces  genius.  They  are  the 
foundation  of  the  great  successes  of  life.  HI.  Our  Epistle  adds  a  comfortino 
WORD,  A  word  of  PROMISE.  "  He  shall  be  a  pillar,"  &c.  Observe  that  this  promise 
is  a  promise,  not  to  the  great  prophets,  not  to  the  men  of  transcendent  spiritiial 
genius,  but  to  the  faithful  Christian  workers,  to  men  who  love  their  fellow  men. 
1.  They  that  thus  gave  themselves  to  God's  service  shall  become  pillars  in  God's 
Church.  The  reward  which  God  gives  for  service  is  more  service.  What  Christ 
says  here  to  every  man  is  this  :  If  you  will  watch  for  your  opportunity  of  service, 
and  if  you  will  be  faithful  in  that  service,  though  you  have  but  little  strength  and 
are  yourself  of  small  account,  you  shall  be  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  you 
shall  be  the  stay  and  strength  of  men  less  strong  than  you,  you  shall  support  the 
Church  of  Christ  by  your  faith,  here  and  hereafter.  2.  They  "  shall  go  no  more 
out."  I  think,  for  the  most  part,  that  in  this  life,  we  in  the  Church  flow  as  the 
drops  of  water  flow  that  are  on  the  very  edge  of  the  Gulf  Stream.  They  are  brought 
in  perpetual  contact  with  the  greater  waters  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  by  the  waves 
and  currents  flowing  back  and  forth.  Now  they  are  without,  and  now  they  are 
within.  A  few  sainted  souls  flow,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  centre  of  the  Gulf  Stream, 
and  know  not  the  cold  of  the  battling  waves  without.  But,  for  the  most  part,  we 
are  half  in  the  world  and  half  out  of  it,  and  count  ourselves  almost  saints  if  we  are 
out  of  the  world  half  the  time.  Now,  Christ  says  this  :  not  to  the  man  of  prayers 
and  visions  and  special  experience  and  the  monastic  life,  but  to  him  who  will  seize 
the  opportunity  for  work,  and  with  fidelity  pursue  it ;  he  shall  more  and  more  find 
himseii  taken  out  from  all  contamination  and  evil  life,  he  shall  find  himself  more 
and  more  following  in  a  current  pure  and  healthful,  until,  when  the  end  shall 
come,  he  shall  go  no  more  out  for  ever.  3.  "  And  on  him  I  will  write  a  new  name 
— the  name  of  my  God,  the  name  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  my  new  name."  How  is 
it  that  God  writes  names  in  human  lives  ?  A  child  is  plucked  out  of  the  street  and 
taken  into  a  Christian  family,  and  the  father  adopts  him  as  his  own,  and  gives  him 
his  own  name  ;  and  in  the  nursery,  in  the  school,  in  the  business,  in  the  household, 
in  all  the  relations  of  life,  father  and  mother  are  writing  their  own  name  in  the  life 
of  their  adopted  child.  And  so  the  city  of  the  New  Jerusalem  writes  in  the  heart 
of  every  man  who  comes  into  allegiance  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ  a  new  name — the 
name  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  God  opens  doors  : — As 
one  who  sails  along  the  Atlantic  coast,  exploring,  comes  to  an  indentation  in  the 
coast,  and  sets  his  sails  toward  it,  and  finds  there  is  no  opening  there,  and  then, 
pushing  out  to  sea  again,  sails  along  a  little  further,  and  comes  to  a  second  and  a 
third,  and  at  last  reaches  the  Narrows,  and  pushes  in  between  Staten  Island  and 
Bay  Kidge,  and  enters  the  great  bay,  and  sees  the  majestic  waters  of  the  Hudson 
Biver  pouring  down — as  such  an  one  has  entered  the  door  which  God  opened  for 
all  future  commerce  to  go  back  and  forth  upon,  so  we  sail  in  hfe,  seeking  our  oppor- 
tunity looking  here,  looking  there,  and  coming  at  last  to  an  open  door.  We  call  it 
a  good  chance  ;  but  God  has  made  it  for  us,  and  it  is  of  His  purpose  that  we  have 
found  it.  He  sets  before  us  our  open  doors.  (Ibid.)  An  open  door  for  little 
strength : — "  Thou  hast  a  httle  strength."  The  words  do  not  mean  that  the 
persecution  had  been  so  oppressive  as  well  nigh  to  exhaust  the  church,  so  that  it 
had  only  a  little  strength  remaining.  Bather  they  describe  the  condition  of  the 
church  before  the  terrible  trial  came  upon  it.  From  the  very  beginning  its  ability 
had  been  but  small.  Tet  small  as  its  strength  was,  its  members  had  stood  firm  in 
the  face  of  cruel  threatenings  and  alluring  promises.  And  lo !  as  the  reward  of 
their  steadfastness,  the  Lord  declares  that  He  has  set  before  them  "  an  open  door" 
which  no  man  could  shut.  That  is  to  say,  through  the  gateway  of  their  fidelity, 
feeble  as  they  were,  they  went  under  the  leadership  of  Christ  to  a  sphere  of  usefid- 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

ness,  which  was  peculiarly  their  own,  and  which  no  mortal  could  prevent  them 
from  filling.  •'  Thou  hast  but  little  strength."  How  many  in  all  our  congregations 
may  be  truly  thus  addressed  ?  Now,  I  know  few  passages  of  Scripture  more 
encouraging  than  this.  For  one  thing  it  suggests  to  us  that  the  having  of  but 
little  strength  is  not  a  matter  of  which  we  need  to  be  ashamed.  If  one  has  brought 
it  upon  himself  by  his  own  iniquity,  then  it  may  be  a  matter  of  disgrace  ;  but  if  it 
come  in  the  allotment  of  God's  providence,  there  is  no  moral  reproach  to  be 
associated  with  it.  Christ  did  not  overlook  the  Church  of  Philadelphia,  weak 
though  it  was.  Is  it  not  written,  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  the 
smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench  "  ?  '*  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them 
that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength."  The  having  of  but  a  little  strength 
may  even  come  to  be,  in  some  respects,  an  advantage.  For  it  is  not  a  little 
remarkable  that  the  two  churches  which  received  unqualified  condemnation  are 
those  of  Smyrna  and  Philadelphia,  neither  of  which  was  strong ;  while  on  the  other 
hand  the  severest  reproof  is  addressed  to  the  church  of  Laodicea,  which  any 
outsider  would  have  spoken  of  as  at  once  prosperous  and  influential.  Thus  we  are 
reminded  that  where  there  is  much  strength  there  is  also  a  disposition  to  trust  in 
that ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  where  there  is  conscious  feebleness  there  is  felt  also 
the  necessity  of  making  application  for  the  might  of  the  Most  High.  But  pursuing 
this  line  of  thought  a  little  farther  we  may  see  from  my  text  that  the  having  of  only 
a  httle  strength  does  not  utterly  disqualify  us  from  serving  the  Lord.  Feeble  as 
they  were,  the  Philadelphians  had  kept  Christ's  word,  and  had  not  denied  His 
name.  They  kept  their  loyalty  to  Him  even  in  their  weakness.  And  it  is  possible 
for  every  one  of  us  to  do  the  same.  If  my  strength  is  small,  God  does  not  require 
of  me  that  which  only  a  larger  measure  of  power  could  enable  me  to  perform. 
Wherever  I  am,  it  is  enough  if  there  I  keep  His  word ;  and  however  limited  be  my 
resources,  He  asks  no  more  than  that  I  use  all  these  resources  in  advancing  the 
honour  of  His  name.  Still  further,  if  we  proceed  upon  this  principle,  my  text 
affirms  that  a  wider  sphere  will  be  ultimately  opened  up  to  us.  Fidelity  always 
rises.  It  is,  in  fact,  irrepressible;  for  when  Christ  says  to  it,  "  Come  up  higher," 
no  one  can  hold  it  down.  I.  We  may  learn  that  usefulness  is  not  the  pbimaby 
OBJECT  of  the  Christlan's  ATTENTION.  Not  what  wc  Can  do  for  others,  but  rather 
what  we  are  in  ourselves,  demands  our  first  attention,  for  to  do  good  to  others  we 
must  first  be  good  ourselves.  Usefulness  is  to  character  what  fragrance  is  to  the 
flower.  But  the  gardener  does  not  make  the  fragrance  his  first  or  greatest  aim. 
Nay,  rather  his  grand  design  is  to  produce  a  perfect  flower,  for  he  knows  if  he 
succeed  in  that,  the  fragrance  will  come  of  itself.  In  the  same  way  the  Christian's 
first  concern  should  be  with  his  own  character.  To  be  holy  is  our  primary  duty, 
and  through  that  we  pass  to  usefulness.  11.  But  if  these  things  are  so,  we  have, 
as  another  inference  suggested  from  this  text,  an  easy  explanation  of  the  obeat 

USEFULNESS    OF    MANY     WHO     ARE     IN    NO     WISE     NOTEWORTHY    FOR     STRENGTH.        FcW 

things  are  more  commonly  spoken  of  among  men  than  the  fact  that  the  most 
successful  soul-winners  in  the  ministry  are  not  always  those  who  are  most  con- 
spicuous for  intellectual  ability  or  argumentative  power.  In  the  same  way  you  will 
sometimes  find  a  church  whose  members  are  poor  in  this  world's  goods,  and  not 
remarkable  for  that  culture  which  modern  circles  have  so  largely  deified,  yet  famous 
for  its  good  works  among  the  masses  ;  and  when  you  look  into  the  matter  you  find 
the  explanation  in  the  consecrated  characters  and  lives  of  those  who  are  associated 
in  its  fellowship.  They  have  sought  their  usefulness  through  their  holiness,  and 
not  their  holiness  through  their  usefulness  ;  and  therefore  it  is  they  have  had  such 
signal  triumphs.  111.  Finally,  if  the  principles  which  I  have  tried  to  deduce  from 
this  text  are  true,  we  see  at  once  how  such  apparently  opposite  things  as 
Christian  contentment  and  Christian  ambition  are  to  be  perfectly  harmonized. 
The  full  discharge  of  duty  on  the  lower  level  opens  the  passage  up  into  the  higher. 
We  see  that  illustrated  in  secular  departments  every  day.  If  the  schoolboy  wishes 
to  gain  a  high  position  as  a  man,  he  must  be  content,  as  long  as  he  is  at  school,  to 
go  through  its  daily  round,  and  perform  in  the  best  possible  manner  its  common 
duties.  The  better  he  is  as  a  scholar,  the  more  surely  will  the  door  into  eminence 
open  for  him  as  a  man.  But  if  he  trifle  away  his  time,  if  he  despise  what  he 
calls  the  "  drudgery"  of  education,  and  so  leave  school  without  having  learned 
those  things  which  he  was  sent  thither  to  acquire,  then  there  will  be  nothiag  for 
him  in  after  life  but  humiliation  and  failure.  Doors  may  open  to  him,  but  he 
will  never  be  ready  to  enter  one  of  them.  Fretting  over  our  weakness  will  not 
make  things   better,  but  it  wiU  prevent  us  from  bringing  anything  out  of   the 


CHAP,  in.]  REVELATION,  219 

little  strength  we  have.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  open  and  shut  door  : — Doors 
are  of  many  kinds.  Everything  has  its  door  leading  into  its  own  reserves,  by  which 
easy  entrance  is  furnished,  but,  apart  from  which,  they  are  inaccessible.  Some 
ways  of  entrance  are  very  narrow  and  restricted,  others  are  relatively  wide  and 
open.  We  have  each  our  door  by  which  we  are  accessible,  and  also  doors  through 
which  we  have  access  to  others.  Human  reason  finds  a  wide  door,  but  human 
sympathy  and  love  a  wider  and  deeper.  What  a  door,  then.  Wisdom  has,  who  i3 
the  maker  and  mother  of  us  all.  1.  But,  though  her  children,  we  make  our  begin- 
NiNO  OUTSIDE  THE  DOOR  OF  AT.T.  THINGS.  We  are  bom  without  the  gate,  laid  very 
humbly  at  the  door.  We  make  our  beginning  in  unconscious  weakness.  *'  Behold," 
says  the  Father,  "  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  which  no  man  can  shut." 
This  is  the  birthright  of  our  childhood.  God  with  His  universe  stands  at  the  gate 
of  His  child  in  the  joy  of  expectation,  waiting  for  the  awaking  of  his  intelligence  to 
declare  to  him  his  blessedness  of  Being,  and  the  greatness  of  his  inheritance. 
♦'  Blessed  is  he  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at  the  posts  of 
my  door."  But,  to  descend  to  particulars,  we  may  ask,  to  what  is  there  not,  at  the 
first,  an  open  door  set  before  us  ?  Only  by  ignorance,  folly,  and  abuse,  the  door  of 
our  physical  inheritance  is  closed  against  us.  God's  creatures  are  commissioned  to 
befriend  His  children.  To  more  than  a  sufficiency  of  worldly  goods  there  is  at  first 
an  open  door.  "  The  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich,  but  he  that  dealeth  with  a 
slack  hand  becometh  poor."  No  less  is  there  a  fellowship  of  mind  which  seeks  to 
awaken  our  observation  and  inquiry,  and  minister  to  our  knowledge.  And  the 
door  of  communication  with  the  fountain-sources  of  all  light  and  power  of  mind  is 
ever  widening.  Earth  draws  nearer  to  and  more  partakes  of  heaven,  and  heaven 
has  more  of  earth  as  generation  after  generation  is  "  taker\  up."  But  to  what  a 
social  inheritance  is  there  not  an  open  door  ?  We  are  born  into  families.  If  as 
youths  we  go  forth  from  our  first  homes,  it  is  only  that  we  may  be  prepared  as  men 
to  enter  upon  our  own  homes.  But  other  worlds  than  earth,  and  higher  life  than 
is  possible  under  nature  is  open  to  us,  through  the  door  that  is  set  before  us.  The 
earth  is  neither  prison-house,  palace,  nor  true  home  for  man.  It  is  not  an  end, 
only  a  way,  a  marvellous  thoroughfare  to  the  Spiritual,  the  Infinite,  and  the  Eternal. 
God  has  not  opened  up  to  us  the  kingdom  of  nature  for  our  culture  by  means  of 
our  senses,  and  the  kingdom  of  mind  for  the  culture  of  thought,  affection,  and  will, 
by  the  exercise  of  our  souls,  and  kept  His  own  door  closed  against  us  as  His 
children.  He  has  not  doomed  us  to  perish  in  the  earth,  much  less  appointed  us  to 
wrath,  but  to  "  inherit  all  things,"  and  "  live  together  with  Him."    11.  He  who 

HADE  us  AND  LAID  US  AT  THE  OPEN  DOOR  HAS  ANTICIPATED  OUR  PRAYER,  AND  MADE 

Himself  the  way  of  access  and  the  door  of  entrance.  We  are  too  accustomed 
to  think  of  Christ  merely  as  the  door  of  mercy  for  our  souls,  but  not  of  health  for 
oar  bodies ;  as  the  door  to  heaven  when  we  are  dismissed  from  earth,  but  not 
the  door  to  all  earthly  treasures ;  as  the  door  of  access  to  God,  but  not  the  door 
of  access  to  men.  We  forget  that  His  kingdom  is  an  universal  kingdom,  and 
His  dominion  everlasting;  that  He  exercises  no  divided  sovereignty;  that  He 
made  all  things  and  gave  them  the  laws  of  their  several  existence.  He  is  also 
the  light  of  all  our  seeing.  "  If  the  eye  be  single,  the  whole  body  will  be  full  of 
light."  And  if  we  follow  the  light,  we  shall  be  led  into  all  the  ways  of  that 
hidden  wisdom  by  which  all  things  have  been  constituted  and  are  kept  in  being. 
Having  His  spirit  we  stand  in  kindred  relation  to  aU  things  and  all  being ;  our 
minds  possess  a  fellowship  of  nature  with  aU  thought  in  its  impersonal  diffusion 
and  in  its  personal  centres ;  our  hearts  are  moved  by  a  sympathy  with  the  attrac- 
tions, affinities,  instincts,  and  personal  affections  which  proclaim  the  drawing 
together  of  aU  things ;  whilst  in  our  deepest  nature  is  awakened  a  sense  of  our 
Divine  childhood,  which  seeks  and  finds  access  to  God.  III.  But  He  who  is 
the  door  to  all  things,  and  also  the  way  to  Himself,  does  not  leave  us  to  our- 
selves to  find  the  door,  but  offers  Himself  as  our  guide,  to  lead  us  not  only 
into  His  House,  but  also  to  conduct  us  to  the  feast  His  wisdom  and  lovb 
HAVE  PREPARED.  He  stauds  at  the  door  and  knocks  for  admission.  He 
offers  Himself  for  our  acceptance.  *  IV.  He  who  so  graciously  offers  to  be 
our  guide  that  He  may  lead  us  into  our  inheritance,  also  warns  us,  lest 
slighting  the  opportunity  of  our  day  we  should  come  to  reject  His  aid, 
despise  our  birthright,  and  not  "  knowing  the  time  of  our  visitation,"  "  the 
things  which  belong  to  our  peace  should  be  for  ever  hidden  from  our  eyes,"  and 
the  door  set  open  before  us  should  be  for  ever  closed  against  us.  {W.Fuls/ord,  D.D.) 
Thou    hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  My  word,  and  hast  not  denied 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

My  name. — Commendation  for  the  steadfast : — The  Philadelphian  church  was  not 
great,  but  it  was  good  ;  not  powerful,  but  faithful.  The  Philadelphian  saints,  like 
the  limpet,  which  has  but  little  strength,  stuck  firmly  to  the  rock,  and  they  are 
commended  for  it.  They  had  little  strength,  but  they  kept  God's  word,  and  they 
did  not  deny  His  name,  I.  A  Word  of  pbaise.  I  do  not  think  that  we  should  be 
so  slow  in  praising  one  another.  There  is  a  general  theory  abroad  that  it  is  quite 
right  to  point  out  to  a  brother  all  his  imperfections,  for  it  will  be  a  salutary  medicine 
to  him,  and  prevent  his  being  too  happy  in  this  vale  of  tears.  Is  it  supposed  that 
we  shall  cheer  him  on  to  do  better  by  always  finding  fault  with  him  ?  What  had 
these  Philadelphian  believers  done  that  they  should  be  praised  ?  "  Thou  hast  kept 
My  word,  and  thou  hast  not  denied  My  name."  What  does  this  mean?  1.  Does 
it  not  mean,  first,  that  they  had  received  the  word  of  God ;  for  if  they  had  not 
heard  it  and  held  it  they  could  not  have  kept  it.  It  was  theirs ;  they  read  it  and 
searched  it  and  made  it  their  own.  It  is  no  small  privilege  so  to  be  taught  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  to  have  a  taste  for  the  gospel,  a  deep  attachment  to  the  truths  of 
the  covenant.  2.  Next,  we  may  be  sure  that  they  loved  the  word  of  God.  They 
had  an  intense  delight  in  it.  They  appreciated  it.  They  stored  it  up  as  bees  store 
away  honey,  and  they  were  as  ready  to  defend  it  as  bees  are  to  guard  their  stores. 
They  meditated  upon  it ;  they  sought  to  understand  it.  More,  however,  is  meant 
than  simply  loving  the  word,  though  that  is  no  small  thing.  3.  It  means  that  they 
believed  it,  believed  it  most  thoroughly,  and  so  kept  it.  I  am  afraid  that  there  are 
great  truths  in  God's  word  which  we  do  not  intelligently  believe,  but  take  for 
granted.  4.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  inner  possession  and  the  hearty  belief 
of  the  truth,  we  must  be  ready  to  adhere  to  it  at  all  times.  That,  perhaps,  is  the 
central  thought  here—"  Thou  hast  kept  My  word."  5.  No  doubt,  also,  it  was 
intended  in  this  sense— that  they  had  obeyed  the  word  of  God.  II.  A  word  of 
PROSPECT.  "  You  have  been  faithful,  therefore  I  will  use  you.  You  have 
been  steadfast,  therefore  I  will  employ  you."  For  a  considerable  period  of 
human  life,  it  may  be,  God  does  not  give  to  all  of  us  a  field  of  usefulness. 
There  are  some  to  whom  He  early  opens  the  gate  of  usefulness,  because  He 
sees  in  them  a  spirit  that  will  bear  the  temptation  of  success ;  but  in  many 
other  cases  it  is  questionable  whether  they  could  bear  promotion,  and  there- 
fore the  Lord  permits  them  to  be  tried  in  different  ways  until  He  sees  that  they  are 
found  faithful,  and  then  He  puts  them  into  His  service,  and  gives  them  an  oppor- 
tunity of  bearing  witness  for  Him.  You  have  been  a  receiver  yourself  until  now, 
and  that  is  well  and  good;  but,  now  that  you  have  become  filled,  overflow  to 
others,  and  let  them  receive  of  your  joy.  "  How  do  I  know  that  they  will  accept 
it?"  say  you.  I  know  it  from  this  fact — that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  man  that 
keeps  God's  word  has  an  open  door  before  him.  Gird  up  your  loins  and  enter  it. 
Bush  to  the  front.  Victory  lies  before  you.  God  means  to  use  you.  The  hour 
needs  its  man  quite  as  much  as  the  man  needs  the  hour.  The  Lord  help  you  to 
keep  His  word,  and  then  to  go  in  for  public  testimony.  III.  A  word  of  promise. 
Those  who  keep  God's  word  shall  themselves  be  kept  from  temptation.  The  Lord 
returns  into  His  servants'  bosoms  that  which  they  render  to  Him :  He  gives  keeping 
for  keeping.  This  is  the  Lord's  way  of  deUvering  those  who  keep  His  word :  He 
shuts  them  away  from  the  temptation  that  comes  upon  others.  He  seems  to  say, 
*'  Dear  child,  since  you  will  not  go  beyond  my  written  word,  you  shall  not  be 
tempted  to  go  beyond  it.  I  will  cause  the  enemies  of  truth  to  leave  you  alone. 
You  shall  be  offensive  to  them,  or  they  to  you,  and  you  shall  soon  part  company." 
Or  perhaps  the  text  may  mean  that  if  the  temptation  shall  come  you  shall  be 
preserved  from  it.  The  deliberately  formed  conviction  that  the  word  of  God  is 
the  standard  of  our  faith,  and  the  unwavering  habit  of  referring  everything  to  it, 
may  not  deliver  us  from  every  error,  but  they  will  save  us  from  that  which  is  the 
nurse  of  every  error— that  is,  the  habit  of  trusting  to  our  own  understanding,  or 
relying  upon  the  understandings  of  our  fellow-men.  I  value  more  a  solid  confi- 
dence in  the  word  of  God  than  even  the  knowledge  that  comes  out  of  it ;  for  that 
faith  is  a  saving  habit,  a  sanctifying  habit,  in  every  way  a  strengthening  and 
confirming  and  preserving    habit,      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's    Word  in  safe 

custody  : — I.  They  kept  His  Word.  God's  word,  and  not  the  traditions  or 
commandments  of  men,  is  the  only  strength  of  the  Church,  and  the  only  source  of 
all  true  religion.  By  us,  too,  this  word  must  be  kept.  1.  Intellectually.  It  is  not 
a  cunningly-devised  fable,  but  the  living  word  of  the  everlasting  God,  who  cannot 
lie.  2.  Affectionately.  In  religion  we  want  not  only  glass  windows  that  let  in  the 
light,  but  human  hearts  that  are  filled  with  love.    3.  Practically.    It  has  been 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  221 

well  said  "  that  the  life  of  a  Christian  is  the  best  picture  of  the  life  of  Christ." 
n.  They  had  not  denied  His  name.  1.  Infidelity  denies  Christ's  name.  2.  Worldly- 
mindedness  is  a  denial  of  Christ's  name.  3.  Religious  formality  is  a  denial  of 
Christ's  name.  4.  Neglect  of  religious  ordinances  is  also  a  practical  denial  of  Christ. 
{W.  G.  Barrett.)  Perseverance  in  iceakness  ;— I.  There  are  many  things  which 
RENDER  US  FAINT  AND  WEARY,  sadly  conscious  of  our  little  strength.  1.  The  power 
and  force  of  temptation,  the  thought  that  I,  the  creature  of  a  day,  with  a  nature 
prone  to  sin,  and  pitted,  before  God  and  His  angels,  against  Satan  and  the  legions 
of  evil.  Oh,  Christian,  if  at  any  moment  the  spirit  of  evil  tempts  thee,  and  thou  art 
about  to  give  way,  bethink  thee  of  the  church  of  Philadelphia,  having  a  little 
strength,  yet  keeping  the  word  of  her  Lord's  patience,  and  not  denying  His  name. 
Faint,  yet  pursuing  !  Let  this  be  thy  watchword  in  the  fight.  Rest  not  until  the 
enemy  has  fled.  2.  The  Philadelphian  church  had  kept  the  word  of  Her  Lord's 
patience.  Affliction  is  very  apt  to  exhaust  the  Christian's  little  strength,  so  that  he 
should  lose  patience  and  begin  to  doubt.  3.  Another  cause  of  discouragement  is 
the  coldness  and  unbelief  of  other  Christians.  4.  And  then  comes  that  which  ia 
so  trying  to  all,  to  those  who  have  escaped  the  above-mentioned  temptations,  to 
those  even  who  have  made  great  progress  in  the  spiritual  life — the  sameness  of 
religion.  Over  and  over  again  the  same  work  has  to  be  done.  We  wanted  to  be 
quit  of  some,  at  least,  of  these  old  and  troublesome  tenants ;  but  there  they  are 
still.  We  hoped  to  go  on  unto  perfection,  higher  yet ;  and  here  we  are  stiU  in  the 
valleys,  doing  most  undignified  work,  quite  unworthy  of  our  long  experience  and 
knowledge.  It  is  very  humiliating.  But  it  is  also  uninteresting,  and  the  want  of 
interest  discourages.  H.  What  ake  the  remedies  for  this  discouragement  ? 
1.  First,  we  may  search  out  the  promises  of  God  made  to  His  people  in  Holy 
Scripture,  and  therefore  made  to  us.  With  this  we  may  combine  attentive  medi- 
tation upon  the  person  and  character  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Most  especially  remark- 
able is  His  tenderness  for  the  weak.  2.  Then  we  must  speak  of  the  means  of 
grace,  prayer,  reading  God's  holy  word,  &c.  3.  There  is  one  thing  which  we  must 
especially  guard  against,  that  is,  impatience.  We  must  not  expect  an  immediate 
and  perfect  cure  of  all  our  spiritual  weakness.  We  cannot,  by  any  process,  make 
one  step  between  earth  and  heaven.  Is  it  nothing  to  hold  fast  that  we  have? 
By  and  by  He  will  come  and  relieve  us.  {W.  Mitchell,  M.A.)  I  will  make 
them  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan  .  .  .  come  and  worship  before  thy  feet.— Su&jm- 
gation  of  the  enemies  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  Debasement  of  the  enemies  of 
Christ  and  of  His  people  foretold.  Haughty,  presuming,  and  persecuting 
characters  must  be  brought  down.  They  shall  one  day  be  compelled  to  do  honour 
to  those  whom  they  have  ignorantly  despised  and  cruelly  tormented.  They  shall 
be  irresistibly  convinced  that  the  objects  of  their  cruel  hatred  were  the  objects  of 
the  infinite  love  of  the  Almighty  Redeemer.  Jesus  can  easily  conquer  His  most 
potent  adversaries  and  protect  His  weakest  friends.  II.  The  distinguished  privileob 
OF  REAL  Christians  shall  be  perceived  by  the  agents  of  Satan.  "  They  shall 
know  that  I  have  loved  thee."  This  is  to  know,  that  they  are  the  most  highly 
honoured,  that  they  are  inviolably  secure,  and  that  they  shall  be  eternally  blessed. 
To  be  loved  by  the  adorable  Immanuel  is  to  be  raised  to  the  summit  of  honour, 
and  to  be  interested  in  a  source  of  never-failing  felicity.  The  love  of  Jesus  Christ 
to  His  people  is  the  source  of  all  their  consolation  in  time,  and  the  basis  of  all 
their  hopes  for  immortality.  III.  The  Redeemer's  approbation  of  the  Phila- 
delphian Church.  *•  Thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience."  1.  The  doctrine 
of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  fitly  called  the  word  of  His  patience,  because  it 
describes  His  persevering  patience  under  the  cruel  persecutions  of  ungodly  men — 
the  fiery  temptations  of  Satan.  The  patience  of  our  blessed  Lord  in  bearing,  and 
in  forbearing,  is  most  amazing.  2.  The  commendation  expressed  in  the  text  may 
refer  to  the  patience  which  the  Philadelphians  had  exercised  in  keeping  the  word 
of  Christ  whilst  they  had  been  enduring  reproaches,  and  temptations,  and  afflic- 
tions. It  requires  more  than  an  ordinary  degree  of  patience  to  keep  the  word  of 
the  Redeemer  when  we  are  called  to  suffer  for  its  sake.  The  stronger  is  our  faith, 
the  more  lively  is  our  hope,  and  the  more  lively  is  our  hope,  the  more  steady  is  our 
patience  in  waiting  for  promised  blessings.  Patience  is  the  grace  that  preserves  the 
tried  and  tempted  Christian  from  yielding  to  despondency :  it  keeps  his  mind 
peaceful  in  the  storms  of  adversity  by  counteracting  the  baneful  influence  of  pride 
and  unbelief  in  the  heart,  which  tend  to  produce  discontent  and  impatience  under 
trying  and  distressing  circumstances.  Nothing  more  recommends  the  religion 
ot  Jesus  Christ  than  the  exercise  of  the  grace  of  patience  under  severe  trials 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  cruel  reproaches.  IV.  The  promise  by  which  our  Lord  encoxtraoed 
THE  Philadelphians.  "  I  also  will  keep  thee,"  &c.  The  Lord  foresees  all  the 
seasons  of  persecution  which  His  servants  will  experience  upon  earth.  {J.  Hyatt.) 
Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  My  patience,  therefore  will  I  keep  thee  l^om 
the  hour  of  temptation. — The  happiness  of  being  kept  from  the  hour  of  temptation : — 
As  deliverance  out  of  temptation  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  greatest  mercies  that 
God  vouchsafes  His  people  in  this  world,  so  there  is  nothing  that  more  enhances  the 
greatness  of  the  mercy  than  the  critical  time  of  God's  vouchsafing  it.  As  in  the 
vicissitudes  of  night  and  day,  the  darkness  of  one  recommends  the  returns  of  the 
other,  adding  a  kind  of  lustre  even  to  light  itself,  so  it  is  the  hour  of  danger  which 
sets  a  price  and  value  upon  the  hour  of  deliverance,  and  makes  it  more  properly  in 
season.  I.  There  is  a  certain  proper  season,  or  hour,  which  gives  a  peculiar 
FORCE,  STRENGTH,  AND  EFFICACY  TO  TEMPTATION.  Every  fit  of  a  bumiug  fcver  is  not 
equally  dangerous  to  the  sick  person  ;  nor  are  aU  hours  during  the  distemper  equally 
fatal.  There  is  a  proper  time,  sometimes  called  in  scripture  "the  day  of  tempta- 
tion "  (Psa.  xcv.  8) ;  sometimes  "  the  evil  day"  (Eph.  vi.  13) ;  and  sometimes  "  the 
hour  of  temptation."  A  time  in  which  temptation  is  infinitely  more  fierce  and 
daring,  more  urgent  and  impetuous,  than  at  other  times.     H.  By  what  means, 

HELPS,  AND  ADVANTAGES,  A  TEMPTATION  ATTAINS   ITS  PROPER  SEASON   OR   HOUR.       1.   For 

that  which  is  most  remote,  but  yet  the  very  source  of  all  the  mischief  which  the 
devil  either  does  or  can  do  to  the  souls  of  men ;  namely,  that  original,  universal 
corruption  of  man's  nature,  containing  in  it  the  seeds  and  first  principles  of  all  sins 
whatsoever,  and  more  or  less  disposing  a  man  to  the  commission  of  them.  For  it 
is  this  which  administers  the  first  materials  for  the  tempter  to  work  upon,  and 
without  which  it  is  certain  that  he  could  do  nothing.  2.  The  next  advantage  is 
from  that  particular  corruption,  or  sort  of  sin,  which  a  man  is  most  peculiarly  prone 
and  inclined  to.  3.  A  third  advantage  towards  the  prevailing  hour  of  a  temptation, 
is  the  continual  offer  of  alluring  objects  and  occasions  extremely  agreeable  to  a 
man's  particular  corruption.  4.  The  fourth  advantage,  or  furtherance  towards  the 
maturity  or  prevalent  season  of  a  temptation :  which  is  the  unspeakable  malice  and 
activity,  together  with  the  incredible  skill  and  boldness  of  the  tempter.  5.  Over 
and  above  all  this,  God  sometimes,  in  his  wise  providence  and  just  judgment, 
commissions  this  implacable  spirit  to  tempt  at  a  rate  more  than  ordinary.  And  this 
must  needs  be  a  further  advantage  towards  the  ripening  of  a  temptation  than  any 
of  the  former.  6.  A  sixth  advantage,  by  which  a  temptation  approaches  to  its 
crisis  or  proper  hour,  is  a  previous,  growing  familiarity  of  the  mind  with  the  sin 
which  a  man  is  tempted  to ;  whereby  he  comes  to  think  of  it  with  still  lesser  and 
lesser  abhorrences,  than  formerly  he  was  wont  to  do.  7.  There  is  yet  another  way 
by  which  a  temptation  arrives  to  its  highest  pitch  or  proper  hour ;  and  that  is  by  a 
long  train  of  gradual,  imperceivable  encroaches  of  the  flesh  upon  the  spirit.    III.  Some 

SIGNS,  MARKS,  AND   DIAGNOSTICS,  WHEREBY   WE   MAY  DISCERN   WHEN   A   TEMPTATION   HAS 

ATTAINED  ITS  PROPER  SEASON  OR  HOUR.  1.  When  there  is  a  strange,  peculiar,  and 
more  than  usual  juncture  and  concurrence  of  all  circumstances  and  opportunities 
for  the  commission  of  any  sin,  that  especially  which  a  man  is  most  inclined  to ; 
then,  no  doubt,  is  the  hour  of  temptation.  2.  A  second  sign  of  a  temptation's 
drawing  near  its  hour  is  a  strange  averseness  to  duty,  and  a  backwardness  to,  if 
not  a  neglect  of,  the  spiritual  exercises  of  prayer,  reading,  and  meditation.  Now  as 
every  principle  of  life  has  some  suitable  aliment  or  provision,  by  which  both  its 
being  is  continued  and  its  strength  supported :  so  the  forementioned  duties  are  the 
real  proper  nutriment  by  which  the  spiritual  life  is  kept  up  and  maintained  in  the 
vigorous  exercise  of  its  vital  powers.  3.  The  third  sign  that  I  shall  mention  of  a 
temptation's  attaining  its  full  hour  or  maturity,  is  a  more  than  usual  restlessness 
and  importunity  in  its  enticings  or  instigations.  For  it  is  the  tempter's  last  assault, 
and  therefore  will  certainly  be  furious ;  the  last  pass  which  he  makes  at  the  soul, 
and  therefore  will  be  sure  to  be  driven  home.  Inferences  :  1.  That  every  time  in 
which  a  man  is  tempted  is  not  properly  the  hour  of  temptation.  2.  That  every 
man  living,  some  time  or  other,  sooner  or  later,  shall  assuredly  meet  with  an  hour 
of  temptation  ;  a  certain  critical  hour,  which  shall  more  especially  try  what  mettle 
his  heart  is  made  of,  and  in  which  the  eternal  concerns  of  his  soul  shall  more 
particularly  lie  at  stake.  3.  That  the  surest  way  to  carry  us  safe  and  successful 
through  this  great  and  searching  hour  of  probation,  is  a  strict,  steady,  conscientious 
living  up  to  the  rules  of  our  religion,  which  the  text  here  calls  a  "  keeping  the  word 
of  Christ's  patience;  "  a  denomination  given  to  the  gospel,  from  that  peculiar 
distinguishing  grace  which  the  great  author  of  the  gospel  was  pleased  to  signalise  it 


CHAP,  ra.]  REVELATION. 


for,  above  all  other  religions  and  institutions  in  the  world,  and  that  both  by  his 
precept  and  example.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Keeping  and  kept: — We  are  not  to 
suppose  that  these  good  souls  in  Philadelphia  lived  angelic  lives  of  unbroken 
holiness  because  Jesus  Christ  has  nothing  but  praise  for  them.  Eather  we  are  to 
learn  the  great  thought  that,  in  all  our  poor,  stained  service.  He  recognises  the 
central  motive  and  main  drift,  and,  accepting  these,  is  glad  when  He  can  commend. 
I.  The  thing  kept.  This  expression,  "  the  word  of  My  patience,"  refers,  not  to 
individual  commandments  to  patience,  but  to  the  entire  gospel  message  to  men. 
What  does  the  New  Testament  mean  by  "  patience "  ?  Not  merely  endurance, 
although,  of  course,  that  is  included,  but  endurance  of  such  a  sort  as  will  secure 
persistence  in  work,  in  spite  of  all  the  opposition  and  sufferings  which  may  come  in 
the  way.  The  man  who  will  reach  his  hand  through  the  smoke  of  hell  to  lay  hold 
of  plain  duty  is  the  patient  man  of  the  New  Testament.  II.  The  keepers  of  this 
WORD.  The  metaphor  represents  to  us  the  action  of  one  who,  possessing  some 
valuable  thing,  puts  it  into  some  safe  place,  takes  great  care  of  it,  and  watches 
tenderly  and  jealously  over  it  So  "  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  My  patience." 
There  are  two  ways  by  which  Christians  are  to  do  that ;  the  one  is  by  inwardly 
cherishing  the  word,  and  the  other  by  outwardly  obeying  it.  Let  me  say  a  word 
about  each  of  these  two  things.  I  am  afraid  that  the  plain  practical  duty  of 
reading  their  Bibles  is  getting  to  be  a  much  neglected  duty  amongst  professing 
Christian  people.  I  do  not  know  how  you  are  to  keep  the  word  of  Christ's  patience 
in  your  hearts  and  minds  if  you  do  not  read  them.  There  never  was,  and  there 
never  will  be,  vigorous  Christian  life  unless  there  be  an  honest  and  habitual  study 
of  God's  word.  The  trees  whose  roots  are  laved  and  branches  freshened  by  that 
river  have  leaves  that  never  wither,  and  all  their  blossoms  set.  But  the  word  is 
kept  by  continual  obedience  in  action  as  well  as  by  inward  treasuring.  Obviously 
the  inward  must  precede  the  outward.  Unless  we  can  say  with  the  Psalmist,  "  Thy 
word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart,"  we  shall  not  be  able  to  say  with  him,  "  I  have  not 
hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart."  III.  Christ  keeping  the  keepers  or  His 
WORD.  There  is  a  beautiful  reciprocity.  Christ  will  do  for  us  as  we  have  done 
with  His  word.  Christ  stUl  does  in  heaven  what  He  did  upon  earth.  Christ  in 
heaven  is  as  near  each  trembling  heart  and  feeble  foot,  to  defend  and  to  uphold, 
as  was  Christ  upon  earth.  He  does  not  promise  to  keep  us  at  a  distance  from 
temptation,  so  as  that  we  shall  not  have  to  face  it,  but  from  means,  as  any  that  can 
look  at  the  original  will  see,  that  He  will  "  save  us  out  of  it,"  we  having  previously 
been  in  it,  so  as  that  "the  hour  of  temptation"  shall  not  be  the  hour  of  falling. 
The  lustre  of  earthly  brightnesses  will  have  no  glory  by  reason  of  the  glory  that 
excelleth,  and,  when  set  by  the  side  of  heavenly  gifts,  will  show  black  against  their 
radiance,  as  would  electric  light  between  the  eye  and  the  sun.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Temptation  consolidates  character : — When  a  hard  winter  sets  in,  and  the  earth  is 
covered  with  a  mantle  of  snow,  and  each  little  knot  and  spray  in  the  hedgerow  is 
encrusted  with  icicles,  vegetation  seems  to  be  killed,  and  every  green  thing  blighted. 
But  it  is  not  so.  The  genial  forces  of  the  earth  are  driven  inward  and  work  deep  in 
her  bosom.  The  snow  mantle  is  doing  for  her  what  the  fur  mantle  does  for  the  human 
frame — concentrating  and  preserving  the  vital  heat  within.  So  it  is  in  temptation ; 
the  time  of  temptation  is  a  cheerless  and  dreary  hour,  when  everything  seems  at  a 
standstill,  and  the  spiritual  pulse  can  no  longer  be  felt,  it  beats  so  faintly  to  the 
outward  touch  ;  but  if  the  will  is  faithful  and  true,  and  the  soul  patient,  the  life  ia 
really  concentrating  itself,  and  rallying  its  forces  within.  .  .  .  There  have  been 
moderate  Christians,  there  have  been  shallow  Christians,  without  very  much 
temptation  ;  but  there  never  yet  was  a  saintly  Christian,  never  yet  one  who  pressed 
to  the  higher  summits  of  the  spiritual  life,  never  one  whose  banner  bore  the  strange 
device  "Excelsior,"  who  was  not  made  the  victim  of  manifold  temptations.  {Dean 
Goulburn.)  Times  of  trial : — Times  of  general  calamity  and  confusion  have  ever 
been  productive  of  the  greatest  minds.  The  purest  ore  is  produced  from  the 
hottest  furnace,  and  the  brightest  thunderbolt  is  elicited  from  the  darkest  storm. 
(0.  Colton.) 

Ver.  11.  Behold,  I  come  quickly. — The  coming  of  Christ : — It  is  not  improbable 
that  this  bishop  was  no  other  than  the  Demetrius  who  is  mentioned  in  St.  John's 
Jiird  Epistle  as  having  a  "  good  report  of  all  men  and  of  the  truth  itself,"  and  if 
this  is  the  case  we  have  before  us  a  holy  man  who,  probably,  was  not  a  very  resolute 
one,  and  was  placed  in  a  position  of  much  difficulty.  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly." 
If  our  Lord's  words  are  understood  of  His  second  coming,  it  is  obvious  to  reflect 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

that  the  good  Bishop  of  Philadelphia  died  without  witnessing  their  fulfilment. 
Nay,  he  has  been  in  his  grave  something  like  eighteen  centuries,  and  our  Lord  has 
not  yet  come  to  judgment.  Man  sees  only  a  little  distance,  and  he  is  impatient, 
because  his  outlook  is  so  limited  ;  to  him  it  seems  that  an  event  will  never  arrive, 
if  it  has  been  delayed  for  some  centuries,  and  so  the  judgment  long  apprehended, 
and  also,  perhaps,  through  a  series  of  years  long  delayed,  will  not  really  take  place 
at  all,  but  may  at  once  be  classed  among  the  phantoms  of  a  morbid  and  disordered 
brain.  With  God  it  is  altogether  otherwise,  long  and  short  periods  of  time  do  not 
mean  to  Him  what  they  mean  to  us.  We  see  this  truth  more  clearly  if  we  reflect 
that  to  us  men  the  passage  of  time  seems  slow  or  rapid,  its  periods  seem  long  or 
short  according  to  our  varying  moods  and  tempers.  When  we  are  suffering  acute 
pain  of  body  or  very  great  anxiety  of  mind  time  hangs  heavily.  We  seem  to  extend 
the  duration  of  time  by  the  sufiering  that  we  compress  into  its  constituent  moments. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  when  we  are  experiencing  great  pleasure,  whether  of  mind 
or  body,  we  become  almost  or  entirely  insensible  to  the  flight  of  time,  and  from  this 
we  may  understand  how  one  being,  who  is  the  fountain  of  all  goodness,  because  He 
is  in  Himself  infinitely  blessed,  blessed  in  contemplating  His  own  perfections, 
blessed  in  surveying  the  works  which  His  hands  have  made,  would  be,  as  such, 
insensible  to  the  impression  of  time.  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  The  Bishop  of 
Philadelphia,  Demetrius,  probably  felt  that,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  these 
words  received  their  fulfilment  when,  his  pastoral  labours  being  completed,  he  laid 
himself  down  to  die.  In  death  our  Lord  comes  to  each  of  us.  He  comes  in  mercy 
or  in  judgment  to  bring  the  present  state  of  existence  to  an  end,  to  open  out  upon 
us  another.  There  are  two  things  about  death  which  are  full  of  meaning,  and 
which  do  not  admit  of  any  sort  of  contradiction.  The  first  is  the  certainty  that  it 
will  come  to  each  of  us  some  day,  and  the  second  is  the  utter  uncertainty  of  the 
day  at  which  it  will  come.  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  The  expected  coming  of 
Christ  throws  a  flood  of  light  on  the  various  aspects  of  existence.  We  are  struck, 
perhaps,  with  the  insignificance  of  life.  Even  when  man  is  in  possession  of  all 
his  faculties  of  mind  and  body  he  is  often  obliged  to  pass  his  life  in  occupations 
which  are  at  once  exacting  and  mechanical — occupations  which  make  scarcely  any 
demand  upon  the  mind  beyond  that  of  attention  to  the  movement  of  the  feet  or 
of  the  fingers ;  occupations  which  might  almost  or  altogether  be  discharged  by 
machinery,  and  which,  taken  by  themselves,  appear  unworthy  of  a  being  capable 
of  comprehending  truth,  capable  of  growing  in  the  comprehension  of  it,  capable  of 
enjoying  a  happiness  proportionate  to  his  vast  desires.  "Behold,  I  come  quickly." 
If  Christ's  coming  means  anything,  it  means  the  introduction  of  a  life  which  has  no 
end ;  it  means,  for  all  who  will,  succession  of  the  inheritance  incorruptible,  unde- 
filed,  and  that  fadeth  not  away.  The  coming  of  our  Lord  means  that  all  the 
wrong-doing  and  the  passions  of  man  which  create  so  much  misery  will  have  had 
their  day ;  it  means  an  entrance,  actual  or  possible,  upon  a  stage  of  existence  in 
which  there  will  be  no  sorrow  nor  crying ;  it  means  the  exercise  of  man's  higher 
powers  to  that  fullest  extent  of  their  capacity — the  beginning  of  an  existence  in 
which  thought  and  heart  and  will  will  rest  in  perfectly  ecstatic  satisfaction  on  their 
one  true  object,  and  an  existence  which  will  last  for  ever.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown.— Hold  fast  : — 

I.  We  ake  already  in  possession  of  a  great  property.  "  That  which  thou  hast." 
As  Christians,  we  are  not  only  striving  to  gain,  but  also  striving  to  keep  '*  that 
which  we  have."      That  is  the  gospel,  salvation,  Christ,  and  heaven  in  Him. 

II.  The  holding  fast  of  that  which  we  have.  1.  "That  which  we  have"  is 
contemplated  more  in  the  light  of  a  trust  than  of  a  privilege.  2.  Of  course,  this  whole 
injunction  implies  the  presence  of  opposition,  making  this  a  matter  of  difficulty. 
A  Christian  holding  fast  against  the  world,  its  spirit,  and  way,  is  like  a  man  pulling 
a  boat  up-stream,  when  the  waters  are  deep  and  the  current  strong.  Whether  in 
the  boat  or  on  the  bank,  pulling  by  a  rope,  he  needs  to  pull  always — a  strong, 
steady,  constant  pull — that  is  it !  He  meets  a  great  many  people  coming  down 
stream  ;  and  they  do  not  need  to  pull  much— a  touch  of  the  helm  now  and  again, 
and  a  dip  of  the  oar  is  all  that  they  need.  Sometimes  a  Christian  is  discouraged 
by  observing  that  so  many  more  seem  to  be  going  with  the  stream  than  seem  to  be 
going  against  it.  He  may  be  in  a  great  measure  mistaken  in  this.  Christians 
Sometimes  have  a  feeling  of  loneliness.  It  seems  as  if  all  the  world  were  against 
them.  "Hold  f  ast ! "  you  are  not  so  solitary  as  you  imagine.  III.  Thy  crown. 
Every  duty  has  a  crown  when  it  is  weU  done,  and  every  affliction  patiently  borne, 
and  every  day  well  spent,  and  every  year  well  lived  through,  a  crown  which  hangs 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  225 

trembling  on  its  last  hour.  There  is  a  sense,  too,  in  which  one  man  can  take  the 
crown  of  another  in  daily  life.  To  put  the  matter  plainly :  if  any  of  us  shall  be 
blind  or  heedless  before  the  face  of  rich  opportunity — if  we  shall  hear,  without 
hearing,  the  Master  say,  "  Behold,  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,"  and  if 
another,  listening,  catch  the  Master's  words  and  enter  in,  that  man  "takes  our 
crown."  He  is  no  richer,  for  the  faithfulness  that  has  proved  itself  here  would 
have  proved  itself  somewhere  else,  and  in  some  other  service ;  but  we  are  the 
poorer — we  have  lost  that  little  crown.  And  to  lose  many  of  these  lesser 
crowns  will  diminish  the  lustre,  if  indeed  it  do  not  also  affect  the  security 
of  the  great  final  crown.  ,  IV.  Behold  He  comes  quickly.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
Hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast : — Those  who  are  overtaken  by  spiritual  bankruptcy 
and  ruin  are  probably  often  very  much  surprised  by  such  a  result  befalling  them. 
Every  one  who  has  ever  had  spiritual  treasures  is  tempted  to  think  that  his  spiritual 
treasure  must  be  secure.  Every  one  who  has  had  a  religious  reputation  is  apt  to 
think  that  such  a  reputation  is  abiding.     I.  The  capacity  of  religious  feeling  and 

EFFORT,  LIKE  ALL  OTHER  POWERS  OF  THE  SOUL,  DIES  OUT  FOR  WANT  OF  USE.   There  is  a 

tendency  to  believe  that  because  we  could  once  do  a  thing,  or  understand  a  thing, 
the  power  or  capacity  must  remain,  although  for  years  we  have  been  out  of  practice. 
"Oh  yes,  of  course,  I  can  do  that;  I  have  done  it  often."  How  frequently  you 
have  heard  a  man  say  that,  and  then,  after  a  desperate,  pitiful  struggle,  he  has  to 
give  it  up  and  admit  his  failure.  A  man  has  been  an  expert  in  rowing,  or 
running,  or  climbing.  Mature  years  are  upon  him  now,  but  he  laughs  at  the 
suggestion  that  his  lungs  are  not  still  as  strong  and  his  arms  as  muscular  as  ever. 
He  makes  a  severe  drain  some  day  on  his  bodily  strength,  and  finds  to  his  surprise 
and  vexation  that  the  nervous  force  is  giving  out  long  ere  the  day's  work  is  done. 
Or  we  once  knew  a  foreign  language.  We  fancy  it  must  still  flow  to  our  tongue  as 
easily  as  ever.  We  are  suddenly  called  upon  to  use  it,  and  are  chagrined  to  find 
that  the  words  will  not  come  at  our  bidding.  Now,  what  is  true  of  our  physical  and 
of  our  intellectual  nature  is  quite  as  profoundly  and  terribly  true  of  our  spiritual 
nature.  There  are  organs  by  which  we  live  to  God,  and  these,  if  they  get  no 
exercise,  decay.  The  practice  of  ten  years  ago  does  not  secure  their  existence  and 
activity  now.  Their  present  existence  depends  upon  their  present  use ;  but  once 
they  have  declined,  all  that  province  of  our  nature  becomes  incapable  of  impression 
and  feeling,  just  as  to  the  unintellectual  man.  Shakespeare  has  no  more  signifi- 
cance than  a  daily  newspaper.  The  inner  eye  loses  its  faculty  of  discerning 
spiritual  things  ;  and  yet  the  tongue  may  go  on  talking  of  them  as  fluently,  perhaps 
even  more  fluently  than  ever.  Others  will  very  likely  detect  the  change.  For  if  a 
man  attempts  to  describe  what  he  has  never  seen,  or  gives  merely  the  loose 
recollection  of  ten  or  twenty  years  ago,  an  intelligent  listener  will  soon  find  out 
something  amiss.  But  the  man  himself  thinks  it  is  all  as  it  should  be.  He  knows 
the  expressions  about  revealed  truth  as  well  as  before.  Perhaps  he  is  even  a  trifle 
more  orthodox  than  he  was  before ;  but  for  all  that  the  spiritual  faculty  may  be 
gone,  perhaps  for  ever.  Let  us  apply  some  tests  to  ascertain  our  spiritual  vitality, 
the  keenness  of  our  spiritual  vision.  Your  nature  is  perhaps  active  enough  on  some 
sides.  You  are  not  suffering  from  intellectual  or  emotional  lethargy.  Your  wants 
and  desires  have  multiplied  in  number  ;  but  are  they  as  baptized  with  the  Christian 
baptism  as  they  were  ten  years  ago  ?  You  have  acquired  means,  you  have  greatly 
increased  your  resources  ;  but  is  there  as  much  of  the  gold  of  the  kingdom,  of  the 
treasure  of  heaven  there?  There  are  wide  harvests  of  the  heart  waving  from 
carefully  sown  seed ;  but  are  you  sure  their  roots  would  not  be  as  rottenness,  and 
their  blossomings-up  as  the  dust,  if  the  fiery  winds  of  God  began  to  blow  across 
them  ?  In  the  remote  recesses  of  the  soul,  in  its  hidden  depths,  what  response  are 
you  making  now  to  spiritual  appeals  and  promptings  ?  Is  there  a  deep  under- 
current of  your  life  setting  towards  Christ  ?  II.  We  are  not  at  all  so  necessary 
TO  God,  so  essential  for  His  purposes,  as  we  sometimes  think  we  are.  We  can 
be  useful  to  God,  helpful  in  carrying  out  His  purposes.  It  is  right  that  the  ambition 
of  being  a  fellow- worker  with  God  should  stir  a  man.  One  of  the  grandest  features 
in  the  character  of  the  Puritans  was  that  they  learned  thus  to  regard  themselves, 
unreservedly.  We  may  not  use  precisely  the  same  phrases,  or  give  exactly  the 
same  colour  and  form  to  our  thinking.  It  is  in  some  respects  better  that  we  should 
not,  but  it  is  as  possible  now  as  then  to  be  representatives  of  God's  cause,  fighters 
for  God,  enthusiasts,  zealots  in  His  behalf ;  to  have  our  joys  and  sorrows  completely 
wrapt  up  with  His  joys  and  sorrows.  It  is  as  possible  and  as  blessed.  But  close 
behind  this  spiritual  attiiude  lies  a  subtle  temptation.    It  lurks  even  in  that  extreme 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

doctrine  of  predestination  in  which  the  Puritans  found  so  much  support  and 
consolation.  When  fighting  God's  battles  amid  discouragement  and  failure  of 
hope,  against  great  odds,  they  comforted  themselves  with  the  thought  that  they 
were  safe  in  God's  hands  ;  that  their  salvation  and  ultimate  triumph  were 
guaranteed  by  a  Divine  decree.  This  decree  was  irreversible,  they  felt  and  said, 
and  in  its  absolute  certainty  they  gloried.  But  you  see  how  dangerous  this  position 
may  become.  So  long  as  we  are  certain  that  our  heart  is  beating  with  God's,  our 
souls  yearning  for  His  righteousness,  our  hands  busy  about  His  work,  we  are  right 
to  comfort  ourselves  with  the  thought  of  the  Divine  decree,  and  to  take  for  granted 
that  it  is  in  our  favour.  But  the  attitude  may  change,  and  the  old  idea  remain. 
We  are  far  too  inclined  to  take  for  granted  that  we  must  be  on  God's  side — that 
His  decree  must  be  in  our  favour.  Do  we  suppose  that  God  has  special  favourites 
— that  He  is  a  respecter  of  persons  ?  What  is  there  in  us,  apart  from  His  grace, 
which  makes  us  specially  attractive  or  necessary  ?  The  history  of  Christ's  Church 
is  one  long  tale  of  gifts  forfeited  and  privileges  transferred.  The  crown  is  not  lost, 
but  with  a  httle  alteration  it  is  made  to  fit  another's  brow.  The  talent  is  not 
melted  down ;  it  becomes  another  man's.  There  is  no  empty  space  either  in  the 
arena  of  conflict  below  or  in  the  place  of  victory  and  banqueting  above,  HE. 
Salvation  and  ultimate  kewabd  depend  entirely  on  faithfulness  to  present 
LIGHT  AND  STEADFASTNESS  IN  PRESENT  DUTY.  Our  crowns  are  being  shaped  by  our 
present  efforts  and  prayers  and  sacrifices.  We  are  like  men  moulding  in  clay. 
God  pours  in  gold  and  brings  the  crowns  out  in  gold.  The  crowns  will  be  out  of 
proportion  to  our  deserts,  yet  will  bear  the  impress  of  our  personality.  Each  of 
Christ's  disciples  has  something — some  attainment,  some  experience,  it  does  not 
matter  how  humble.  Whatever  be  his  ultimate  salvation  and  reward,  his  crown 
depends  on  his  holding  it.  You  have  learnt,  perhaps,  some  rudiment  of  Christian 
faith — as,  for  example,  that  you  cannot  keep  your  own  feet  when  the  enemy  assails ; 
and  you  have  learnt  when  you  feel  your  own  weakness  to  cry  out  to  God.  Well, 
that  is  not  much,  but  it  is  something.  "  Hold  that  fast."  You  have  perhaps  got 
further — acquired  some  deeper  laws  of  the  Christian  life.  You  have  found  that  the 
soul  grows  by  giving.  You  have  tasted  the  strange,  Christlike  sweetness  of  doing 
good  ;  the  new  strength  won  by  bold  witness-bearing.  "  Hold  that  fast."  Or  you 
have  found  out  that,  however  it  may  be  with  others,  there  are  certain  assaults  of 
evil  which  have  for  you  a  special  danger  ;  certain  places  and  atmospheres  peculiarly 
perilous  ;  a  certain  set  of  truths  on  which  your  soul  must  feed.  It  is  much  to  have 
found  out  what  these  are.  "  Hold  that  fast."  Don't  think  it  a  small  thing  merely 
to  hold  what  you  have.  Don't  think  it  always  necessary  to  be  opening  your  hands 
and  grasping  at  more,  sometimes,  in  your  eagerness,  dropping  what  you  were 
holding.  It  is  well  to  think  and  speak  of  progress,  but  let  your  edifying,  your 
building  up,  be  done  carefully ;  see  that  the  new  stones  lie  evenly  on  the  top  of  the 
old.  Permanence  in  spiritual  things  is  as  important  as  progress,  and  a  permanence 
that  is  essential  is  sometimes  sacrificed  to  a  progress  that  is  not  essential.  Let 
us  make  sure  that  we  are  husbanding  what  we  have  won.  To  gather  up,  to  retain, 
to  make  use  of  all  the  wisdom  we  have  ever  got  from  God ;  never  to  fall  behind 
the  best  epochs  of  our  former  spiritual  selves — if  we  do  this  we  shall  not  fall.  {John 
F.  Ewing,  M.A.)  Soul-tenacity  : — I.  The  things  of  which  the  soul  is  to  be 
TENACIOUS.  The  soul  of  man  is  not  to  be  tenacious  of  riches,  of  fame,  or  of  the 
things  of  this  life ;  these  it  cannot  long  retain  in  its  grasp.  1.  It  must  hold  fast 
the  truths  of  the  Bible.  2.  It  must  hold  fast  the  reality  of  the  Christian  character. 
3.  It  must  hold  fast  the  determination  of  the  Christian  life.  The  tenacity  of  the 
soul  must  be  brave ;  it  must  be  meek  ;  it  must  be  wise  ;  it  must  be  prayerful ;  and 
it  must  be  hopeful  of  the  end.  II.  The  reason  why  the  soul  should  be  tenacious 
of  these  things.  1.  Because  they  are  valuable.  2.  Because  they  are  threatened 
by  vigilant  enemies.  3.  Because  the  advent  of  Christ  is  near.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Fair  warning  : — I.  The  possession  implied.  "  That  which  thou  hast."  1.  If  un- 
saved, still  we  have — (1)  The  offer  of  salvation.  (2)  The  means  of  grace.  (8)  The  Bible. 
i4)  The  commanding  voice  of  conscience.  (5)  The  convictions  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
6)  The  precious,  ennobling  possibilities  of  a  blood-bought  probation.  2.  If  saved, 
we  have  all  these,  and — (1)  Saving  faith.  (2)  The  witness  of  the  Spirit.  (3)  God's 
approving  smile  and  fellowship.  (4)  Saintly  communion  and  fellowship.  (5)  Place 
among  the  people  of  God.  (6)  Hope  of  glory.  H.  The  duty  urged.  "  Hold  fast." 
1.  Do  it  publicly.  2.  Persistently.  3.  Fearlessly.  4.  Humbly.  5.  In  faith,  and 
humble  reliance  upon  Jesus  Christ.  6.  Do  it  in  self-defence.  "  That  no  man  take 
thy  crown."    HI.  The  motive  presented.    "Behold,  I  come  quickly."    1.  The 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  227 

majesty  and  power  of  the  person  coming.  "  I."  Describe  him :  (1)  His  pre-incarnate 
glory.  (2)  His  humiliation  and  sacrifice.  (3)  His  mediatorial  glory  and  coming 
to  judgment.  2.  The  solemnity  of  the  event.  "  I  come."  3.  The  impressive 
manner  of  His  approach.  "Quickly."  4.  The  attention  the  subject  demands. 
"  Behold."  This  great  crisis  will  be  sprung  upon  no  man  unaware  or  unwarned. 
He  exhorts,  entreats,  warns,  so  that  all  may  be  ready  to  meet  Him  with  joy.  {T.  Kelly.) 
Perseverance  : — Those  who  are  sincere  Christians  ought  to  be  very  careful  that  they 
hold  fast  and  preserve  that  which  they  have.  You  must  by  no  means  abandon  the 
faith  and  truth  which  ye  once  espoused,  you  must  continue  in  grace  and  persist  in 
the  ways  of  virtue,  through  all  opposition.  A  Christian  ought  to  strive  and  endeavour 
for  final  holiness.  He  must  persevere  not  only  in  the  profession  of  all  Divine  truths, 
but  in  the  performance  of  all  the  duties  which  are  enjoined  by  the  Christian  reli- 
gion. I.  On  what  accounts  we  are  obliged  to  be  careful  that  we  persevebb 
IN  TRUTH  AND  GODLINESS.  1.  As  to  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  persevering,  it 
were  enough  to  say  that  this  is  that  which  will  give  us  an  assurance  of  the  sincerity 
of  our  hearts,  and  of  the  reahty  of  our  holiness.  Many  men's  beginnings  are 
tolerably  good,  but  they  grow  worse  afterwards,  and  their  end  is  worst  of  all.  There- 
fore it  is  the  conclusion  that  must  be  the  trial  of  men.  Next,  I  will  show  the 
advantage  of  this  admirable  gift  from  that  portion  of  Scripture  to  which  my  text 
belongs :  "  Thou  hast  kept  My  Word,  and  hast  not  denied  My  Name."  Now,  observe 
what  are  the  advantages.  "  Behold,  I  will  make  them  of  the  Synagogue  of  Satan,  to 
come  and  worship  before  thy  feet,  and  to  know  that  I  have  loved  thee,"  i.e.,  I  will 
make  heretics,  apostates,  and  false  brethren  ashamed  :  they  shaU  at  last  be  forced 
to  condemn  their  own  hypocrisy  and  apostasy,  and  to  reverence  that  sincerity  and 
uprightness  which  appear  in  the  lives  of  those  holy  men  whom  no  temptations 
could  withdraw  from  their  duty,  but  who  in  all  seasons  held  fast  their  integrity.  It 
follows,  ver.  10.  "Because  thou  hast  kept  the  Word  of  My  patience,  I  also  will  keep," 
&c.  Here  is  another  benefit  of  perseverance,  namely,  God  keeps  those  who  keep  His 
Word,  who  continue  in  it,  and  forsake  not  the  profession  and  practice  of  it.  Such 
persons  shall  be  kept  in  an  hour  of  temptation,  i.«.,  in  a  remarkable  time  of  distress. 
And  He  adds,  "That  no  man  take  thy  crown":  where,  according  to  the  different  sense 
of  this  clause,  there  is  a  double  reason  suggested,  that  we  should  not  apostatise 
from  the  ways  of  God.  If  by  crown  be  meant  religion  itself,  then  we  have  reason  to 
hold  it  fast,  because  it  is  a  thing  of  so  excellent  a  nature.  It  is  our  crown,  our 
dignity,  our  glory.  Or,  we  may  understand  this  of  the  crown  of  perseverance,  and 
then  the  sense  may  be  this.  Hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  continue  so  steadfast  in 
your  religion  and  in  your  duty  that  no  man  may  be  able  to  take  your  crown  from 
you,  i.e.,  to  rob  you  of  your  constancy  and  perseverance,  for  these  are  the  crown  of 
a  Christian.  Ajid  they  are  called  so  because  they  are  the  consummating  of  all, 
according  to  that  known  maxim,  the  end  crowns  the  work,  i.e.,  accompUsheth  the 
whole  enterprise.  Again,  perseverance  is  deservedly  called  a  crown,  because  it  is 
this  which  entitles  you  to  a  crown  of  glory.  It  is  in  vain  that  we  set  out  well  at 
first,  and  run  swiftly,  if  we  reach  not  the  end  of  the  race,  and  come  up  to  the 
very  goal.  This  may  convince  you  of  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  this  duty. 
So  that  I  need  not  insist  much  on  the  evil  of  apostasy.  Apostasy  is  near  akm 
to  the  unpardonable  sin  (Matt.  v.  13).  This  doctrine  condemns  the  apostasy 
of  these  times  we  live  in.  II.  The  most  effectual  helps  to  perseverance,  and 
THE  most  sovereign  ANTIDOTES  AGAINST  APOSTASY.  1.  The  first  effectual  help  is 
serious  deliberation  and  choice.  For  it  is  certain  that  this  is  one  cause  of  apostasy 
that  men  do  not  sit  down  and  consider  before  they  enter  into  religion.  They  take 
up  the  principles  and  practice  of  religion  too  hastily ;  and  so  it  is  no  wonder  that 
as  they  rashly  took  them  up,  they  as  suddenly  lay  them  down.  The  old  aphorism  is 
true  here,  "  Nothing  that  is  violent  lasts  long."  Force  a  stone  upwards  with  never  so 
great  strength,  yet  you  shall  soon  see  it  fall  down  again.  And  to  this  purpose 
furnish  yourselves  with  a  sufficient  stock  of  knowledge ;  for  this  will  help  to  preserve 
you  from  falling  away  (Prov.  ii.  11,  12).  They  are  the  ignorant  and  novices  that 
usually  leave  the  paths  of  uprightness.  Let  religion  be  founded  in  serious  considera- 
tion and  choice,  and  then  you  will  not  bid  farewell  to  it  in  evil  times,  when  you 
come  to  be  tried ;  then  you  will  not  shrink  and  fall  back,  and,  like  ill-built  ships, 
sink  in  the  launching.  2.  That  you  may  do  so,  carefully  look  to  your  heart,  for 
thence  is  the  rise  of  all  your  backsUding.  What  you  can  do  in  religion,  though  it 
be  never  so  weak  and  mean,  do  it  heartily.  3.  That  you  may  hold  fast  that  which 
you  have,  and  not  revolt  from  God  and  His  ways,  see  that  you  be  very  humble. 
Unless  you  lay  your  foundation  low,  your  fabric  will  not  stand  long.     4.   To 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

humility  you  must  not  forget  to  join  fearfulness,  according  to  that  of  the  apostle, 
"  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  I  do  not  speak  of  such  a  fear  as  is  accompanied  with 
cowardice ;  but  such  a  religious  awe  upon  our  minds,  whereby  we  are  sensible  of 
our  own  inability  to  stand,  and  therefore  we  are  wary  and  cautious.  5.  Are  you 
desirous  to  persevere,  and  continue  to  the  end  in  the  ways  of  fruth  and  holiness  ? 
Then  see  that  your  affections  be  not  immoderately  carried  out  towards  this  world. 
6.  That  you  may  not  be  of  this  number,  fix  and  establish  yourselves  by  faith.  "  Thou 
standest  by  faith,"  saith  the  apostle  (Eom.  xi.  12).  This  grace  is  an  establishing, 
confirming,  strengthening  grace ;  ana  as  long  as  we  maintain  this,  we  shall  never 
fall  away.  But  on  the  contrary,  know  this — that  unbehef  is  one  grand  cause  of 
apostasy — which  was  the  occasion  of  that  caution  given  in  Heb.  iii.  12.  Such  as 
your  faith  is,  such  is  your  fortitude  ;  therefore  endeavour  to  attain  great  measures 
of  this,  that  you  may  with  undaunted  valour  withstand  the  temptations  of  the  evil 
spirit,  and  keep  your  station  when  he  is  most  desirous  to  put  you  to  flight.  Cleave 
to  the  Kock  of  Ages,  and  you  shall  stand  immovable ;  rely  on  Him,  and  you  shall  be 
upheld  ;  depend  on  His  promises,  and  you  shall  never  fall.  7.  That  you  may  never 
turn  apostates,  entertain  a  love  of  God  and  goodness  in  your  breasts.  Love 
as  well  as  faith  is  an  establishing  grace.  Therefore  St.  Jude  had  reason  to  speak 
thus  to  the  Christians  of  his  days  (ver.  28),  ''Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  If 
they  would  be  steadfast  in  their  religion,  they  must  embrace  it  out  of  love.  8.  In 
order  to  perseverance  be  careful  to  nourish  a  patient  and  resigning  temper  of  mind. 
9.  Grow  in  gi-ace,  strive  for  the  utmost  attainments  in  Christianity ;  for  this  like- 
wise is  an  approved  remedy  against  apostasy.  See  then  that  you  cast  off  aU  sloth- 
fulness,  and  remember  that  constant  endeavours  and  the  continual  exercise  of 
Christian  graces  are  the  conditions  of  perseverance.  Be  diligent,  then,  to  improve 
your  graces,  and  to  make  accessions  to  what  you  have.  10.  That  you  may  continue 
and  persevere  in  all  holiness,  take  care  that  those  means,  those  institutions,  those 
ordinances,  which  were  appointed  for  this  purpose,  be  not  neglected  by  you.  Lastly, 
Be  ever  watchful  and  circumspect,  if  you  would  hold  fast  what  you  have.  (j. 
Edwards.)  Hold  fast  thy  crown : — We  must  all  feel  that  to  •'  have,"  and  then  to 
"  lose,"  is  worse  than  never  to  have  "  had."  For  a  man  is  to  be  responsible — not 
according  to  what  he  is  to  be  found  having  at  the  last,  but  according  to  what  he 
once  possessed  and  the  capability  that  possession  gave  him  of  possessing  much 
more.  But  then  you  must  remem"ber  what  is  the  Bible  sense  of  that  word  to  "  have." 
To  "have"  is  to  "hold"  anything  that  so  you  can  and  do  use  and  enjoy  it. 
First,  then,  there  are  stores  of  memory.  It  is  no  trifling  possession  to  have  pas- 
sages of  Scripture,  of  sacred  poetry,  of  holy  authors,  laid  up  in  the  mind.  Increase 
the  power  of  a  sacred  memory  by  always  adding  something  more  to  the  stock.  And 
never  forget  that  it  is  one  of  the  ofl&ces  and  prerogatives  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  assist 
and  to  empower  the  memory  in  Divine  things.  Secondly,  the  acquisition  of  a  new  truth, 
or  a  clearer  perception  of  any  truth,  is  a  very  real  and  very  delightful  possession.  But, 
if  you  would  "  hold  "  a  truth  "  fast  "  you  must  turn  that  truth  to  some  practical 
account,  for  God  is  very  jealous  that  His  truth  be  not  an  idle  thing  ;  you  must  make 
that  truth  a  centre,  round  which  you  are  always  gathering  another  and  another 
truth.  The;n  you  must  live  that  truth  inwardly  ;  and  then  you  must  live  that  truth 
outwardly.  You  must  live  it,  not  only  for  yourself  ;  but  you  must  live  it  for  others. 
You  must  glorify  God  in  it.  And  that  truth  will  abide ;  and  that  truth  will 
grow.  Thirdly,  you  have  enjoyed  the  things  of  God,  the  means  of  grace.  You  must 
be  coming  down  from  your  mount  to  the  plain — to  the  simple  duty  of  daily  life,  to 
do  that  duty  better  because  you  have  been  upon  the  mount.  Fourthly,  a  soft,  tender 
heart — feelings  much  drawn  out  in  strong  love  to  God  or  man — is  a  thing  greatly  to 
be  prized.  But  to  maintain  that  blessed  state  of  a  mental  affection,  it  is  necessary 
that  you  live  very  close  to  God.  The  wax  will  only  be  soft  if  it  is  kept  in  the 
sunshine.  Fifthly,  an  open  door  of  usefulness  is  an  exceeding  boon  when  God  gives 
it  to  a  man.  Have  you  it  ?  Sixthly,  to  some  of  you  it  has  been  given  to  know,  and 
not  to  doubt,  that  you  can  call  Christ  yours.  And  can  all  this  pass  away  ?  Yes,  it 
can.  If  that  light  go  out,  how  great  will  that  darkness  be !  It  all  depends  upon  the 
firmness  and  the  continuance  with  which  you  hold  it.  Therefore,  spend  life  in 
"  making  your  calling  and  election  sure."  Do  not  grieve,  by  small  resistances,  that 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you.  The  only  way  to  "  hold  fast,"  is  to  be  "  held  fast." 
Under  our  weak  hand,  God's  own  omnipotence  must  lie ;  and  we  must  be  appre- 
hended, that  we  may  apprehend.  {Jas.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Thy  crown  .-—I.  The 
CROWN  spoken  of  here  is  not  the  symbol  of  royalty,  but  the  floral  wreath  which  in 
ancient  social  life  played  many  parts :  was  laid  on  the  temples  of  the  victors  in  the 


CHAP,  ra.]  REVELATION.  229 

games,  was  wreathed  around  the  locks  of  the  conquering  general,  was  placed  upon 
the  anointed  heads  of  brides  and  of  f casters,  was  the  emblem  of  victory,  of  festivity, 
of  joy.  And  it  is  this  crown,  not  the  symbol  of  dominion,  but  the  symbol  of  a  race 
accomplished  and  a  conquest  won,  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  a  festal  day,  with 
all  its  abundance  and  ease  and  abandonment  to  delight,  which  the  apocalyptic 
vision  holds  out  before  the  Christian  man.  The  crown  is  spoken  about  under  three 
designations — as  a  crown  of  "  life,"  of  "  righteousness,"  of  "  glory."  The  crown  is 
the  reward  of  righteousness,  and  consists  of  life  so  full  that  our  present  experience 
contrasted  with  it  may  almost  be  called  an  experience  of  death ;  of  glory  so  flashing 
and  wonderful  that,  if  our  natures  were  not  strengthened,  it  would  be  an  "  exceeding 
weight  of  glory  "  that  would  crush  them  down,  and  upon  all  the  Hfe  and  all  the 
glory  is  stamped  the  solemn  signature  of  eternity,  and  they  are  for  ever.  Christian 
men,  it  much  concerns  the  vigour  of  your  Christianity  that  you  should  take  time 
and  pains  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  looking  forward  through  all  the  mists  of  this 
petty  present,  and  of  thinking  of  that  future  as  a  certainty  more  certain  than  the 
contingencies  of  earth,  and  as  a  present  possession,  more  real  by  far  than  any  of  the 
fleeting  shadows  which  we  proudly  and  falsely  call  our  own.  "  Thy  crown  "  will 
fit  no  temples  but  thine.  It  is  part  of  thy  perfected  self,  and  certain  to  be  thine,  if 
thou  hold  fast  the  beginning  of  thy  confidence  firm  unto  the  end.  II.  The  gbim 
POSSIBILITY  OF  LOSING  THE  CROWN.  "  That  uo  man  take  "  it.  Of  course  we  are  not 
to  misunderstand  the  contingency  shadowed  here  as  if  it  meant  that  some  other 
person  could  filch  away  and  put  on  his  own  head  the  crown  which  once  was  destined 
for  us,  which  is  a  sheer  impossibility  and  absurdity.  No  man  would  think  to  win 
heaven  by  stealing  another's  right  of  entrance  there.  No  man  could,  if  he  were  to 
try.  The  results  of  character  cannot  be  transferred.  Nor  are  we  to  suppose 
reference  to  the  machinations  of  tempters,  either  human  or  diabolic,  who  delibe- 
rately try  to  rob  Christians  of  their  religion  here,  and  thereby  of  their  reward  here- 
after. But  it  is  only  too  possible  that  men  and  things  round  about  us  may  upset 
this  certainty  that  we  have  been  considering,  and  that  though  the  crown  be  "thine," 
it  may  never  come  to  be  thy  actual  possession  in  the  future,  nor  ever  be  worn  upon 
thine  own  happy  head  in  the  festival  of  the  skies.  That  is  the  solemn  side  of  the 
Christian  life,  that  it  is  to  be  conceived  of  as  lived  amidst  a  multitude  of  men  and 
things  that  are  always  trying  to  make  us  unfit  to  receive  that  crown  of  righteousness. 
If  we  would  walk  through  life  with  this  thought  in  our  minds,  how  it  would  strip  off 
the  masks  of  all  these  temptations  that  buzz  about  us  !  III.  The  way  to  secure  the 
CROWN  WHICH  IS  OURS.  "  Hold  fast  that  thou  hast."  The  slack  hand  will  very  soon 
be  an  empty  hand.  Anybody  walking  through  the  midst  of  a  crowd  of  thieves  with 
a  bag  of  gold  in  charge  would  not  hold  it  dangling  from  a  finger-tip,  but  he  would  put 
all  five  round  it,  and  wrap  the  strings  about  his  wrist.  The  first  shape  which  we 
may  give  to  this  exhortation  is — hold  fast  by  what  God  has  given  in  His  gospel ; 
hold  fast  His  Son,  His  truth.  His  grace.  Use  honestly  and  diligently  your  intellect 
to  fathom  and  to  keep  firm  hold  of  the  great  truths  and  principles  of  the  gospel. 
Use  your  best  efforts  to  keep  your  wandering  hearts  and  mobile  wills  fixed  and  true 
to  the  revealed  love  of  the  great  Lover  of  souls,  which  has  been  given  to  you  in 
Christ,  and  to  obey  Him.  But  there  is  another  aspect  of  the  same  commandment 
which  applies  not  so  much  to  that  which  is  given  us  in  the  objective  revelation  and 
manifestation  of  God  in  Christ,  as  to  our  own  subjective  degrees  of  progress  in  the 
appropriation  of  Christ,  and  in  likeness  to  Him.  And  possibly  that  is  what  my  text 
more  especially  means,  for  just  a  little  before  the  Lord  has  said  to  that  Church, 
"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength,  and  hast  kept  My  word,  and  hast  not  denied  My 
name."  "  Thou  hast  a  little  strength  .  .  .  hold  fast  that  which  thou  hast."  See  to 
it  that  thy  present  attainment  in  the  Christian  life,  though  it  may  be  but  rudimen- 
tary, is  at  least  kept.  Cast  not  away  your  confidence,  hold  fast  the  beginning  of 
your  confidence  firm,  with  a  tightened  hand  unto  the  end.  For  if  we  keep  what  we 
have,  it  will  grow.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Graces  need  keeping  : — Where  we  are 
most  tempted,  know  that  there  is  some  special  grace  to  be  kept  or  lost.  A  thief  will 
not  hanker  after  an  empty  chest ;  but  if  he  knows  where  jewels  or  treasure  is,  he 
will  haunt  there.  {Jeremy  Taylor.)  Perseverance  : — No  grace,  not  even  the  most 
sparkling  and  shining,  can  bring  us  to  heaven  without  perseverance  in  following 
Christ ;  not  faith,  if  it  be  faint  and  frail ;  nor  love,  if  it  decUne  and  wax  cold ;  nor 
humility,  if  it  continue  not  to  the  end  ;  not  obedience,  not  repentance,  not  patience, 
no,  nor  any  other  grace,  except  they  have  their  perfect  work.  It  is  not  enough  to 
begin  well,  unless  we  end  well.     {T.  Brooks.) 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Yer.  12.    Him  that  oyercometli  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  My  God. — 
The  Philadelphian  conqueror  : — I.  The  conqueror  is  to  be  a  temple -pillar.    Not  an 
outside,  but  an  inside  pillar.     The  interior  colonnades  or  double  rows  of  tall  pillars 
in  some  churches  and  temples  are  splendid  beyond  description.     They  are  part  of 
the  vast  fabric ;  not  like  those  who  minister  there,  going  out  and  in,  but  standing 
immovable  in  their  surpassing  beauty.     Such  is  the  reward  of  the  Philadelphian 
conqueror.    An  everlasting  inhabitant  and  ornament  of  that  sanctuary  of  which  we 
read,  "  I  saw  no  temple  therein,"  &c.   They  shall  go  no  more  out !   Their  home  is  the 
innermost  shrine  in  the  heaven  of  heavens.    Like  Jachin  and  Boaz  (1  Kings  vii. 
15,  21),  there  they  stand  for  ever.    11    The  conqueror  is  to  be  inscribed  with 
GLORIOUS  names.     It  is  said  of  Christ  that  He  has  on  His  vesture  and  on  His  thigh 
a  name  written,  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."    It  is  said  of  the  redeemed  in 
glory  that  they  have  their  Father's  name  written  on  their  foreheads  (chap.  xiv.  1) ;  so 
here  on  these  Philadelphian  pillars  are  many  names  to  be  inscribed,  each  of  them 
unutterably  glorious.     These  inscriptions  are  written  by  Christ  Himself  :  "  I  will 
write."    He  engraves  these  names  upon  these  temple-pillars,  that  they  may  be 
eternal  witnesses  to  them  in  the  glorious  sanctuary.    The  inscriptions  to  be  thus 
engraven  are  as  follows  :  1.  The  name  of  my  God.     This  is  the  name  which  God 
proclaimed  to  Moses,  the  name  which  is  the  summary  of  His  blessed  character,  as 
the  God  of  all  grace.    What  honour  I     To  be  the  marble  on  which  Jehovah's  name 
is  carved,  and  from  which  it  shall  blaze  forth  in  the  eternal  temple  !     2.  The  name 
of  the  city  of  my  God.     Other  pillars  set  up  on  earth  by  man  have  the  names  of 
deities,  or  kings,  or  warriors,  or  cities  graven  upon  them.    But  this  inscription 
excels  all  in  glory.   3.  My  new  name.   This  is  the  new  name  given  by  Christ,  which 
no  man  knoweth  save  he  who  receiveth  it.   (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)       The  Christians  final 
triumph : — I.  The   qualitication  insisted  upon  in  the  text.      "  Him  that  over- 
cometh."     1.  The  term  evidently  implies  a  struggle  and  conflict.     2.  The  term 
"  overcometh  "  implies  daily  advancement  and  success.     3.  A  third  feature  of  the 
man  who  *'  overcometh  "  is  perseverance.     His  religion  is  not  the  mere  meteor  of 
the  moment,  extinguished  almost  as  soon  as  kindled.     He  will  set  his  face  like  a 
flint    against    corruption;    will  "resist,   even    unto  blood,   the  contradiction  of 
sinners  "  against  the  Master  he  loves.     11.  The  promises  addressed  in  the  text 
to  the  victorious  servants  of  the  Eedeemer.    1.  The  successful  Christian  shall  be 
*'  made  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  his  God."  In  this  world  the  servant  of  the  Bedeemer 
maybe  a  mere  outcast  in  society.    Nevertheless,  "he  that  overcometh  shall  be 
made  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  God."    That  poor  outcast,  if  a  true  servant  of  Christ, 
shall  be  stripped  of  his  rags  and  wretchedness,  and  be  raised  as  a  pillar  of  orna- 
ment in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.     Great  will  be  the  changes  of  the  last  day  :  "  the 
first  shall  be  last  and  the  last  first."    2.  He  "  shall  go  no  more  out."    The  sun  of 
his  joys  shall  never  go  down.      The  wellspring  of  his  comforts  shall  never  fail.     3. 
"  I  wUl  write  on  bim  the  name  of  My  God."    In  this  world,  it  is  possible  that  the 
sincere  Christian  may  be  perplexed,  either  by  his  own  doubts  of  acceptance  with 
God  or  by  the  suspicions  and  insinuations  of  others ;  but  in  heaven  his  acceptance 
and  adoption  will  be  no  longer  a  disputable  point.     He  shaU  be  recognised  by  Him 
who  has  stamped  him  with  His  own  name.     4.  "  I  will  write  on  him  the  name  of 
the  city  of  My  God,  which  is  New  Jerusalem,  which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven 
from  my  God."    Even  here  it  is  "  the  city  not  made  with  hands "  which  the 
Christian  seeks.    And  to  that  city  he  shall  be  exalted  in  heaven.    6.  "  I  will  write 
upon  him  My  new  Name."     {J.  W.  Cunningham.)        Fidelity  rewarded  : — 1.  In 
HEAVEN  NOBLE  SERVICE.    BcHevers  are  called  in  the  epistles,  even  while  they  are  on 
earth,  "  the  temple  of  God."    But  how  often  it  is  desecrated  and  defiled  1    Here  the 
same  image  has  a  more  glorious  and  fitting  application  to  the  perfect  life  of  heaven. 
We  seem  to  see  the  entire  company  of  God's  servants  fitly  framed  together  into  one 
vast,  living  temple ;  the  polished  stones  brought  from  many  distant  parts.     What 
worship  there,  where  every  stone  has  a  tongue  to  praise,  a  heart  to  feel  1    But  as, 
in  examining  a  noble  pile  of  building,  the  great  whole  distracts  you,  and  you  turn 
from  it  to  look  separately  at  single  parts — a  window,  or  an  arch — so  let  us  follow 
our  heavenly  guide,  as,  leading  us  through  the  "  temple  of  His  God,"  He  points 
our  attention  to  one  of  its  component  parts,  bids  us  observe  the  functions  of  a 
"  pillar  "  in  it.    It  is  the  office  of  a  pillar  to  support,  uphold,  an  edifice,  and  also 
to  adorn  it.    A  column,  then,  is  a  noble  part  of  any  building ;  noble  because  of  its 
important  function — to  sustain  within  a  small  compass  the  weight  of  the  spreading 
roof  and  arches ;  and  noble  also  because  there  can  be  joined  with  this  utihty  beauty 
of  form  and  wealth  of  ornament.     Then,  too,  a  pillar  is  not  something  extraneous, 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  231 

introduced  into  a  building  for  a  temporary  purpose,  and  then  to  be  removed  ;  but 
it  is  an  essential  part  of  it.  So  the  servant  whom  Christ  makes  a  pillar  in  God's 
temple  shall  by  that  appointment  become  himself  an  actual  part  of  heaven  itself, 
bearing  its  glories  up  by  the  unwearied  strength  of  his  own  hands,  and  adding  to 
its  beauty  by  his  holiness  and  by  the  bright  success  attending  all  his  toils.  As  a 
column  has  no  wasted  parts,  but  is  so  shaped  that  every  atom  bears  its  due  pro- 
portion of  the  weight,  or  carries  ornament  in  keeping  with  the  beauties  around  it, 
so  you  are  being  moulded,  by  the  Divine  Workman  who  makes  the  pillars  for  that 
temple,  in  such  wise  that  your  energies  will  neither  be  left  latent  nor  be  over- 
strained, but  developed  to  the  full,  and  kept  in  joyous  exercise,  till  you,  in  your 
place  there,  will  become  a  very  part  of  heaven,  its  beauty  and  blessedness  augmented 
by  the  contribution  of  your  pure  delight.  For  the  light  of  God  will  flash  back 
reflected  from  the  pillars  there.  11.  No  last  hours  in  heaven.  '  This  expressive 
image  of  a  piUar  is  often  applied,  and  justly,  to  the  positions  men  occupy  on  earth. 
For  men  of  high  faculties  do  often  find  worthy  scope  for  their  powers — fill  important 
posts  with  eminent  success.  The  warrior  who  saves  his  country's  independence — 
what  a  noble  pillar  of  its  fortunes  is  he !  Or  the  statesman,  who  develops  its 
resources,  and  conducts  it  to  greatness  and  renown — how  fitly  is  he  called  a  pillar 
of  the  state !  When  the  great  abilities  needed  for  such  high  stations  are  employed 
in  filling  them,  have  we  not  all  we  covet,  namely,  noble  faculties  in  noblest  exercise  ? 
Well,  forget  if  you  will  the  failures  and  disappointments  which  attend  such  careers, 
yet  will  you  say  that  such  a  lot  is  comparable  to  heaven  ?  Look  on  a  few  years. 
A  great  funeral  passes  by — the  pillar  is  broken.  Out  of  his  high  place  he  goes,  and 
does  not  return.  Oh,  what  an  abatement  of  pride  to  know  that  any  day  the  stately 
colunm  may  fall  prostrate  in  the  dust  I  But  he  whom  Christ  makes  a  pillar  in  the 
temple  of  His  God  "  shall  go  no  more  out."  His  strength  and  beauty  will  never 
know  decay.  HI.  Such  service  is  the  reward  of  victory  here.  For  he  whom 
Christ  makes  a  pillar  there,  is  "  him  that  overcometh."  So  that  the  temptations, 
the  disappointments,  the  wretched  weaknesses,  all  so  harassing,  and  in  such  sad 
contrast  to  the  bright  light  above,  are  not  hostile  to  it,  but  co-operate  towards  it. 
The  stability  of  heaven,  so  firm  and  glorious,  is^tobe  won  only  by  patient  endurance 
of  earth's  changes  and  earnest  conflict  with  its  sins.  So  if  you  want  to  work  for 
God  there,  with  delightful  ease,  you  must  learn  by  hard  effort  here  to  use  your 
hands  skilfully  for  Him.  The  workman  who  does  the  hardest  task  with  greatest 
ease  has  gained  that  dexterity  only  by  years  of  strenuous  toil.  And  so  the  servants 
who  do  God's  work  with  joyous  ease  in  heaven,  have  all  come  out  of  great  tribula- 
tion, and  have  by  that  hard  discipline  been  schooled  into  their  glorious  proficiency, 
and  only  after  a  long,  fierce  conflict  did  they  "  overcome."  IV.  The  double 
AGENCY  SPOKEN  OF.  "  Him  that  overcometh  " :  the  man  must  fight  and  conquer. 
*•  I  will  make  him  a  pillar  "  :  like  a  passive  column,  he  is  fashioned  by  another's 
hand.  Yes  ;  both  are  true.  We  must  act ;  not  because  God  does  not,  but  because 
He  does.  Christ,  by  the  might  and  skill  of  His  Divine  hand,  makes  a  pillar,  not  of 
the  man  who  wishes  and  dreams,  but  of  the  man  who  overcomes.  The  blows  of 
misfortune,  which  were  so  hard  to  bear  and  seemed  so  disastrous,  were  the  strokes 
of  His  Divine  chisel,  educing  beauty  from  deformity.  The  bitter  deprivation  of 
what  they  prized  so  much,  and  which  excited  such  complaints,  was  the  cutting 
away  of  what  would  have  for  ever  disfigured  God's  temple  if  it  had  remained.  (T. 
M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  A  pillar  in  the  temple,  the  emblem  of  moral  character : — I. 
Here  is  the  idea  of  sanctity.  II.  Here  is  the  idea  of  strength.  God  uses  the 
good  in  the  maintenance  of  His  Church  in  the  world,  hence  they  must  give  their 
best  sympathy,  talent,  and  effort  in  its  service.  The  good  will  be  stronger  in  the 
temple  above.  HI.  Here  is  the  idea  of  permanence.  In  this  life  moral  character 
in  its  higher  mood  is  uncertain  in  continuance  ;  it  is  beset  by  many  enemies  who 
would  carry  it  out  of  the  temple  of  God ;  but  there  it  will  be  eternally  amidst  scenes 
of  devotion  and  splendour.  IV.  Here  is  the  idea  of  inscription.  In  heaven  moral 
character  will  be  more  God-like  ;  it  will  be  transformed  by  a  vision  of  the  Eternal. 
Every  man's  life  has  some  inscription  on  it,  which  is  read  by  the  world.  Lessons  : 
1.  That  the  good  are  consecrated  to  Divine  uses  in  Hfe.  2.  That  the  good  are  to  be 
morally  useful  in  life.  That  the  good  should  in  their  lives  exhibit  the  name  of  God. 
(J.  S.  Exell,  M.A,)  The  promises  to  the  victor : — I.  The  steadfast  pillar.  Now, 
I  take  it  that  the  two  clauses  which  refer  to  this  matter  are  closely  connected.  "  I 
will  make  him  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out."  In 
the  second  clause  the  figure  is  dropped ;  and  the  point  of  the  metaphor  is  brought 
out  more  clearlj.    Here  it  cannot  mean  the  office  of  sustaining  a  building,  or  pre- 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

eminence  above  others,  as  it  naturally  lends  itself  sometimes  to  mean.    For  instance, 
the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  the  three  chief  apostles  in  Jerusalem  and  says  that  they 
"  seemed  to  be  pillars."     We  cannot  conceive  of  even  redeemed  men  sustaining 
that  temple  in  the  heavens ;  and  also,  inasmuch  as  the  promise  here  is  perfectly 
universal,  and  is  given  to  all  that  overcome.     Now,  the  second  of  the  two  clauses 
which  are  thus  linked  together  seems  to  me  to  point  to  the  direction  in  which  we 
are  to  look.     "  He  shall  go  no  more  out."    A  pillar  is  a  natural  emblem  of  stability 
and  permanence,  as  poets  in  many  tongues,  and  in  many  lands,  have  felt  it  to  be. 
But  whilst  the  general  notion  is  that  of  stability  and  permanence,  do  not  let  us 
forget  that  it  is  permanence  and  stability  in  a  certain  direction,  for  the  pillar  is  "in 
the  temple  of  my  God."    And  whilst  there  are  ideas  of  dignity  and  grace  attaching 
to  the  metaphor  of  the  pillar,  the  underlying  meaning  of  it  is  substantially  that  the 
individual  souls  of  redeemed  men  shall  be  themselves  parts,  and  collectively  shall 
constitute  the  temple  of  God  in  the  heavens.     The  special  point  in  which  that 
perfection  and  transcendence  are  expressed  here  is  to  be  kept  prominent.     "  He 
shall  go  no  more  out."     Permanence,  and  stability,  and  uninterruptedness  in  the 
communion  and  consciousness  of  an  indwelling  God,  is  a  main  element  in  the  glory 
and  blessedness  of  that  future  life.     Stability  in  any  fashion  comes  as  a  blessed 
hope  to  us,  who  know  the  cause  of  constant  change,  and  are  tossing  on  the  unquiet 
waters  of  life.     Sometimes  the  bay  is  filled  with  flashing  waters  that  leap  in  the 
sunshine ;  sometimes,  when  the  tide  is  out,  there  is  only  a  long  stretch  of  grey  and 
oozy  mud.     It  shall  not  be  always  so.     Like  lands  on  the  equator,  where  the 
difference  between  midsummer  and  midwinter  is  scarcely  perceptible,  either  in 
length  of  day  or  in  degree  of  temperature,  that  future  will  be  a  calm  continuance,  a 
uniformity  which  is  not  monotony,  and  a  stability  which  does  not  exclude  progress. 
♦'He  shall  go  no  more  out."   Eternal  glory  and  unbroken  communion  is  the  blessed 
promise  to  the  victor  who  is  made  by  Christ  "  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God." 
II.  Now,  secondly,  notice  the  threefold  inscription.     The  writing  of  a  name 
implies  ownership  and  visibility.     So  the  first  of  the  triple  inscriptions  declares 
that  the  victor  shall  be  conspicuously  God's.     "  I  will  write  upon  him  the  name  of 
my  God."    There  may  possibly  be  an  allusion  to  the  golden  plate  which  flamed  in 
the  front  of  the  High  Priest's  mitre,  and  on  which  was  written  the  unspoken  name 
of  Jehovah.     How  do  we  possess  one  another  ?     How  do  we  belong  to  God  ?     How 
•  does  God  belong  to  us  ?    There  is  but  one  way  by  which  a  spirit  can  possess  a 
spirit — by  love ;  which  leads  to  self-surrender  and  to  practical  obedience.    And  if — 
as  a  man  writes  his  name  in  his  books,  as  a  farmer  brands  on  his  sheep  and  oxen 
the  marks  that  express  his  ownership — on  the  redeemed  there  is  written  the  name 
of  God,  that  means,  whatever  else  it  may  mean,  perfect  love,  perfect  self-surrender, 
perfect  obedience.     That  is  the  perfecting  of  the  Christian  relationship  which  is 
begun  here  on  earth.    In  the  preceding  letter  to  Sardis  we  were  told  that  the  victor's 
name  should  not  "  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life."    Here  the  same  thought  is 
suggested  by  a  converse  metaphor.     The  name  of  the  victor  is  written  on  the  rolls 
of  the  city ;  and  the  name  of  the  city  is  stamped  on  the  forehead  of  the  victor. 
That  is  to  say,  the  affinity  which  even  here  and  now  has  knit  men  who  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ  to  an  invisible  order,  where  is  their  true  mother-city  and  metropolis, 
will  then  be  uncontradicted  by  any  inconsistencies,  unobscured  by  the  necessary 
absorption  in  daily  duties  and  transient  aims  and  interests  which  often  veils  to 
others,  and  renders  less  conscious   to  ourselves,  our  true  belonging  to  the  city 
beyond  the  sea.     The  last  of  the  triple  inscriptions  declares  that  the  victor  shall  be 
conspicuously  Christ's.     *'  I  will  write  upon  him  My  new  name."    What  is  that 
new  name  ?    It  is  an  expression  for  the  sum  of  the  new  revelations  of  what  He  is, 
which  will  flood  the  souls  of  the  redeemed  when  they  pass  from  earth.     That  new 
name  will  not  obliterate  the  old  one — God  forbid!    It  will  do  away  with  the  ancient, 
earth-begun  relation  of  dependence  and  faith  and  obedience.     "  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
same  ...  for  ever " ;  and  His  name  in  the  heavens,  as  upon  earth,  is  Jesus  the 
Saviour.     That  new  name  no  man  fully  knows,  even  when  he  has  entered  on  its 
possession,  and  carries  it  on  his  forehead;   for  the  infinite  Christ,  who  is  the 
manifestation  of  the  infinite  God,  can  never  be  comprehended,  much  less  exhausted, 
even  by  the  united  perceptions  of  a  redeemed  universe,  but  for  ever  and  ever  more 
and  more  will  well  out  from  Him.     His  name  shall  last  as  long  as  the  sun,  and 
blaze  when  the  sun  himself  is  dead.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14-22.   The  Laodiceans. — Laodicea — the  self-complacent  Church : — Laodicea 
is  the  type  of  a  self-complacent  Church.    Underneath  the  condemnation  of  luke< 


ijHAi'.  m.]  niEVELATION.  233 

vrarmness  there  is  a  yet  more  heart-seatching  lesson.  Lukewannness  itself  is  the 
Bure  result  of  self-complacency  ;  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  self-complacent  men 
to  be  other  than  lukewarm.  If  we  grasp  this  truth  we  get  below  symptoms  of  a 
grave  and  conspicuous  evil  in  Churches  to  its  very  source  ;  we  r^ach  the  heart  and 
display  its  hidden  weakness  and  woe.  Perhaps,  also,  we  shall  find  the  way  of 
deliverance ;  many  a  man  is  lukewarm,  and  he  knows  not  why.  It  is  his  constant 
Borrow  and  his  wonder ;  he  ought  to  be  earnest,  and  he  feels  he  is  not.  To  show 
any  who  may  be  conscious  of  this  strange  indifference  the  real  reason  of  their  un- 
impassioned,  powerless  piety,  to  disclose  the  secret  of  the  lukewarmness  which  ia 
their  never-forgotten  perplexity  and  their  self-reproach,  may  suggest  to  them  how 
they  are  to  be  cured.  There  are  two  points  in  the  description  of  the  self-complacency 
of  Laodicea,  the  simple  statement  of  which  bites  hke  satire ;  it  is  the  self-com- 
placency, first,  of  the  moneyed  man,  and,  secondly,  of  the  so-called  self-made  man. 
By  a  strange  moral  irony  the  self-complacent  man  fixes  his  attention  on  what  he 
has  of  least  value,  and  lets  his  higher  possibilities  go  un thought  of.  The  R.V.,  "  I 
am  rich  and  have  gotten  riches,"  strikes  harshly  on  the  ear  accustomed  to  the  older 
reading,  "  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods  "  ;  but  it  has  this  merit — it  shows  us 
the  self-complacent  congratulating  himself  that  he  is  the  author  of  his  own  success, 
Laodicea  "  was  a  town  of  some  consequence  in  the  Eoman  province  of  Asia."  "  Its 
trade  was  considerable ;  it  lay  on  the  line  of  a  great  road."  It  is  now  a  ruin, 
absolute  and  utter  ;  the  site  of  its  stadium,  its  gymnasium,  and  its  theatres  alone 
discernible.  "  North  of  the  town  are  many  sarcophagi,  with  their  covers  lying  near 
them,  partly  embedded  in  the  ground,  and  all  having  been  long  since  rifled."  "  The 
remains  of  an  aqueduct  are  there,  with  stone  barrel-pipes,  incrusted  with  calcareous 
matter,  and  some  completely  closed  up."  It  is  an  awful  historic  parable — broken 
buildings,  rifled  tombs,  water-pipes  choked  with  the  earthy  matter  they  conveyed. 
So  may  the  soul  be  charged  with  the  dregs  of  what  we  allow  to  filter  through  it ;  so 
will  the  soul  be  rifled  which  has  allowed  itself  to  become  a  tomb,  the  receptacle  of 
dead  forms  of  activity  that  might  have  been  ermobled  with  the  highest  life.  The 
curse  of  societies  which  measure  the  things  of  God  by  a  worldly  standard — and 
where  this  is  not  done,  self-complacency  is  impossible — is  the  inevitable  degradation 
and  ruin  which  set  in.  There  is  no  common  measure  between  the  surpassing 
purpose  of  the  Saviour  and  the  satisfaction  men  have  in  what  they  have  attained, 
and  in  themselves  for  having  attained  it.  "  All  things  are  possible  to  me,"  says  the 
believer  in  Christ ;  for  his  faith  goes  out  to  a  life,  an  energy  beyond  him ;  it  becomes 
surety  for  what  his  eye  has  not  seen.  "  All  things  are  possible  to  me,"  says  the 
worldly  Christian ;  for  he  takes  care  never  to  admit  into  his  purpose  anything  more 
than  he  has  already  achieved.  Where  the  purpose  is  thus  debased  the  thought  is 
narrow,  and  mind,  and  heart,  and  soul  are  contracted  to  the  limit  of  what  they  hold. 
So,  when  the  appeal  of  the  gospel  is  made,  there  is  no  response  ;  there  is  nothing 
which  seems  worth  a  transcendent  effort.  The  man  is  lukewarm,  there  is  nothing 
to  fire  him  in  his  purpose,  no  heart  in  him  to  be  fired.  He  is  poor  for  all  his  wealth. 
Thus  the  central  thought  of  the  message  to  Laodicea,  when  once  we  have  caught  it, 
dominates  all  our  perception  ;  it  recurs  to  us  again  and  again ;  its  inevitableness 
strikes  us ;  we  never  can  forget  that  the  self-complacent  man  or  Church  is  and 
must  be  lukewarm.  In  Hogarth's  picture  of  Bedlam,  the  most  distressing  figures  are 
those  of  the  self-complacent — the  Pope  with  his  paper  tiara  and  lathen  cross  ;  the 
astronomer  with  paper  tube,  devoid  of  lenses,  sweeping  not  the  heavens,  but  the 
walls  of  the  madhouse ;  the  naked  king,  with  sceptre  and  crown  of  straw.  Their 
misery  is  seen  upon  their  faces  ;  even  their  self-complacency  cannot  hide  it.  The 
heart  is  hopeless  where  the  man  is  self-centred ;  gladness  is  as  foreign  as  enthusiasm 
to  him  who  is  full  of  the  sense  of  what  he  has  acquired.  But  out  of  this  same 
dominating  thought  comes  the  hope  of  recovery.  When  we  are  conscious  of  luke- 
warmness, the  first  thing  which  occurs  to  us  is  that  we  ought  to  be  earnest ;  and 
we  set  ourselves  to  try  to  be  so.  We  try  to  arouse  the  lukewarm  to  intensity  ;  we 
lash  them  with  scorn ;  we  overwhelm  them  with  demonstrations  of  their  misery, 
and  present  them  with  images  of  the  resolved  ;  "  Be  earnest,"  we  cry  to  them  again 
and  again ;  ♦'  without  earnestness  there  is  no  possibility  of  Christian  life."  How 
vain  it  aU  is  I  The  young  may  be  awakened  by  appeals  ;  but  not  those  who  have 
come  to  their  lassitude  through  prosperity,  "  the  rich,  and  increased  with  goods." 
One  way  remains — give  them  to  see  the  glory  of  Christ ;  there  is  in  Him  a  sublimity, 
an  augustness,  a  moral  dignity  and  worth  which  may  thrill  the  soul  with  a  new 
passion,  and  set  the  tides  of  life  flowing  toward  a  central  splendour.  And  this  is 
Vihai  we  find  in  the  message  to  Laodicea.    First  there  is  presented  a  stately  image 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

of  Him  who  walks  about  among  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  "  These  things 
saith  the  Amen,"  &c.  We  feel  at  once  the  mystic  sublimity  of  the  phrases :  an 
unrevealed  grandeur  is  behind  the  form  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  arousing  our 
expectation,  moving  the  heart  with  a  faintly  imagining  awe.  Next,  we  have  a 
picture  of  the  tender  Saviour,  one  which  has  entered  into  our  common  Christian 
speech  as  few  presentations  even  of  Christ  have,  luring  on  the  painter  to  body  forth, 
«nd  the  poet  to  describe  what  they  can  never  express,  but  what  we  all  can  feel. 
*•  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,"  &c.  Here,  too,  is  a  cure  for  self-complacency.  The 
heart  can  be  won  by  tenderness.  And  then  there  is  the  sublime  promise,  so  reserved, 
yet  sounding  into  such  depths  of  suggestion — *•  He  that  overcometh,  I  will  give  to 
him  to  sit  down,"  &c.  The  throne  on  which  Christ  is  seated  is  a  Divine  throne  ; 
but  it  is  also  a  throne  on  which  are  exalted  disappointed  human  hopes.  When 
Jesus  died  upon  the  cross  He  died  in  faith  of  what  He  had  not  realised.  And  then 
the  triumph  came.  God  "  raised  him  up  from  the  dead  and  gave  Him  glory." 
Christ's  mission  is  accomplished  when  human  souls  awaken  to  a  faith  and  a  hope 
for  ever  in  advance  of  all  men  can  attain  to  on  earth,  a  faith  and  a  hope  which  are 
in  God.  There  is  a  cure  for  self-complacency  here ;  and  with  self-complacency  the 
deathly  lukewarmness  is  gone.  There  are  some  pathetic  touches  which  we  should 
notice  before  closing  this  solemn,  heart-searching  appeal  to  the  self-complacent. 
The  abrupt  change  of  tone  in  vers.  17  and  18  is  significant.  "  Because  thou  sayest, 
I  am  rich,  and  have  gotten  riches,  and  have  need  of  nothing  ;  and  knowest  not  that 
thou  art  the  wretched  one  and  miserable  and  poor  and  blind  and  naked  " — with 
such  an  introduction,  what  words  may  we  not  expect  to  follow,  of  warning,  censure, 
doom  ?  They  are  not  spoken.  The  Lord  begins  in  another  strain — "  I  counsel 
thee  to  buy  of  Me,"  <fec.  The  pathos  of  all  self-complacency,  at  once  its  condem- 
nation and  the  more  than  hope  of  deliverance  from  it,  is  this — the  delivering  Lord 
is  so  nigh.  The  true  riches,  the  robe  of  righteousness,  the  Divine  vision,  all  are 
for  us ;  to  be  bought,  as  God's  best  gifts  can  only  be  bought,  '•  without  money  and 
without  price."  Some  words  follow  with  which  we  are  very  familiar,  the  thought 
they  express  entering  so  largely  into  Biblical  teaching  and  human  experience. 
"  Aj  many  as  I  love,"  &c.  One  of  the  suggestions  of  this  utterance  is,  that  vnth 
all  its  self-complacency  Laodicea  was  profoundly  unhappy.  The  denizens  of 
Bedlam  are  more  than  half  conscious  of  their  derangement ;  the  self-satisfied 
Christian  knows  how  deep  is  his  discontent.  Another  suggestion  is  that  of 
coming  tribulation;  the  knocking  at  the  door  of  which  the  next  verse  speaks  is 
an  intimation  that  trouble  is  at  hand.  Let  it  come ;  it  will  be  welcome ;  any- 
thing will  be  welcome  which  can  stir  this  mortal  lethargy.  The  treasures  of 
the  Divine  chastisement  are  not  exhausted ;  and  they  are  treasures  of  the  Divine 
love.  {A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  Laodicea  : — I.  Thbee  aspects  op  the  character 
or  Christ.  1.  "  The  Amen."  This  sets  forth  His  immutability.  2.  "  The 
faithful  and  true  Witness."  (1)  Christ  is  a  Witness — (a)  In  His  personal  life 
and  death.  (6)  By  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  inspired  Word,  in  the  plan  of 
redemption,  and  in  the  organisation  of  the  Church.  (c)  In  the  hearts  of 
individual  believers,  where  He  dwells  by  faith.  (2)  Christ,  as  Witness,  in  this 
threefold  sense,  is  faithful  and  true.  (3)  His  promised  rewards  will  be  faithfully 
fulfilled,  and  His  threatened  penalties  will  be  strictly  carried  out.  3.  "The  be- 
ginning of  the  creation  of  God."  The  Head,  Prince,  or  Potentate.  H.  The  two- 
fold character  of  the  Laodicean  Church.  1.  Latitudinarian.  2.  Self-deceived. 
in.  Christ's  appropriate  counsel.  1.  This  counsel  is  characteristic  of  our  Lord. 
(1)  Tender  and  considerate.  (2)  Appropriate  and  definite.  (3)  Timely  and  solemn. 
2.  This  counsel  is  very  suggestive.  (1)  "  Buy  of  Me."  In  one  sense  grace  cannot 
be  bought.  It  has  been  bought — not  with  silver  and  gold,  &c.  In  another  sense, 
if  we  are  not  willing  to  give  up  the  world  and  its  sinful  pleasures  for  Divine  grace, 
we  shall  not  obtain  it  (2)  "  Gold  tried  in  the  fire."  That  which  enriches  the  soul 
for  ever,  and  will  endure  the  test  of  His  judgment.  (3)  "White  raiment"  (chap. 
xix.  8).  (4)  "  Eye-salve."  The  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  IV.  Three 
PROOFS  OF  Christ's  loving  interest.  1.  Discipline.  2.  Patient,  personal  appeals 
to  those  who  have  practically  rejected  Him.  3.  His  gracious  proffer  of  the  highest 
honour  to  him  who  becomes  conqueror  in  His  name.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A,)  The 
word  of  Christ  to  the  congregation  at  Laodicea : — I.  Its  real  character  was 
thorouohly  known,  n.  Its  spiritual  iNDiFrERENTisM  IS  Divinely  arhorrent. 
1.  Spiritual  indifferentism  is  a  most  incongruous  condition.  2.  Spiritual  in- 
differentism  is  a  most  incorrigible  condition.  III.  Its  self-deception  is  terribly 
AiiARMiNQ.    IV.  Its  miserable  condition  need  NOT  be  hopeless.     1.  Recovery  is 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION. 


freely  offered.  2.  Eecovery  is  Divinely  urged.  3.  Eecovery  is  Divinely  rewarded. 
(1)  The  throne  of  an  approving  conscience.  (2)  The  throne  of  moral  rule.  (D. 
Tfuymas,  D.D.)  The  Church  abhorrent  to  Christ  because  of  the  lukewarm  tempera- 
ture of  its  spiritual  life  : — I.  This  Church  was  lukewarm  in  the  temperature  of 
ITS  spiritual  life.  1.  The  language  of  this  verse  aptly  describes  the  rehgious 
state  of  many  Churches  now.  (1)  A  lukewarm  Church  is  unique  in  the  world.  In 
every  sphere  of  life,  save  the  moral,  men  are  red  hot.  (2)  A  lukewarm  Church  is 
useless  in  the  world.  It  cannot  make  any  progress  against  a  vigilant  devil  and  a 
wicked  world.  (3)  A  lukewarm  Church  is  an  anomaly  in  the  world.  The  Church 
is  destined  to  represent  on  earth  the  most  energetic  and  spiritual  ministries  which 
exist  in  the  unseen  universe.  (4)  A  lukewarm  Church  has  much  tending  to  awaken 
it.  It  should  be  awakened  by  a  study  of  the  lives  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament 
saints,  by  the  earnest  life  of  Christ,  by  the  great  need  of  the  world,  by  the  transi- 
toriness  of  life,  and  by  the  quickening  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  2.  That  this 
lukewarm  Church  was  abhorrent  to  the  Divine  Being.  It  is  better  to  be  a  sinner 
than  a  merely  nominal  Christian ;  because  the  latter  brings  a  greater  reproach  upon 
the  name  of  Christ ;  because  the  latter  is  in  the  greater  peril ;  and  because  hypocrisy 
is  a  greater  sin  than  profanity.  11.  This  lukewarm  Church,  sadly  deceived,  was 
wisely  counselled  as  to  the  real  condition  of  its  spiritual  life.  1.  Sad  de- 
ception. (1)  The  members  of  this  Church  imagined  that  they  were  rich  and  had 
need  of  nothing.  (2)  The  members  of  this  Church  imagined  that  they  were 
prosperous.  (3)  The  members  of  this  Church  imagined  that  they  had  attained  all 
possible  excellence.  2.  Wise  counsel.  (1)  This  Church  was  advised  to  get  true 
wealth.  (2)  This  Church  was  advised  to  get  renewed  purity.  (3)  This  Church  was 
advised  to  get  clear  vision.    (4)  This  Church  was  advised  to  get  Christly  merchandise. 

3.  Disguised  love.  All  the  Divine  rebukes  are  for  the  moral  good  of  souls,  and 
should  lead  to  repentance  and  zeaL     III.  Tms  Church  was  urgently  encouraged 

TO   AMEND    ITS   MORAL    CONDITION    AND    TO    ENTER   UPON   A   ZEALOUS   LIFE.        The    adviCB 

of  Christ  is  always  encouraging.  He  will  help  the  most  degraded  Church  into  a 
new  life.  Lessons :  1.  That  a  lukewarm  Church  is  abhorrent  to  the  Divine  mind. 
2.  That  Christ  gives  wise  counsel  to  proud  souls.  3.  That  the  most  valuable 
things  of  life  are  to  be  had  from  Christ  without  money  and  without  price. 

4.  Are  we  possessed  of  this  gold,  raiment,  eyesalve?  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
These  things  saith  the  km^u.—ChrisVs  names :— The  name  which  the  Lord 
assumes  in  addressing  this  Church  is  threefold,  yet  one — "the  Amen,  the  faithful 
and  true  Witness,  the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  The  name  "  Amen  "  as 
here  employed  has  its  root  in  the  Old  Testament,  where  God  is  called  "  the  God  of 
truth,"  the  God  of  the  Verily,  the  God  of  Amen— not  merely  distinguishing  Him 
from  the  "  lying  vanities  "  of  the  heathen  and  the  phantom-gods  of  philosophy,  but 
bringing  into  view  the  absolute  truth  of  His  nature  and  of  all  His  attributes.  We 
cannot  but  mark  how  supremely  and  absolutely,  in  assuming  this  name,  Jesus  claims 
to  be  what  the  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament  was.  Two  successive  steps  may  give 
us  a  glimpse  of  the  meaning  of  this  name  as  now  assumed  and  worn  by  the  Lord. 
In  the  first  place.  He  Himse5  is  true,  and  deserves  our  absolute  trust.  His  compas- 
sions are  true,  His  love  is  true.  His  word  is  true,  His  smile  is  true,  yea.  His  very 
silence  is  true,  even  as  He  said  to  His  disciples,  "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have 
told  you."  He  does  not  say  and  unsay ;  He  does  not  come  and  go  ;  He  is  without 
variableness  or  shadow  of  turning.  In  the  second  place.  He  is  the  Amen,  the  Verily, 
to  all  that  God  has  spoken.  The  ancient  promises  that  had  come  down  through 
thousands  of  years  unfulfilled  are  fulfilled  in  Him,  and  that  not  in  the  letter  merely, 
but  in  the  inner  spirit.  The  promises  that  still  look  to  the  future  are  in  Him  certain 
and  sure,  as  hopes.  And  so  with  every  word  that  God  has  spoken,  whether  promise 
or  threatening.  There  is  no  may  be  or  may  not  be  about  them ;  in  Him  they  are  all 
Amen.  He  is  their  full  and  sure  accomplishment,  even  as  He  is  the  accomplishment 
of  the  past.  Besides  being  the  Amen,  Jesus  is  to  the  Laodiceans  "  the  faithful  and 
true  Witness."  He  is  the  Messenger  and  Eevealer  of  the  Father,  who  answers  all 
the  deep  questions  of  the  conscience  and  heart,  as  well  as  of  the  intellect,  according 
to  the  ancient  prophecy — '•  Behold,  I  have  given  Him  for  a  Witness  to  the  people." 
"  I  have  manifested  Thy  name,"  He  says  to  the  Father,  "unto  the  men  whom  Thou 
gavest  me  out  of  the  world."  It  is  essential  to  a  witness  that  he  have  personal 
knowledge  of  that  which  he  reports ;  and  this  Witness  was  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  and  knows  what  is  in  His  heart.  As  Witness  He  is  "  faithful  and  true." 
These  two  words  are  like  the  right  hand  and  the  left.  As  I  conceive,  they  are  not 
interchangeable ;  but  each  conveys  its  own  distinct  and  special  meaning.    Taken 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

together,  they  mark  that  He  kept  back  nothing  which  the  Father  delivered  unto 
Him,  and  that  all  He  said  might  be  relied  upon  to  the  last  jot  and  tittle.  Once 
more  the  Lord  names  Himself  "  the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  We  trace 
"  the  things  that  are  "  back  and  up  to  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  the  uncaused  cause  of 
their  being,  their  vital  origin,  ♦•  willing  "  them  into  existence ;  and  the  "  increasing 
purpose  "  is  but  the  gradual  unfolding  of  the  thought  of  His  heart.  It  is  the  same 
truth  that  fills  such  words  as  these:  "All  things  were  made  by  Him,"  &c.  "In  Him 
(comprehended  within  the  sphere  of  His  being,  power,  and  will)  were  all  things 
created,"  &c.  The  grand  thought  is,  that  this  glorious  universe,  whose  origin  lies 
back  of  human  imagination,  was  brought  into  being  (according  to  the  will  of  the 
eternal  Father)  by  our  blessed  Kedeemer's  creative  power,  and  exists  for  His  sake. 
(J.  Culross,  D.D.)  The  Amen  : — The  word  "Amen  "  is  much  more  full  of  meaning 
than  may  be  supposed,  and  as  a  title  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  it  is  eminently 
suggestive.  I  might  have  divided  my  discourse  very  fairly  under  these  three  heads 
— asserting,  consenting,  petitioning.  For  in  each  of  these  our  adorable  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  certainly  "the  Amen."  He  asserts  the  will  of  God— He  asserts  God 
Himself.  God  the  Son  is  constantly  called  the  Word ;  He  who  asserts,  declares,  and 
testifies  God.  In  the  second  place,  we  know  that  Jesus  Christ  consents  to  the  will, 
design,  and  purpose  of  Jehovah.  He  gives  an  Amen  to  the  will  of  God — is,  in  fact, 
the  echo,  in  His  life  and  in  His  death,  of  the  eternal  purposes  of  the  Most  High. 
And,  thirdly.  He  is  "  the  Amen  "  in  the  petitionary  sense,  for  to  all  our  prayers  He 
gives  whatever  force  and  power  they  have.  But  we  have  preferred  to  divide  the 
discourse  another  way.  I.  Our  Lord  is  superlatively  God's  Amen.  1.  Long  ere 
you  and  I  had  a  being,  before  this  great  world  started  out  of  nothingness,  God  had 
made  every  purpose  of  His  eternal  counsel  to  stand  fast  and  firm  by  the  gift  of  His 
dear  Son  to  us.  He  was  then  God's  Amen  to  His  eternal  purpose.  2.  When  our 
Lord  actually  came  upon  the  earth.  He  was  then  God's  Amen  to  the  long  line  of 
prophecies.  That  babe  among  the  horned  oxen,  that  carpenter's  son,  was  God's 
declaration  that  prophesy  was  the  voice  of  heaven.  3.  Christ  was  God's  Amen  to 
all  the  Levitical  types.  Especially  when  up  to  the  Cross  as  to  the  altar  He  went  as 
a  victim  and  was  laid  thereon,  then  it  was  that  God  solemnly  put  an  Amen  into 
what  otherwise  was  but  typical  and  shadowy.  4.  Christ  is  God's  Amen  to  the 
majesty  of  His  law.  He  has  not  sinned  Himself,  but  He  has  the  sins  of  all  His 
people  imputed  to  Him.  He  has  never  broken  the  law,  but  all  our  breaches  thereof 
were  laid  on  Him.  The  law  says  He  is  accursed,  for  He  has  sin  upon  Him :  will 
the  Father  consent  that  His  own  Beloved  shall  be  made  a  curse  for  us  ?  Hearken 
and  hear  the  Lord's  Amen.  "Awake,  0  sword,  against  the  man  that  is  My  fellow, 
saith  the  Lord."  What,  does  God  the  Father  say  Amen?  Can  it  be  ?  It  is  even 
so.  He  says.  Amen.  And  what  an  awful  Amen  too,  when  the  sweat  of  blood 
started  from  every  pore  of  His  immaculate  body.  5.  Jesus  Christ  is  very  blessedly 
God's  Amen  to  all  His  covenant  promises,  for  is  it  not  written  that  "all  the  promises 
of  God  in  Him  are  yea  and  in  Him  Amen."  6.  Jesus  Christ  will  be  God's  Amen  at 
the  conclusion  of  this  dispensation  in  the  fulness  of  time.  H.  He  is  our  Amen  in 
Himself.  1.  He  proved  Himself  to  be  Amen;  the  God  of  truth,  sincerity,  and 
faithfulness  in  His  fulfilment  of  covenant  engagements.  "  Lo  I  cornel  In  the 
volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  Me :  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  From 
all  eternity  He  declared  Himself  to  be  ready  to  go  through  the  work,  and  when  the 
time  came  He  was  straightened  till  the  work  was  done.  2.  He  was  also  "  the  Amen  " 
in  all  His  teachings.  We  have  already  remarked  that  He  constantly  commenced 
with  "  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you."  Christ  as  teacher  does  not  appeal  to  tradi- 
tion, or  even  to  reasoning,  but  gives  Himself  as  His  authority.  3.  He  is  also  "  the 
Amen  "  in  all  His  promises.  Sinner,  I  would  comfort  thee  with  this  reflection.  4. 
Jesus  Christ  is  yea  and  Amen  in  all  His  ofiices.  He  was  a  priest  to  pardon  and 
cleanse  once ;  He  is  Amen  as  priest  still.  He  was  a  King  to  rule  and  reign  for  His 
people,  and  to  defend  them  with  His  mighty  arm  ;  He  is  an  Amen  King,  the  same 
still.  He  was  a  prophet  of  old  to  foretell  good  things  to  come ;  His  lips  are  most 
sweet,  and  drop  with  honey  still — He  is  an  Amen  Prophet.  6.  He  is  Amen  with 
regard  to  His  person.  He  is  still  faithful  and  true,  immutably  the  same.  Not  less 
than  God !  Omnipotent,  immutable,  eternal,  omnipresent  still  1  God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever.  0  Jesus,  we  adore  Thee,  Thou  great  Amen.  He  is  the  same,  too, 
as  to  His  manhood.  Bone  of  our  bone  still;  in  all  our  afflictions  still  afflicted. 
III.  He  is  experimentally  God's  Amen  to  every  believing  soul.  1.  He  is  God's 
Amen  in  us.  If  you  want  to  know  God  you  must  know  Christ ;  if  you  want  to  be 
sure  of  the  truth  of  the  Bible  you  must  believe  Jesus.    2.  Jesus  Christ  is  "the 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION,  237 

Amen"  not  only  in  us,  but  "the  Amen  "  for  us.  When  you  pray,  you  say  Amen. 
Did  you  think  of  Christ  ?  Did  you  offer  your  prayer  through  Him  ?  Did  you  ask 
Him  to  present  it  before  God  ?  If  not,  there  is  no  Amen  to  your  prayer.  3.  I  want 
that  Jesus  Christ  should  be  God's  Amen  in  all  our  hearts,  as  to  all  the  good  things 
of  the  covenant  of  grace ;  I  am  sure  He  will  be  if  you  receive  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Amen : — What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  this  sacred  word  ?  It  means  truth ;  it  means 
reality,  I  want  to  bring  before  you  the  awfulness  of  truth — that  is,  of  reality,  of 
sincerity,  of  guileless  simplicity,  both  as  regards  our  conduct  in  the  life  that  now  is 
and  as  regards  the  eternal  life  of  man's  spirit.  First,  as  regards  our  earthly  life. 
We  may  each  of  us  spend  our  lives  either  in  the  world  or  in  God,  If  we  live  in 
God — "  if  that  life  which  we  now  live  in  the  flesh  is  lived  by  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God  " — then  we  are  living  in  the  world  of  reality.  If  we  are  living  for  the  world — 
if  we  are  setting  our  affections  on  the  things  of  the  earth — we  are  living  in  the 
midst  of  fatal  delusions  and  fading  shadows.  Let  a  man  but  once  catch  a  glimpse 
of  the  true  light,  and  he  learns  utterly  to  despise  the  dim  rushlights  of  this  earth's 
tinselled  stage ;  let  but  one  ray  out  of  eternity  shine  down  into  his  heart,  and  for 
him  the  world  and  the  things  of  the  world  shrivel  into  insignificance.  God  is  the 
Amen,  and  all  His  laws  are  eternal :  they  abide  for  ever  ;  they  are  laws  not  only  of 
reality,  not  only  of  righteousness,  but  of  pleasantness  and  peace.  Earnestly,  then, 
would  I  invite  you  all  to  base  yourselves  on  the  "  Amen,"  on  the  solid  and  ultimate' 
reality  of  life,  by  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  living  soberly,  right- 
eously, and  godly  in  this  present  world.  And  no  less  earnestly  would  I  invite  you 
to  base  your  unshaken  hves  on  the  Amen  of  true  religion,  without  which  the  house 
of  your  life  will  only  be  built  upon  sand.  The  Church  depends  solely  on  the  presence 
of  Christ.  Eeligious  partisans  show  their  greatest  zeal  always  not  for  God's  eternal 
verities,  but  for  what  is  doubtful  and  questionable  and  valueless,  and  often  they  pass 
over  the  whole  essential  message  and  meaning  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  order  to 
insist  on  the  grossest  misinterpretation  of  some  single  text.  But  God  is  the  God  of 
Amen,  that  is,  of  truth.  Let  us  then  look  to  the  basis  of  our  faith  and  the  basis  of 
our  conduct.  "  Will  ye,  by  hypocrisy  in  conduct,  will  ye,  by  petty  unreality  in  faith, 
offer  to  the  God  of  Truth  the  unclean  sacrifice  of  a  lie  ?  "  Keality,  sincerity,  holiness 
— the  elementary  Christian  graces,  faith,  hope,  love — the  primary  Christian  duties, 
soberness,  temperance,  chastity — these  are  the  things  and  these  are  the  tests  of  a  true 
religion;  apart  from  these  all  else  is  fringes  and  phylacteries.  {Dean  Farrar.) 
Tlie  Beginning  of  tlie  creation  of  God. — The  creation  of  God  : — The  third  appellation 
cannot  be  limited  to  the  thought  of  the  mere  material  creation,  as  if  equivalent  to 
the  statement  that  by  the  Word  were  all  things  made.  It  would  thus  fail  to  corres- 
pond with  the  two  appellations  preceding  it,  which  undoubtedly  apply  to  the  work 
of  redemption,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  addition  of  the, words  "of  God"  would 
be  meaningless  or  perplexing.  Let  us  add  to  this  that  in  chap  i.  5,  immediately 
after  Jesus  has  been  called  the  "  faithful  Witness,"  He  is  described  as  the  "First- 
begotten  of  the  dead,"  and  we  shall  not  be  able  to  resist  the  conviction  that  the 
words  before  us  refer  primarily  to  the  new  creation,  the  Christian  Church,  that 
redeemed  humanity  which  has  its  true  life  in  Christ.  {W.  Milligan,  D.D.)  I  know 
thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  hot  nor  cold, — The  condition  of  the  Laodiceans  :^ 
"  I  know  thy  works,"  There  is  to  be  no  dealing  with  them  in  the  dark,  as  man  ia 
compelled  to  do ;  no  drawing  of  a  bow  at  a  venture  ;  the  arrow  is  aimed  straight  at 
the  mark.  He  is  about  to  judge  the  Laodiceans,  and  His  judgment  proceeds  on  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  their  condition.  "  Thy  works,"  in  all  that  they  are  and  all 
that  they  mean  and  involve,  lie  open  under  Mine  eye,  in  the  broad,  bright  sunshine, 
as  they  do  not  lie  open  even  to  thyself.  An  awful  thought !  you  exclaim.  Yes,  but 
also  unspeakably  precious.  It  is  the  word,  not  of  the  detective  who  has  found  us  out, 
and  who  delivers  us  to  the  judge,  but  of  the  physician  who  comprehends  our  case. 
His  knowledge,  His  diagnosis,  if  I  may  so  say,  is  the  stepping-stone  of  His  grace  ani 
help.  What  the  works  were  is  not  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  epistle.  It  is  not  mere 
quantity,  so  to  speak,  but  quality  that  is  taken  into  account.  The  special  region 
into  which  the  Lord  looks  is  that  of  the  affections.  The  stress  of  His  charge  is  that 
they  were  indifferent:  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  hot  nor  cold."  From 
what  follows  it  is  evident  that  the  Laodiceans  themselves  were  quite  satisfied  with 
things  as  they  were,  and  had  no  wish  for  a  change.  Christian  discipleship  (rooted 
in  faith)  implies  love  to  Jesus  Christ  personally.  Not  merely  a  true  creed,  not  merely 
a  virtuous  and  beautiful  life,  but  the  heart's  love.  There  may  be  very  few  on  carta 
who  think  our  love  worth  the  having ;  but  not  so  with  Jesus,  the  glorified  Eedeemer. 
Man  all  over,  He  desires  and  seeks  our  love.    Year  by  year  our  fellowship  with  Him 


2^8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ought  to  become  more  close  and  delightful ;  year  by  year  our  hearts  should  become 
more  fully  His ;  and  last  love  should  be  a  greater  thing  than  even  first  love.  In  the 
light  of  such  considerations  let  us  now  look  at  Christ's  words  to  Laodicea.  "  Thou 
art  not  cold."  A  Church  of  Christ  should  certainly  not  be  that.  Yet  such  Churches 
exist.  They  are  quite  orthodox  ;  their  creed  is  a  model  of  clearness  and  Scriptural- 
ness ;  they  are  examples  of  moral  propriety ;  there  is  not  merely  good  order,  but  even 
fine  taste  and  exquisite  grace  in  their  arrangements  ;  yet  the  temperature  is  down  at 
freezing-point.  Now,  the  Laodiceans  were  not  cold.  The  Lord  testifies  that  con- 
cerning them.  Neither  were  they  "  hot."  The  condition  indicated  by  this  word 
is  one  of  entire  devotedness  and  joyful  response  to  the  love  of  Him  who  died  for  us, 
and  rose  again.  It  is  not  merely  the  supreme  affection  of  a  holy  soul,  rising  above 
all  others  and  commanding  them  ;  in  some  sense  it  carries  in  it  and  contains  aU 
other  Divine  affections,  and  is  also  the  sum  of  all  duty — the  fulfilUng  of  all  law. 
Now  the  Laodicean  Church  was  not  in  a  condition  like  this.  There  was  nothing 
among  them  that  could  be  called  fervour,  or  zeal,  or  self-consecration,  or  enthusiasm, 
or  holy  passion  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither 
cold  nor  hot."  Their  condition  (for  it  is  a  condition,  and  not  a  stage  in  the  process 
of  warming)  is  described  by  the  word  "lukewarm."  Love,  zeal,  joy,  dehght  in 
worship,  desire  for  the  salvation  of  men,  and  every  other  Christian  affection  and 
emotion,  have  been  cooling  down  till  they  have  reached  the  temperature  of  indiffer- 
ence. The  lukewarmness  is  shown  in  all  directions.  It  is  shown  in  the  angel  of 
the  Church  dealing  in  pleasant  nothings,  instead  of  the  mighty  truths  of  God,  or  in 
intellectual  and  philosophic  refinements,  in  place  of  the  gospel  of  grace — accom- 
modating his  words  to  the  taste  of  his  hearers,  lest  he  should  lose  his  popularity  and 
preach  them  away  from  the  church — it  is  shown  in  the  general  community,  who  love 
to  have  it  so.  It  is  shown  in  the  tone  of  conversation  common  among  them,  which, 
instead  of  being  alway  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt,  degenerates  so  readily  into 
gossip,  debate,  frivohty,  uncharitable  censure  of  the  absent,  or  merest  religious 
gabble,  in  which  the  tongue  does  everything  and  the  heart  does  nothing.  It  is  shown 
in  the  weekly  assembly,  in  the  conscious  "distance  "  from  God  that  is  maintained; 
in  the  dislike  of  spiritual  thought,  and  indeed  incapacity  for  it,  and  unfitness  to  deal 
•wiih  any  great  and  deep  questions  of  Divine  truth.  It  is  shown  in  the  lightness  with 
•which  they  regard  abounding  iniquity,  smiling  where  once  their  eyes  would  have 
filled  with  sudden  tears,  and  they  would  have  withdrawn  to  pray.  It  is  shown  in  the 
neglect  of  personal  effort  for  the  extension  of  the  gospel,  and  the  transference  of  the 
work  to  a  substitute — a  missionary  or  Bible- woman — paid  at  the  cheapest  possible 
rate,  wxih  the  boast  of  having  found  the  missing  link.  It  is  shown  in  conformity  to 
the  world,  in  the  love  of  worldly  society  and  amusements,  in  doing  what  is  religiously 
fashionable,  in  giving  the  cold  shoulder  to  unapplauded  truth,  and  in  avoiding  what- 
ever leads  to  reproach  and  the  cross.  It  is  shown  in  the  practical  powerlessness  of 
the  creed  which  they  profess  to  hold  ;  the  most  awful  and  mysterious  truths,  as  one 
has  expressed  it,  "  losing  all  the  power  of  truths,  and  lying  bedridden  in  the  dormi- 
tory of  the  soul."  It  is  unnecessary  to  proceed  further  with  an  account  of  this  evil 
estate.  It  is  made  up  of  negations,  and  chiefly  the  negation  of  all  earnestness.  Some 
things  indeed  there  are  that  evoke  feeling  in  a  lukewarm  Church,  even  to  passion- 
ateness.  Let  one,  for  example,  tell  plain  truth  about  wine-bibbing  or  ball- 
rooms or  theatres ;  or  let  one  whose  soul  is  thrilled  with  a  sense  of  Divine  mercy, 
and  who  longs  to  be  Christ-like,  stand  up  in  the  church-meeting  and  propose  united 
prayer  for  the  revival  of  religion ;  or  let  some  Jeremiah  with  the  fire  in  his  bones 
§tand  up,  not  fearing  the  face  of  clay,  and  speak  of  eternal  things  with  cries  and 
anguish  and  weeping ;  and  instantly  you  find  the  very  passion  of  resentment  aroused 
—though  it  dare  not,  for  shame's  sake,  express  itself  plainly— against  this  troubling 
of  Israel,  this  breaking  of  the  peace,  this  molesting  of  souls,  this  accusing  of  the 
brethren  ;  while  it  moves  them  not  to  know  that  the  honour  of  Christ's  name  and 
the  salvation  of  the  perishing  are  at  stake.  What  is  the  secret  of  all  this  ?  For 
beforehand  we  should  pronounce  lukewarmness  on  the  part  of  saved  men  an 
impossiuility  ;  and  it  can  never  be  regarded  otherwise  than  as  most  unnatural  and 
even  dreadful  in  a  Christian  Church.  How  does  it  come  to  pass?  One  cause, 
operating  more  extensively  and  with  greater  force  than  is  commonly  thought,  is  the 
endeavour  to  retain  the  first  joy  of  conversion  without  making  progress.  The  whole 
and  only  joy  sought  after  is  the  joy  of  forgiveness,  to  the  neglect  of  the  joy  of  holiness 
and  new  obedience.  The  consequence  is  that  gradually  they  lose  the  very  joy  they 
have,  and  sink  down  into  a  state  of  heartless  apathy.  Again,  there  is  failure  io 
personal,  living,  realising  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  as  our  Kedeemer. 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION,  239 

It  is  the  grand  lack  of  to-day.  Is  it  strange  that  spiritual  fervour  should  decline  ? 
Would  it  not  be  a  miracle  if  it  continued  ?  It  is  as  if  a  betrothed  should  cease  to 
correspond  with  her  afl&anced  husband  ;  the  natural  result  is  the  decay  of  affection. 
Another  cause,  operating  very  widely  and  very  subtly,  is  unbelief  in  the  fulness  and 
power  of  grace  to  enable  us  to  live  a  victorious  Christian  life.  It  is  quietly  taken  for 
granted  that  a  life  of  self-consecration  and  likeness  to  the  Son  of  God  is  an  impos- 
sibility, and  that  the  very  utmost  we  can  expect  is  a  never-ceasing  debate  (conflict  it 
cannot  be  called)  between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit,  with  "  heaven  "  somehow  at  the 
end.  The  question  of  main  interest — ap'parently  never  quite  settled — is.  How  to  get 
clear  off  in  the  day  of  judgment  ?  As  for  reproducing  the  life  of  Christ  among  men, 
manifesting  it  afresh  in  this  mortal  body,  and  being  in  some  real  sense  His  "gospels  " 
to  our  age,  this  is  smiled  at  as  a  very  simple  imagination  indeed.  Then,  next,  those 
who  forget  how  high  the  Christian  calling  is,  and  who  neglect  fellowship  with  God, 
become  blind  to  the  evil  of  intermingling  the  Church  and  the  world  in  one  visible 
community.  For  the  sake  of  numbers,  or  out  of  friendship  with  the  world,  or  to  make 
ourselves  seem  great,  or  out  of  a  cruel  charitableness,  the  flesh  is  received  into  church- 
fellowship,  is  treated  as  a  Christian,  is*  taught  to  use  Christian  forms  of  speech,  to 
Bing  Christian  hymns,  to  pray  Christian  prayers,  to  do  Christian  acts,  to  aim  at  the 
production  of  Christian  virtues,  to  sit  down  with  saints  at  the  Lord's  table  and  com- 
memorate a  love  that  is  not  believed  in  or  felt.  The  necessary  issue  in  the  long  run 
— indeed,  the  run  is  not  very  long — is  the  repression  of  spiritual  fervour  in  the  Church 
and  the  spread  of  apathy.  Another  thing  working  most  disastrously  is  the  poor,  poor 
conception  prevalent  in  Churches  of  the  tremendous  necessity  of  salvation.  It  is  first 
emptied  of  its  significance,  and  then  it  is  put  into  the  second  rank  instead  of  the  first, 
and  then  the  ardour  of  the  Church  inevitably  cools,  and  they  are  content  and  take  it 
as  quite  a  matter  of  course  that  there  should  be  no  conversion  of  sinners  to  God. 
Again,  there  is  the  spirit  of  self-pleasing,  the  love  of  comfort  and  pleasurable  sensa- 
tions, the  substitution  of  taste  and  culture  for  godliness,  the  cry  of  the  preacher,  Move 
us,  move  us !  which  by  and  by  becomes.  Tickle  us,  tickle  us !  Once  more,  there  is  the 
formation  of  worldly  friendships  and  the  entering  into  associations  in  which  it  is 
impossible  to  preserve  the  spirit  of  Christ.  The  injury  done  to  piety  by  such  associa- 
tions and  friendships  is  beyond  calculation,  both  in  extent  and  deptli.  Now,  in 
whatever  light  men  may  regard  this  condition  (and  the  world  praises  it,  for  the  world 
loves  its  own),  Christ  is  displeased  and  grieved  with  it.  "  I  would,"  He  says,  "  that 
thou  wert  cold  or  hot."  Wilt  thou  not  be  so ?  That  "  would"  is  no  unimpassioned 
word,  as  one  might  say,  I  should  prefer  it  thus  or  thus :  it  is  a  sigh  from  the  heart 
of  distressed  love ;  it  carries  Divine  emotion  in  it,  reminding  us  of  that  lamentation 
over  Jerusalem,  "I  would — and  ye  would  not."  Thus  the  Lord  makes  it  evident 
that  He  has  no  pleasure  in  this  half-and-half  condition.  This  is  the  Lord's  judgment 
in  the  case :  "  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  My  mouth."  No  doubt  every  believing  soul  in 
Laodicea  would  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord,  even  though  involved  in  the 
prevalent  lukewarmness.  But  the  Church  would  be  rejected  from  being  a  Church. 
Lukewarmness  unrepented  of  issues  in  rejection.  It  is  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  of  Laodicea  as  a  spiritual  community  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  Lord's 
threatening  is  to  be  found;  and  the  outward  desolation  is  to  be  regarded 
only  as  the  visible  symbolism  of  a  tremendous  spiritual  fact.  (cT".  Culross,  D.D.) 
An  earnest  warning  against  lukewarmness : — I.  The  state  into  which  Churches 
ABE  VERY  APT  TO  FALL.  1.  A  Church  may  fall  into  a  condition  far  other  than  that  for 
which  it  has  a  repute.  It  may  be  famous  for  zeal,  and  yet  be  lethargic.  The 
address  of  our  Lord  begins,  "  I  know  thy  works,"  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Nobody  else 
knows  you.  Men  think  better  of  you  than  you  deserve.  You  do  not  know  yourselves, 
you  think  your  works  to  be  excellent,  but  I  know  them  to  be  very  different."  The 
public  can  only  read  reports,  but  Jesus  sees  for  Himself.  He  knows  what  is  done,  and 
how  it  is  done,  and  why  it  is  done.  2.  The  condition  described  in  our  text  is  one  of 
mournful  indifference  and  carelessness.  They  were  not  infidels,  yet  they  were  not 
earnest  believers ;  they  did  not  oppose  the  gospel,  neither  did  they  defend  it ;  they 
were  not  working  mischief,  neither  were  they  doing  any  great  good.  3.  This  condi- 
tion of  indifference  is  attended  with  perfect  self-complacency.  The  people  who 
ought  to  be  mourning  are  rejoicing,  and  where  they  should  hang  out  signals  of 
distress  they  are  flaunting  the  banners  of  triumph.  What  can  a  Church  require  that 
we  have  not  in  abundance  ?  Yet  their  spiritual  needs  are  terrible.  Spiritually 
poor  and  proud.  4.  This  Church  of  Laodicea  had  fallen  into  a  condition  which  had 
chased  away  its  Lord.  "  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."  That  is  not  the  position 
which  our  Lord  occupies  in  reference  to  a  truly  flourishing  Church.    If  we  are  walk- 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ing  aright  with  Him,  He  is  in  the  midst  of  the  Church,  dwelling  there,  and  revealing 
Himself  to  His  people.  H.  The  danger  of  such  a  state.  1.  The  great  danger  is, 
to  be  rejected  of  Christ.  "  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  My  mouth."  Churches  are  in 
Christ's  mouth  in  several  ways,  they  are  used  by  Him  as  His  testimony  to  the 
world.  He  speaks  to  the  world  through  their  lives  and  ministries.  When  God  is  with 
a  people  they  speak  with  Divine  power  to  the  world,  but  if  we  grow  lukewarm  Christ 
says,  "  Their  teachers  shall  not  profit,  for  I  have  not  sent  them,  neither  am  I  with 
them.  Their  word  shall  be  as  water  spilt  on  the  ground,  or  as  the  whistling  of  the 
wind."  Better  far  for  me  to  die  than  to  be*  spued  out  of  Christ's  mouth.  Then  He 
also  ceases  to  plead  for  such  a  Church.  Mighty  are  His  pleadings  for  those  He 
really  loves,  and  countless  are  the  blessings  which  come  in  consequence.  It  will  be 
an  evil  day  when  He  casts  a  Church  out  of  that  interceding  mouth.  Do  you  not  tremble 
at  such  a  prospect?  2.  Such  a  Church  will  be  left  to  its  fallen  condition,  to  become 
wretched — that  is  to  say,  miserable,  unhappy,  divided,  without  the  presence  of  God, 
and  so  without  delight  in  the  ways  of  God.  HI.  The  remedies  which  the  Lobd 
EMPLOYS.  1.  Jesus  gives  a  clear  discovery  as  to  the  Church's  true  state.  He  says  to 
it,  "  Thou  art  lukewarm,  thou  art  wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and 
naked."  I  rejoice  to  see  people  wiUing  to  know  the  truth,  but  most  men  do  not  wish 
to  know  it,  and  this  is  an  ill  sign.  We  shall  never  get  right  as  long  as  we  are  confi- 
dent that  we  are  so  already.  SeK-complacency  is  the  death  of  repentance.  2.  Our 
Lord's  next  remedy  is  gracious  counsel.  He  says,  "I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me  gold 
tried  in  the  fire."  3.  Now  comes  a  third  remedy,  sharp  and  cutting,  but  sent  in 
love,  namely  rebukes  and  chastenings.  "  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten." 
4.  The  best  remedy  for  backshding  Churches  is  more  communion  with  Christ. 
"  Behold,"  saith  He,  "  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."  This  text  belongs  to 
the  Church  of  God,  not  to  the  unconverted.  It  is  addressed  to  the  Laodicean  Church. 
There  is  Christ  outside  the  Church,  driven  there  by  her  unkindness,  but  He  has  not 
gone  far  away.  He  loves  His  Church  too  much  to  leave  her  altogether.  He  longs  to 
come  back,  and  therefore  He  waits  at  the  doorpost.  He  knows  that  the  Church  will 
never  be  restored  till  He  comes  back,  and  He  desires  to  bless  her,  and  so  He 
stands  waiting  and  knocking.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Tht  destiny  of  a  lukewarm 
Church : — I.  The  complaint.  1.  This  complaint  is  made  against  the  Church.  We 
learn  from  this  fact  that  Churches  do  become  corrupt;  they  do  decay.  Keep,  there- 
fore, the  Christ  of  God,  who  never  will  fail,  or  decay,  exalted  above  the  Church  in 
your  minds  and  hearts.  2.  This  complaint  is  made  by  One  who  can  say,  "I  know." 
3.  This  complaint  is  made  by  One  who  does  know,  and  cannot  misrepresent.  4. 
This  complaint  is  made  by  One  who  does  know,  and  cannot  misrepresent,  and  who 
has  a  right  to  complain.  Just  let  us  see  now  what  is  meant  by  the  lukewarmness 
complained  of.  The  people  had  love  for  Christ,  but  it  was  not  ardent.  The  people 
had  charity  among  themselves,  but  it  was  not  fervent.  The  people  received  spiritual 
blessings,  but  they  did  not  thirst  for  them.  The  people  wrought  good  works,  but  not 
zealously.  The  people  prayed,  but  not  fervently.  They  gave,  but  not  Uberally  or 
cheerfully.  The  whole  heart  was  not  given  to  anything  in  connection  with  church 
life.  Perhaps  through  the  neglect  of  the  msans  of  preserving  spiritual  heat,  or  by 
using  unwise  means  or  false  means,  tl  ese  peDple  had  become  lukewarm,  or  perhaps 
by  some  besetting  sin.  5.  Now  this  complaint  is  based  on  works.  "  I  know  thy 
works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  not."  One  would  have  thought  that  "  the 
Amen,  the  true  and  faithful  Witness,"  would  have  said,  "I  know  thy  heart;  I  know 
thy  spirit."  The  complaint  is  based  on  works,  and  not  so  much  on  general  conduct 
as  on  labours  of  love.  These  were  less  than  since  their  first  profession.  Oh,  what 
a  striking  fact  this  is  in  church  life  !  How  thoroughly  it  reappears  before  the  eye  of 
every  pastor.  6.  See,  the  complaint  is  based  on  works,  and  it  is  made  with  evident 
feeling.  Christ  could  not  speak  without  f eehng,  far  less  could  He  complain  without 
feeling.  It  is  the  want  of  feeling  in  the  complaints  that  people  make  about  Churches 
that  so  often  distresses  one.  II.  The  thbeatening.  Any  food  or  drink  which  ought  to 
be  either  hot  or  cold  is  most  unpleasant  if  lukewarm  ;  and  the  strong  language  used 
here  means,  •'  I  will  reject  thee."  1.  This  threatening  is  addressed,  not  to  the 
individual,  but  to  the  Church.  Christ  presently  turns  to  the  individual,  counselling 
him  "  to  buy  of  Me  gold."  You  cannot  be  in  communion  with  Christ  without  being 
rebuked.  Why  ?  Because  your  faults  and  defects  are  continually  coming  out,  and 
His  love  for  you  is  such  that  He  will  not  let  them  pass — He  cannot  let  them  pass. 
If,  however,  you  be  merely  a  nominal  disciple,  they  will  often  pass  unnoticed,  and 
you  will  not  hear  a  sound  of  rebuke  from  the  skies  until  the  day  of  final  reckoning. 
2.  "  The  Amen  "  rejects  the  lukewarm  Church.     He  rejects  it — how  ?    First,  by 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  241 

withdrawing  His  Spirit  from  it  because  such  a  Church  is  not  His  temple.     And 
secondly,  by  not  using  it  for  the  purposes  of  His  kingdom.   3.  Now,  observe,  in  con- 
clusion, that  works  are  expected  from  a  Christian  Church,  and  the  works  of  the 
Church  show  whether  it  be  cold  or  hot.     (S.  Martin.)         Laodicea : — I.  The  lovino 
REBUKE  or  THE  FAITHFUL  WiTNESs.    The  persous  thus  described  are  Christian  people 
(for  their  Christianity  is  presupposed),  with  very  little,  though  a  little,  warmth 
of  affection  and  glow  of  Christian  love  and  consecration.    Further  this  defectiveness 
of  Christian  feeling  is  accompanied  with  a  large  amount  of  self-complacency.  Then 
again,  this  deficiency  of  warmth  is  worse  than  absolute  zero.      "  I  would  thou  wert 
cold  or  hot."    Because  there  is  no  man  more  hopeless  than  a  man  on  whom  the 
power  of  Christianity  has  been  brought  to  bear,  and  has  failed  in  warming  and 
quickening  him.     Is  that  our  condition  ?    Look  at  the  standard  of  Christian  life 
round  about  us.    Mark  how  wavering  the  line  is  between  the  Church  and  the  world ; 
how  little  upon  our  side  of  the  line  there  is  of  conspicuous  consecration   and 
unworldliness :  how  entirely  in  regard  of  an  enormous  mass  of  professing  Christians, 
the  maxims  that  are  common  in  the  world  are  their  maxims ;    and  the  sort  of  life 
that  the  world  lives  is  the  sort  of  life  that  they  live.      Look  at  your  Churches 
and  mark  their  feebleness,  the  slow  progress  of  the  gospel  among  them,  the  low  lives 
that  the  bulk  of  professing  Christians  are  living,  and  answer  the  question,  is  that 
the  operation  of  a  Divine  Spirit  that  comes  to  transform  and  to  quicken  everything 
into  His  own  vivid  and  flaming  life  ?  or  is  it  the  operation  of  our  own  selfishness  and 
worldliness,  crushing  down  and  hemming  in  the  power  that  ought  to  sway  us  ?     II. 
The  causes  of  this  lukewabmness  of  spiritual  life.      Of  course  the  tendency  to  it 
is  in  us  all.     Take  a  bar  of  iron  out  of  the  furnace  on  a  winter  day,  and  lay  it  down 
in  the  air,  and  there  is  nothing  more  wanted.      Leave  it  there,  and  very  soon 
the  white  heat  will  change  into  livid  dulness,  and  then  there  will  come  a  scale  over 
it,  and  in  a  short  time  it  will  be  as  cold  as  the  frosty  atmosphere  around  it.  And  so 
there  is  always  a  refrigerating  process  acting  upon  us,  which  needs  to  be  counter- 
acted by  continual  contact  with  the  fiery  furnace  of  spiritual  warmth,  or  else  we  are 
cooled  down  to  the  degree  of  cold  around  us.    But  besides  this  universally  operating 
cause  there  are  many  others  which  affect  us.     I  find  fault  with  no  man  for  the 
earnestness  which  he  flings  into  his  business,  but  I  ask  you  to  say  whether  the  rela- 
tive importance  of  the  things  seen  and  unseen  is  fairly  represented  by  the  relative 
amount  of  earnestness  with  which  you  and  I  pursue  these  respectively.     Then, 
again,  the  existence  among  us,  or  around  us,  of  a  certain  widely  diffused  doubt  as  to 
the  truths  of  Christianity  is,  illogically  enough,  a  cause  for  diminished  fervour  on 
the  part  of  the  men  that  do  not  doubt  them.     That  is  foolish,  and  it  is  strange,  but 
it  is  true.    And  there  is  another  case,  which  I  name  with  some  hesitation,  but  which 
yet  seems  to  me  to  be  worthy  of  notice ;  and  that  is,  the  increasing  degree  to  which 
Christian  men  are  occupied  with  what  we  call,  for  want  of  a  better  name,  secular 
things.    I  grudge  the  political  world  nothing  that  it  gets  of  your  strength,  but  I  do 
grudge,  for  your  sakes,  as  well  as  for  the  Church's  sake,  that  so  often  the  two  forms 
of  activity  are  supposed  by  professing  Christians  to  be  incompatible,  and  that  there- 
fore the  more  important  is  neglected,  and  the  less  important  done.   III.  The  loving 
CALL  TO  deepened  EARNESTNESS.     "  Be  zcalous,  therefore."    Lay  hold  of  the  truth 
that  Christ  possesses  a  full  store  of  all  that  you  can  want.      Meditate  on  that  great 
truth  and  it  will  kindle  a  flame  of  desire  and  of  fruition  in  your  hearts.     "  Be 
zealous,  therefore."    And  again,  "  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten."   "  Be 
zealous,  therefore."    That  is  to  say,  ^asp  the  great  thought  of  the  loving  Christ, 
all  whose  dealings,  even  when  His  voice  assumes  severity,  and  His  hand  comes 
armed  with  a  rod,  are  the  outcome  and  manifestation  of  His  love ;  and  sink  into 
that  love,  and  that  will  make  your  hearts  glow.     "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock."  "  Be  zealous,  therefore."  Think  of  the  earnest,  patient,  long-suffering  appeal 
which  the  Master  makes,  bearing  with  all  our  weaknesses,  and  not  suffering  Hfs  gentle 
hand  to  be  turned  away,  though  the  door  has  been  so  long  barred  and  bolted  in  His 
face.    IV.  The  merciful  call  to  a  new  beginning.   "Kepent."   (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  danger  of  lukewarmness  in  religion  .-—The  soul  of  man  is  endowed  with  such 
active  powers  that  it  cannot  be  idle  :  and,  if  we  look  round  the  world,  we  see  it  all 
alive.     What  vigorous  action,  what  labour  and  toil  about  the  necessaries  of  life, 
about  riches  and  honours  1    But  it  is  quite  otherwise  in  religion.     Only  a  few  act  as 
if  they  regarded  religion  as    the  most   important  concern   of  life.      For  look 
round    you,   the   generality    are    very    indifferent    about     it.       They     will    not 
indeed  renounce  all  religion  entirely;  they  will  make  some  little  profession  of 
religion  ;  but  it  is  a  matter  of  indifferency  with  them,  and  they  are  but  Uttle  con- 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

cerned  about  it ;  they  are  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot.  Now  such  a  luke- 
•warmness  is  an  eternal  solecism  in  religion  ;  it  is  the  most  inconsistent  thing 
imaginable  :  more  so  than  avowed  impiety ;  therefore,  says  Christ,  "  I  would  thou 
wert  cold  or  hot" — i.e.  "  You  might  be  anything  more  consistently  than  what  you  are. 
If  you  looked  upon  religion  as  a  cheat,  and  openly  rejected  the  profession  of  it,  it 
would  not  be  strange  that  you  should  be  careless  about  it  and  disregard  it  in  practice. 
But  to  own  it  true,  and  make  a  profession  of  it,  and  yet  be  lukewarm  and  indifferent 
about  it,  this  is  the  most  absurd  conduct  that  can  be  conceived  ;  for,  if  it  be  true,  it 
is  certainly  the  most  important  and  interesting  truth  in  all  the  world,  and  requires 
the  utmost  exertion  of  all  your  powers."  There  are  some  aggravations  peculiar  to 
the  lukewarm  professor  that  render  him  peculiarly  odious  ;  as — 1.  He  adds  the  sin 
of  a  hypocritical  profession  to  his  other  sins.  2.  He  adds  the  guilt  of  presumption, 
pride,  and  self-flattery,  imagining  he  is  in  a  safe  state  and  in  favour  with  God ; 
whereas  he  that  makes  no  pretensions  to  religion  has  no  such  umbrage  for  this 
conceit  and  delusion.  3.  He  is  in  the  most  dangerous  condition,  as  he  is  not  liable 
to  conviction,  nor  so  likely  to  be  brought  to  repentance.  4.  The  honour  of  God  and 
religion  is  more  injured  by  the  negligent,  imconscientious  behaviour  of  these  Laodi- 
ceans,  than  by  the  vices  of  those  who  make  no  pretensions  to  religion  ;  with  whom 
therefore  its  honour  has  no  connection.  But  to  be  more  particular  :  let  us  take  a 
view  of  a  lukewarm  temper  in  various  attitudes,  or  with  respect  to  several  objects. 

1.  Consider  who  and  what  God  is.  He  is  the  original  uncreated  beauty,  the  sum 
total  of  all  natural  and  moral  perfections,  the  origin  of  all  the  excellences  that  are 
scattered  through  this  glorious  universe ;  He  is  the  supreme  good,  and  the  only 
proper  portion  for  our  immortal  spirits.  He  also  sustains  the  most  majestic  and 
endearing  relations  to  us  :  our  Father,  our  Preserver  and  Benefactor,  our  Lawgiver, 
and  our  Judge.    Is  such  a  Being  to  be  put  off  with  heartless,  lukewarm  services  ? 

2.  Is  lukewarmness  a  proper  temper  towards  Jesus  Christ  ?  Is  this  a  suitable  return 
for  that  love  which  brought  Him  down  from  His  native  paradise  into  our  wretched 
world  ?  Oh,  was  Christ  indifferent  about  your  salvation  ?  Was  His  love  lukewarm 
towards  you  ?  3.  Is  lukewarmness  and  indifferency  a  suitable  temper  with  respect 
to  a  future  state  of  happiness  or  misery  ?  4.  Let  us  see  how  this  lukewarm  temper 
agrees  with  the  duties  of  religion.  And  as  I  cannot  particularise  them  all,  I  shall 
only  mention  an  instance  or  two.  View  a  lukewarm  professor  in  prayer.  The 
words  proceed  no  further  than  from  your  tongue  :  you  do  not  pour  them  out  from 
the  bottom  of  your  hearts  ;  they  have  no  life  or  spirit  in  them,  and  you  hardly  ever 
reflect  upon  their  meaning.  And  when  you  have  talked  away  to  God  in  this  manner, 
you  will  have  it  to  pass  for  a  prayer.  But  surely  such  prayers  must  bring  down  a 
curse  upon  you  instead  of  a  blessing  :  such  sacrifices  must  be  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord  (Prov.  xv.  8).  The  next  instance  I  shall  mention  is  with  regard  to  the  Word  of 
God.  You  own  it  Divine,  you  profess  it  the  standard  of  your  religion,  and  the  most 
excellent  book  in  the  world.  Now,  if  this  be  the  case,  it  is  God  that  sends  you  an 
epistle  when  you  are  reading  or  hearing  His  Word.  How  impious  and  provoking 
then  must  it  be  to  neglect  it,  to  let  it  lie  by  you  as  an  antiquated,  useless  book,  or  to 
read  it  in  a  careless,  superficial  manner,  and  hear  it  with  an  inattentive,  wandering 
mind !  Ye  modern  Laodiceans,  are  you  not  yet  struck  with  horror  at  the  thought 
of  that  insipid,  formal,  spiritless  religion  you  have  hitherto  been  contented  wiQi  ? 
1.  Consider  the  difficulties  and  dangers  in  your  way.  You  must  be  made  new  men, 
quite  other  creatures  than  you  now  are.  And  oh  !  can  this  work  be  successfully 
performed  while  you  make  such  faint  and  feeble  efforts?  2.  Consider  how  earnest 
and  active  men  are  in  other  pursuits.  Is  religion  the  only  thing  which  demands  the 
utmost  exertion  of  all  your  powers,  and  alas  !  is  that  the  only  thing  in  which  you 
will  be  dull  and  inactive?  (S.  Davies,  M.A.)  Lukewarmness  : — I.  What  is 
LUKEWARMNESS  IN  BELiGioN  ?  It  is  uot  Christian  moderation.  There  is  the  popular 
and  not  unfounded  prejudice  against  extremes,  a  suspicion  of  too  great  zeal,  too 
much  enthusiasm.  And  so  in  the  service  and  the  worship  of  God  people  choose  a 
middle  course  between  those  who  are  "  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts,"  and 
those  who  turn  their  backs  upon  Him.  They  would  not  like  to  think  anything 
extravagant ;  and  they  prefer  to  follow  public  opinion  as  safest ;  and  then  they 
think  they  are  letting  their  moderation  be  known  unto  all  men.  Yet,  after  all,  when 
we  come  to  scrutinise  this  spirit,  it  is  not  quite  like  moderation  and  sober-minded- 
ness, and  the  Lord's  carefulness  not  to  offend  the  weak.  It  is  much  more  like 
worldly-mindedness.  II.  What  aee  the  causes  op  lukewarmness  ?  1.  May  we 
not  put  first,  worldly  prosperity,  the  intrusion  of  something  else  into  the  place  which 
God  once  occupied,  and  which  God  alone  ought  to   occupy  in  the   affections? 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  243 

2.  Another  cause  is  the  frequency  of  little  sins.  Evil  speaking,  untruth- 
fulness and  exaggeration,  outbreaks  of  temper,  vanity,  self-indulgence,  these, 
freely  indulged,  show  not  only  that  religion  has  no  real  power  in  the  heart, 
but  relax  the  hold  of  conscience,  lessen  our  confidence  towards  God,  and  so 
chill  our  love.  3.  Then,  again,  we  may  mention  dissipation  of  mind,  occupation 
in  so  many  pursuits  that  little  or  no  time  is  allowed  for  undisturbed  communion  with 
God  in  prayer  and  meditation.  We  all  find  it  difl&cult  to  keep  our  attention  fixed 
upon  God  without  distraction.  But  how  much  harder  if  we  allow  our  hearts  to  be 
choked  with  the  pleasures  and  cares  of  this  world  !  And  if  we  cannot  find  time  to 
think  about  Him  we  certainly  shall  not  have  power  to  love  Him  first,  perhaps  not 
to  love  Him  at  all  with  anything  that  deserves  the  name  of  love.  In  other  ways  this 
dissipation  of  mind  serves  to  produce  lukewarmness.  If  we  are  too  busy  to  fix  our 
minds  upon  God  we  shall  scarcely  have  time  to  pay  much  attention  to  ourselves. 
How  should  we  manage  that  which  requires  so  much  resolution,  so  much  abstraction 
from  worldly  things,  strict  self-examination  ?  How  should  we  accurately  measure 
our  gain  and  loss  since  the  last  solemn  inquiry  into  our  spiritual  state  ?  How 
ascertain  where  we  stand  before  God  ?  HI.  These  are  some  of  the  causes,  and  some 
of  the  symptoms  too — for  it  is  impossible  to  keep  them  distinct — of  lukewarmness. 
Some  other  symptoms  may  be  mentioned.  If  you  suffer  yourself  on  every  httle 
pretext  to  shorten,  or  to  omit,  your  devotions  ;  if  you  care  more  about  the  fact  of 
going  through  them  than  about  the  manner  or  the  spirit  in  which  you  go  through 
them ;  if,  when  you  feel  not  altogether  happy  in  your  conscience  towards  God  and 
man,  you  either  neglect  self-examination,  or  set  about  it  in  a  slovenly  way  ;  if,  when 
you  have  detected  a  fault  in  yourself,  you  are  slow  at  reformation  ;  if  you  act,  day 
after  day,  without  once  sanctifying  your  motives  and  your  actions  to  God ;  if  you 
never  aim  at  forming  habits  of  obedience  to  His  commandments  ;  if  you  never 
attack  any  one  particular  sin ;  if  you  despise  little  things  and  daily  opportunities ; 
if  you  delight  rather  in  thinking  of  the  good  you  have  done  than  of  the  good  you 
have  left  undone,  resting  on  the  past  rather  than  looking  forward  into  the  future  ; 
if  you  never  care  to  have  God  in  all  your  thoughts,  and,  by  meditation  at 
least,  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  then  I  fear  it  must  be  said  of  you 
that  you  are  lukewarm.  IV.  Would  to  God  that  we  could  as  easily  tell  the  remedy 
as  the  disease.  Try,  then,  if  ever  you  feel  your  love  growing  cold,  your  faith  less 
vivid,  to  quicken  them  by  meditation  on  eternal  truths,  so  as  to  saturate  your  minds 
with  the  conviction  of  their  infinite  importance.  Fight  against  the  cause  of  luke- 
warmness ;  against  worldliness,  self-indulgence,  carelessness,  habitual  sins,  however 
little  they  may  seem,  self-complacency  in  the  past,  the  oppression  of  too  many  cares. 
That  can  be  no  duty  which  perils  the  soul.  {W.  Mitchell,  M.A.)  Lukewarmness  : — I. 
An  exposure  of  some  of  the  disgustful  things  which  are  found  in  lukewarm 
RELIGION.  1.  A  lukewarm  religion  is  a  direct  insult  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  I 
boldly  say  I  do  not  believe  what  He  teaches,  I  have  given  Him  the  lie.  But  if  I  say 
to  Him,  "  I  believe  what  Thou  teachest,  but  I  do  not  think  it  of  sufficient  importance 
for  me  to  disturb  myself  about  it,"  I  do  in  fact  more  wilfully  resist  His  word  ;  I  as 
much  as  say  to  Him,  "If  it  be  true,  yet  is  it  a  thing  which  I  so  despise  that  I  will 
not  give  my  heart  to  it."  2.  Bethink  you,  again,  does  the  Lord  Jesus  deserve  such 
treatment  at  your  hands  ?  and  may  He  not  well  say  of  such  hearts  as  ours.  He  would 
that  we  were  "  either  cold  or  hot "?  3.  The  lukewarm  Christian  compromises  God 
before  the  eyes  of  the  world  in  all  he  does  and  says.  The  world  sees  a  man  who 
professes  to  be  going  to  heaven,  but  he  is  travelling  there  at  a  snail's  pace.  He  pro- 
fesses to  believe  there  is  a  hell,  and  yet  he  has  tearless  eyes  and  never  seeks  to 
snatch  souls  from  going  into  the  fire.  Let  the  minister  be  as  earnest  as  ever  he  will 
about  the  things  of  God,  the  lukewarm  Christian  neutralises  any  effect  the  minister 
can  produce,  because  the  world  will  judge  the  Church  not  by  the  standard  of  the 
pulpit  so  much  as  by  the  level  of  the  pew.  And  thus  they  say,  "  There  is  no  need 
for  us  to  make  so  much  stir  about  it ;  these  peculiar  people,  these  saints,  take  it 
remarkably  easy  ;  they  think  it  will  all  be  well ;  no  doubt  we  do  as  much  as  they 
do,  for  they  do  very  little."  4.  The  Lord  hateth  lukewarmness,  because  wherever  it 
is  found  it  is  out  of  place.  There  is  no  spot  near  to  the  throne  of  God  where  luke- 
warmness could  stand  in  a  seemly  position.  II.  Dissuasives  against  lukewarmness. 
As  Christians,  you  have  to  do  with  solemn  realities  ;  you  have  to  do  with  eternity, 
with  death,  with  heaven,  with  hell,  with  Christ,  with  Satan,  with  souls,  and  can  you 
deal  with  these  things  with  a  cold  spirit  ?  Suppose  you  can,  there  certainly  never 
was  a  greater  marvel  in  the  world,  if  you  should  be  able  to  deal  with  them  success- 
iully.     These  things  demand  the  whole  man.     And  the  day  is  coming  when  you 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

will  think  these  things  worthy  of  your  whole  heart.     When  you  and  I  shall  lie 
stretched  upon  our  dying  beds,  I  think  we  shall  have  to  regret,  above  aU  other 
things,  our  coldness  of  heart.    Ay,  and  there  will  be  a  time  when  the  things  of  God 
will  seem  yet  more  real  even  than  on  the  dying  bed.    I  refer  to  the  day  when  we 
shaD  stand  at  the  bar  of  God.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  first  stages  of  spintual 
decline  : — If  the  Christian's  progress  may  be  likened  to  a  steep  and  difficult  ascent, 
we  may  compare  his  first  beginnings  of  decline  to  the  slow  and  doubtful  motion  of 
some  heavy  substance  from  which  the  force  is  removed  which  caused  it  to  ascend, 
while  the  impetus  is  not  yet  gained  which  will  shortly  urge  it  down  its  headlong, 
unresisted  course.    Betwixt  ceasing  to  mount  upwards  and  beginning  to  fall  back, 
there  is  an  awful  moment  of  suspense.     Or,  to  use  another  illustration,  when  the 
tide  has  risen  to  its  height  there  is  still- water  for  a  time,  before  the  ebbing  waves 
begin  to  retire.     Just  so  with  the  business  of  the  soul.    I.  The  signs  of  ltjkewakm- 
NESs  IN  RELIGION.     1.  Wc  may  first  describe  the  state  to  which  the  Lord  refers  in 
the  message  to  Laodicea  as  a  state  of  great  spiritual  insensibility.     2.  Another 
symptom  of  lukewarmness  in  religion  may  be  discovered  in  the  influence  which  the 
opinions  and  the  example  of  the  world  exert  upon  us.     Why  not  preserve  just  so 
much  of  religion  as  will  satisfy  the  meagre  demands  of  a  sleepy  conscience,  and  yet 
enjoy  the  pleasures,  and  pursue  with  breathless  haste  the  riches,  of  the  world?   The 
attempt  is  vain  1     3.  But,  further,  that  Laodicean  spirit  which  the  text  describes, 
betrays  itself  at  length  in  a  decay  of  zeal  for  God.    Does  it  cause  you  but  little 
sorrow  that  the  Saviour  of  the  world  should  still  be  an  outcast  from  so  large  and 
fair  a  portion  of  His  inheritance  ?    Have  you  no  bowels  of  mercies  for  a  perishing 
world  ?    n.  Some  of  those  circumstances  which  render  this  lukewarm  state  so 
DANGEROUS  TO  THE  SOUL.     1.  The  first  that  strikes  us  arises  from  the  very  nature  of 
spiritual  religion.    For  it  is  a  contest  against  a  corrupt  nature.    All  the  natural  aids 
are  on  the  side  of  sin :  the  world  and  the  flesh  are  banded  in  one  common  cause. 
So  that  to  lose  ground  in  religion  is  not  merely  to  risk  our  souls  by  wasting  those 
advantages  we  have  gained,  but,  further,  it  is  to  arm  our  enemies  ;  it  is  to  give  to 
them  the  advantages  which  we  have  lost  :  for  the  attractive  power  of  sin  increases 
as  we  approach  it.     2,  The  danger  of  this  state  is  increased  by  the  circumstance 
that  there  is  in  it  nothing  which  at  first  excites  alarm.    For  it  is  not  a  lapse  intc 
open  sin.    It  does  not  amount  to  a  rejection  of  the  gospel.    After  all,  the  lukewarm 
Christian,  compared  with  the  multitude,  is  a  religious  man.    And  all  this  serves  tc 
soothe  and  to  quiet  his  conscience.     {J.  B.  Marsden,  M.A.)        The  danger  of  luke- 
warmness : — 1.  There  seems  to  be  more  likelihood  of  repentance,  where  men  art 
manifestly  wrong,  than  where  there  is  ever  so  small  ground  on  which  they  flatter 
themselves  that  they  are  right.     Conscience  in  the  one  case  may  be  awakened  more 
readily  by  God's  ordinary  dispensations  of  providence  and  grace,  than  in  the  other, 
where  it  is  lulled  by  the  fatal  satisfaction  of  being  no  worse  than  the  world  in 
general,  of  being  ahnost  if  not  quite  a  Christian.     2.  The  absolutely  cold  are  in 
one  respect  less  hardened   than  the  lukewarm.      They  have  at  least   usually 
less  familiarity  with  those  means  of  grace,  whose  abuse  is  as  sure  to  harden 
the  heart   as  their  right  use  is  to  melt  and  refine  it.      3.  A  third  reason  why 
the  faithful    Witness  might    wish  even    that  we  were    cold  rather  than  luke- 
warm    is,    that    in    the    latter    case    we    do    more     signal    disparagement    to 
the  grace  He  dispenses,  to  the  gospel  He  has  revealed.      {Canon   Girdlestone.) 
The  three  stages  of  religious   emotion: — I.  The  hot  condition.     Some  degree  cf 
warmth  is  necessary  for  the  commencement  of  a  religious  experience.    In  the 
earliest  days,  wherever  the  Word  was  preached,  wherever  it  penetrated  men's  hearts, 
there  was  a  rush  of  spiritual  emotion,  a  glow  of  inspiration,  an  effervescence  of 
feeling,  a  new,  strange  joy.     This  was  the  token  of  the  Spirit's  presence.    And  what 
was  true  at  first  is  true  still,  because  religious  history  is  a  history  of  commence- 
ments and  recommencements.     Science  has  taught  us  that  heat  and  motion  are 
interchangeable,  that  heat  is  but  a  mode  or  form  of  motion,  and  motion  but  a  mode 
or  form  of  heat.     The  heat  of  the  furnace  and  boiler  is  turned  into  the  motion  of 
the  engine ;  the  heat  produced  by  the  food  we  eat  is  turned  into  the  motion  of  our 
bodies.    The  sun's  heat  stored  up  in  the  coal  measures  becomes  the  motion  of  a 
thousand  factories.     So  it  is  in  the  moral  world.     To  start  and  to  keep  up  motion, 
right  action,  zealous  effort,  painstaking  and  fruitful  activity,  you  must  have  heat 
within  the  soul.    You  know  the  type  of  Christian  men  whose  enthusiasm  is  always 
at  a  glow.    It  brightens,  and  sparkles,  and  runs  over.     They  thaw  you,  they 
warm  you,  when  you  come  near  them.     These  are  the  men  who  seem  to  respond 
to   every  genial  influence  of  God's  Spirit.     They  have  built  the  house  of  their 


CHA?.  m.]  REVELATION.  245 

faith  not  merely  on  the  good  foundation,  but  they  have  been  wise,   and  built 
it  with  a  warm,   bright   exposure  as  well.     The   forces  of  evil  and  temptation 
are  strong.    You  must,  therefore,  have  ardent  religious  feeling ;   you  must  have 
the  action,  the  sympathy,  the  way  of  looking  at  and  speaking  of  things  that 
come  with  such  strong  feeling ;  otherwise  the  young  and  trustful,  the  men  full 
of  keen,  vigorous  life,  will  be  swept  into  some  of  those  vortices  of  evil  and  be 
lost.     n.  The  cold  condition.     There  is,  of  course,  in  human  nature  a  continual 
tendency  to  cool  down.    Like  the  earth's  surface  during  the  night,  our  hearts  are 
incessantly  raying  off  heat.     People  don't  intend  probably  to  be  cold  and  insensible 
to  the  things  of  God,  but  their  mental  force  is  run  off,  and  so  they  grow  cold. 
But  then,  once  coldness  comes  it  propagates  itself,  it  even  justifies  itseli.     Men  per- 
manently, steadily  cold,  men  with  the  spiritual  thermometer  standing  constantly 
at  zero,  take  various  lines.     There  is  among  those  who  still  profess  to  be  Christians 
what  may  be  called  an  orthodox  and  a  heterodox  coldness.     Orthodox  coldness  still 
preserves  the  form  of  its  faith,  though  that  faith,  instead  of  being  a  living  figure,  is 
a  mere  marble  effigy — a  corpse.     Heterodox  coldness  has  readjusted  its  beliefs  and 
considerably  modified  them.     Cold  tends  to  contract  most  things,  and  faith  among 
the  rest.     When  men  become  cold  after  this  fashion  they  become  incapable  of  high 
belief,  the  belief  that  transforms  a  man  and  brings  him  near  to  God.     They  narrow 
their  horizon,  and  all  the  stars  go  out  of  their  sky.     Cold  men  are  dangerous 
neighbours.     They  very  soon  draw  off  all  the  heat  from  us.    Let  a  centre  of  ice 
once  form  in  a  pond,  and  if  the  water  be  undisturbed,  in  a  few  hours  it  is  frozen 
over.     If  we  wish  to  preserve  our  heat,  we  must  take  care  what  company  we  keep. 
Alas !  for  that  icy  chill  that  has  settled  over  many  a  heart  that  once  throbbed  kindly 
and  truly  in  the  service  of  Christ  and  of  humanity !     Some  of  the  cold  men  look 
like  icebergs.     The  fact  is,  they  are  not  icebergs ;  they  are  extinct  volcanoes.    They 
once  glowed  with  deep  subterranean  fires,  and  a  red-hot  stream  of  energy  poured 
down  the  mountain-side.     Now,  there  is  only  a  collection  of  sulphur  and  ashes  and 
crusted  lava  cakes.    III.  The  lukewarm  condition.     Lukewarmness  is  a  stage  of 
cooling  down.     No  soul  stops  short  at  this  stage.     The  heart  leaps  at  once  into  fire 
and  life.    But  it  chills  gradually.    A  lukewarm  man  you  cannot  describe.    He  is  a 
mere  collection  of  negations.     His  soul  is  like  a  reservoir  or  bath,  into  which  streams 
of  hot  water  and  cold  are  being  run  at  the  same  time,  and  you  cannot  tell  which 
current  is  stronger,  for  they  are  often  about  equally  strong.     A  lukewarm  man  has 
force,  but  it  never  moves  him  to  any  definite  action.     He  has  sympathies,  but  they 
tend  to  evaporate.     He  thinks,  on  the  whole,  he  is  a  good,  a  religious  man,  on  the 
side  of  Christ  and  of  right.     Other  people  are,  on  the  whole,  not  quite  sure  what 
side  he  is  on.     The  lukewarm  man  does  not  make  it  a  principle  to  confine  his 
religion  to  the  four  walls  of  the  church,  and  the  two  boards  of  the  Bible.    He  holds 
that  it  should  not  be  so  confined.     And  so  he  carries  a  few  scraps  of  it  into  his  daily 
life.     He  knows  that  prayer  should  not  be  an  empty  form,  so  he  occasionally  tries  to 
pray  inwardly  and  sincerely — that  is,  when  he  is  neither  very  tired  nor  very  busy. 
He  has  never  given  way  on  a  question  of  principle,  except  when  he  was  very  hard 
pushed,  or  it  appeared  that  very  few  people  were  looking  on :  and  he  has  really 
often  regretted  giving  way  at  all.     He  does  not  intend  to  do  it  again.     A  lukewarm 
man  generally  does  a  little  Christian  work,  not,  of  course,  enough  to  involve  any 
sacrifice  or  exhaustion,  nor  would  he  take  any  pains  to  provide  a  substitute  for 
occasional  or  even   frequent   absence.     It  is  only  genuine  workers  who  do  that. 
The  lukewarm  person  has  made  a  great  many  vows  in  the  matter  of  religion  in  the 
course  of  his  or  her  life — too  many,  in  fact.     It  would  have  been  better  to  have 
made  fewer  and  kept  some.    IV.  Christ's  verdict  on  these  stages  of  religious 
EMOTION.     He  regards  it  best  to  be  hot,  next  best  to  be  cold,  worst  of  all  to  be 
lukewarm.     Two  or  three  reasons  may  be  suggested.     1.  There  is,  first,  its  unreality. 
Lukewarmness  is  a  sort  of  imposture  or  sham.     It  is  neither  one  thing  nor  another ; 
and  in  a  world  that  is  sternly  real,  things  and  persons  ought  to  have  a  definite 
character.     Lukewarmness  is  the  a>^sence  of  character.     It  perplexes  an  outsider, 
and  often  imposes  on  a  man  himself.     2.  Then  it  is  useless.     It  has  really  no  place 
in  the  order  of  things.     3.  Further,  it  is  a  very  impracticable  state.     You  don't 
know  how  to  deal  with  it.     4.  Lastly,  it  is  a  dangerous  state.     It  is  more  difficult 
to  treat  a  man  in  a  low  fever  than  to  treat  a  man  who  is  sharply  unwell.    Luke- 
warmness tends  not  to  get  hotter,  but  to  get  colder.     There  is  really  more  hope  for  a 
man  who  is  cold  outright.     He  is  not  blinding  himself.     He  is  not  playing  with 
truths.     He  knows  he  is  cold.     As  a  rule  it  is  only  when  lukewarmness  has  died 
down  into  coldness  that  a  change  for  the  better  comes.    A  man  loses  all,  or  almost 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

all,  religious  life  and  interest,  and  then  he  starts  to  find  himself  thus  dead,  and 
turns  in  penitence  and  fear  to  Christ.  {John  F.  Ewing,  M.A.)  Lukewarmness 
in  religion : — I.  The  temper  which  our  Lord  reproves  in  the  Church  op 
Laodicea.  1.  They  are  lukewarm  who  are  at  no  pains  to  guard  against  error, 
and  to  acquire  just  sentiments  of  religion.  2.  They  are  lukewarm  who,  from 
worldly  hopes  or  fears,  detain  in  unrighteousness  the  truth  they  know,  and  who 
will  not  profess  it  openly.  3.  They  are  lukewarm  who  give  God  the  body, 
but  withhold  from  Him  the  soul.  4.  The  inactivity  of  professed  Christians  is  a 
strong  proof  that  they  are  lukewarm.  5.  Many  discover  their  lukewarmness  by 
the  limitations  within  which  they  confine  their  obedience,  or  by  the  weakness  of 
their  religious  affections,  when  compared  with  their  affections  to  worldly  objects. 
6.  They  are  lukewarm  who  are  little  affected  with  the  advancement  or  the  decay  of 
religion,  or  with  that  which  concerns  the  common  welfare  of  mankind.    II.  Why  a 

LUKEWARM   SPIRIT    SO   WOEFULLY   PREVAILS   AMONG   MANY   WHO   PROFESS  TO  BELIEVE  THE 

RELIGION  OF  Jesus.  Lukcwarmuess  prevails  through  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief. 
Men  imagine  that  they  believe  the  threatenings  of  the  law  and  the  promises  of  the 
gospel,  who  have  never  considered  either  their  interesting  nature  or  their  undoubted 
certainty.  Strangers  they  must  be  to  holy  fervour  of  spirit  who  see  not  the  beauty 
and  glory,  and  who  relish  not  the  pleasures  of  religion ;  who  talk  of  treasures  in 
heaven,  but  view  the  treasures  of  this  earth  as  more  desirable ;  and  who  fondly 
cherish  a  secret  hope  that  God  will  be  less  severe  on  transgressors  than  the  language 
of  His  threatenings  supposes.  The  want  of  religious  principles,  ill-founded  and 
presumptuous  hopes,  and  that  lukewarmness  which  flows  from  both,  are  greatly 
promoted  by  bad  education  and  by  bad  example.  The  ordinary  commerce  of  the 
world  completes  the  ruin  which  education  had  begun.  The  conversation  and 
manners  of  those  whom  the  young  are  taught  to  love,  or  whose  superior  age  and 
wisdom  they  respect,  completely  pervert  their  ideas,  their  resolutions,  and  their 
conduct.  III.  The  folly,  guilt,  and  danger  of  this  lukewarm  temper.  1.  The 
lukewarm  practically  deny  the  excellence  and  the  importance  of  religion.  2.  A 
lukewarm  religion  answers  no  valuable  purpose.  3.  The  temper  and  conduct  of 
the  lukewarm  is  peculiarly  base  and  criminal.  (1)  It  argues  the  vilest  ingratitude. 
(2)  It  indicates  hypocrisy.  (3)  The  man  who  is  lukewarm  disgraces  the  worthy 
name  by  which  he  is  called.  4.  The  lukewarm  are  not  reclaimed  without  great 
diflBculty,  and  they  are  always  waxing  worse  and  worse,  whether  it  is  pride,  or  self- 
deceit,  or  gross  hypocrisy  which  chiefly  prevails  in  their  characters.  5.  Lukewarm- 
ness exposes  men  to  the  dreadful  effects  of  God's  vengeance  in  temporal  judgments, 
in  spiritual  plagues,  and  in  eternal  destruction.  (John  Erskine,  D.D.)  Luke- 
warmness : — No  one  can  help  admiring  a  straightforward,  honourable  course,  and 
when  the  world  says  of  a  man  that  he  is  "sitting  on  the  fence,"  it  is  hardly 
considered  as  a  compliment.  I.  The  first  alarming  symptom  of  the  existence  of 
lukewarmness  is  a  growing  inattention  to  the  private  duties  op  religion. 
n.  Another  evidence  of  the  encroachments  of  lukewarmness  is  carelessness  m 
attending  public  worship,  ni.  A  third  symptom  of  lukewarmness,  about  which 
there  can  be  no  possible  mistake  is  an  indifference  concerning  the  benevolent 

ENTERPRISES    OF     THE    DAY,    AND     SCANT     OFFERINGS     FOR     THEIR   FURTHERANCE.      The 

world  has  an  eagle  eye  for  anything  inconsistent,  and  nothing  disgusts  it  more  than 
lukewarmness  in  those  who  claim  to  be  followers  of  Christ.  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 
Indifference  : — The  besetting  sin  of  that  ancient  Church  of  Asia  was  lukewarmness, 
half-hearted  indifference.  It  is  the  besetting  sin  among  us  to-day.  "  I  don't  care,'* 
are  words  more  commonly  spoken  among  us  than,  *'  I  don't  believe."  A  careless, 
or  idle,  or  even  vicious  boy  at  school  may  be  reclaimed,  but  one  who  takes  no 
interest  in  his  work  is  a  hopeless  case.  Look  at  some  of  the  results  of  being 
indifferent  about  religion.  1.  It  makes  our  religion  unreal.  It  is  not  the  love  of 
God  which  constrains  us,  but  fashion,  or  custom.  Our  religion  is  like  a  spurious 
coin,  good  enough  to  look  on,  but  when  tried  it  does  not  ring  true.  2.  Next, 
indifference  makes  people  ignorant  of  the  teachings  of  the  Church,  they  are  often 
unacquainted  with  the  very  A  B  C  of  Christianity.  3.  Again,  this  lukewarm 
indifference  makes  people  selfish  and  idle.  The  idea  of  making  any  sacrifice  for 
Christ's  sake  is  not  in  their  thoughts.  4.  But  above  all,  this  lukewarm  indifference 
leads  to  a  shallow  view  of  sin.  {H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.)  Lukewarmness 
injurious  to  others :— One  lukewarm  Christian  may  do  untold  harm  to  a  whole 
Church.  Pour  a  quantity  of  tepid  water  into  a  vessel  that  contains  boiling  water, 
and  immediately  the  temperature  of  the  whole  will  sink.  Just  so  the  contact  of 
men  who  are  indifferent  with  those  who  are  fervid,  deadens  their  fervour,  and  tends 
to  reduce  them  to  the  same  lukewarmness.     {G.  Bowes.) 


CHAP.m.]  REVELATION.  247 

Vers.  17,  18.   Knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched. — A  great  mistake,  and  the 
way  to  rectify  it : — These  Laodicean  people  were  unhappily  in  such  a  state  that 
you  could  not  get  at  them.     They  were  not  so  poor  that  they  knew  they  were  poor, 
and  therefore  when  the  poverty-stricken  were  addressed,  they  said,  "  These  things 
are  not  for  us:  we  are  increased  in  goods."     They  were  blind,  but  they  thought 
they  saw;  they  were  naked,  and  yet  they  prided  themselves  on  their  princely 
apparel,  and  hence  it  was  hard  to  reach  them.     Had  they  even  been  outwardly 
worse,  had  they  defiled  their  garments  with  overt  transgression,  then  the  Spirit 
might  have  pointed  out  the  blot  and  convicted  them  there  and  then  ;  but  what  was 
to  be  done  when  the  mischief  was  hidden  and  internal  ?    I.  First,  let  us  think  of 
the  Church  in  Laodicea  and  listen  to  theik  saying  ;  it  may  prevent  us  from  reach- 
ing such  a  height  of  pride  as  to  speak  as  they  did.     1.  The  spirit  of  self -congratu- 
lation expressed  itself  in  a  manner  strikingly  unanimous.     It  was  the  general, 
unanimous  feeling,  from  the  minister  down  to  the  latest  convert,  that  they  were 
a  most  wonderful  Church.     They  were  heartily  at  one  in  having  a  high  estimate  of 
themselves,  and  this  helped  to  keep  them  together,  and  stirred  them  to  attempt 
great  things.     2.  This  saying  of  theirs  was  exceedingly  boastful.     The  present  was 
all  right,  the  past  was  eminently  satisfactory,  and  they  had  reached  a  point  of  all 
but  absolute  perfection,  for  they  needed  nothing.     3.  They  were  sincere  in  this 
glorying.     When  they  said  it  they  were  not  consciously  boasting,  for  the  text  says, 
"And  thou  knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked."    They  did  not  know  the  truth.    How  readily  do  we  believe 
a  lie  when  it  fosters  in  us  a  high  opinion  of  ourselves.    4.  But  now  see  what  was 
their  actual  state  :  they  were  altogether  mistaken.     These  intelligent  persons,  these 
wealthy  persons,  these  instructed  persons  did  not  know  themselves,  and  that  is  the 
grossest  kind  of  ignorance.    You  remember  the  Tay  Bridge  disaster.    There  is  no 
doubt  whatever  that  the  bridge  was  not  fitted  for  its  position,  its  ordinary  strain 
was  all  it  could  bear ;  but  nobody  thought  so.    Undoubtedly  the  engineers  reckoned 
it  would  stand  any  test  to  which  ifmight  be  put,  and  therefore  there  was  no  atten- 
tion given  to  it  to  make  it  any  stronger  and  to  provide  against  sudden  disaster ;  and 
consequently  when  a  specially  fierce  hurricane  was  out  one  night  it  swept  it  all 
away.    That  is  just  the  picture  of  many  a  Church  and  many  a  man,  because  he  is 
thought  to  be  so  pious,  and  the  Church  is  thought  to  be  so  correct  and  vigorous, 
therefore  no  attempt  is  made  for  improvement,  no  special  prayer,  no  cries  to 
heaven.    11.  Our  Lord's  blessed  counsel.     1.  Note  how  He  begins :  "  I  counsel 
thee  to  buy."    Is  not  that  singular  advice  ?    Just  now  He  said  that  they  were 
"  wretched  "  and  ••  poor."    How  can  they  buy  ?    Surely  it  suggests  to  us  at  once 
those  blessed  free  grace  terms  which  are  only  to  be  met  with  in  the  market  of 
Divine  love :  "  Yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  price." 
2.  But  next,  what  does  He  say  ?    "I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me."    Ah,  they  had 
been  dealing  with  one  another :  they  had  been  bartering  amongst  themselves.    One 
brother  had  brought  this  talent,  another  that,  and  they  had  grown  rich,  as  they 
thought,  by  a  mutual  commerce.     "  Now,"  says  Christ,  "  compare  yourselves  with 
yourselves  no  longer:  give  up  seeking  of  man,  and  buy  of  Me."    It  is  the  very 
foundation  of  grace — to  be  willing  to  buy  of  Christ.     3.  Now  see  the  goods  which 
He  describes.     "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me  " — what  ?    Everything.    It  is  true 
that  only  three  wants  of  these  people  are  here  mentioned,  but  they  are  inclusive  of 
all  needs.     4.  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  is  not  only  that  we  buy  of  Him  everything, 
but  that  we  buy  the  best  of  everything  of  Him.     Gold  is  the  most  precious  metal, 
but  He  would  have  them  buy  the  best  of  it,  "  gold  tried  in  the  fire  "  ;  gold  that  will 
endure  all  further  tests,  having  survived  that  of  fire.    Kemember  the' raiment  too, 
for  that  is  of  the  best ;  our  Lord  calls  it  "  white  raiment."     That  is  a  pure  colour, 
a  holy  colour,  a  royal  colour.    We  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  joy,  our  glory,  our 
righteousness.    And  as  to  the  eyesalve,  it  is  the  best  possible  one,  for  Jesus  says, 
"Anoint  thine  eyes  with  eyesalve  that  thou  mayest  see."     5.  All  this  is  the  counsel 
of  Christ,  and  the  counsel  of  Christ  to  a  people  that  were  proud  and  self-conceited. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  self-ignorance  of  the  Laodiceans  ;— The  secret  of  luke- 
warmness   is   disclosed  in  these  words,    "  Thou  sayest,  I  am  rich,  and  increased 
with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."     Shall  we  find  fault  with  the  words  in 
themselves  ?     Might  they  not  be  taken  as  an  expression  of  gratitude  ?     Might  they 
not  mean,  "  The  lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  pleasant  places ;  yea,  I  have  a  goodly 
heritage"?    Now  1  would  not  deny  that  this  may  have  been  meant  by  the 
Laodiceans  as  the  language  of  very  exalted  piety.    Possibly,  too,  their  neighbours 
might  admit  the  claim,  and  regard  them  with  admiration.    But  when  we  look 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

closely  into  the  words,  two  unpleasant  things  appear.     First,  here  is  no  recognition 
of  the  Lord  and  His  goodness  ;  no  lowly  and  grateful  ascribing  of  all  to  His  unde- 
served lovingkindness  and  bounty.     If  the  Laodiceans  had  felt  themselves  debtors, 
they  would  at  least  have  said,    "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  " — "  Not 
unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name  be  the  glory."     This  second 
thing,  too,  becomes  apparent,  in  examining  the  words,  that  they  are  a  boast ; 
a  glorying  in  self,  and  not  in  the  Lord ;  a  quiet  claim  of  superiority  over  other 
Churches;  like  the  words  of  the  Pharisee,  "  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as 
other  men  are."     Their  wretched  and  pitiable  condition  is  presented  to  themselves 
in  three  aspects :  as  poverty,  blindness,  and  nakedness.     What  a  combination  of 
ills !     If  you  find  a  fellow-man  in  this  plight,  how  you  commiserate  him.     Each 
evil  more  than  doubles  the  other.     And  then  add  inevitable  nakedness — with  it& 
shamefulness   and  discomforts — and  how   woeful  the   condition  I     Well,   here  is 
a  Church  of  Christ  in  that  pitiable  condition.     There  is  material  wealth,  growing 
numbers,  name  and  repute  in  society,  many  showy  and  coveted  virtues  that  attract 
attention  and  admiration.    But  look  for  the  faith,  the  love,  the  joy,  the  peace,  the 
hope,  the  meekness,  the  piety,  the  holy  zeal,  the  beneficence,  the  martyr-spirit,  the 
self -forgetfulness  and  self-denial,  in  which  the  true  wealth  of  a  Church  consists,  and. 
she  has  nothing.     Inquire  how  much  of  heaven  there  is  within  her  borders — how 
much  of  the  power  and  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost — and  you  discover  that  in  the  real, 
true  sense  she  is  bankrupt.     This  Church  is  "  blind  "  as  well  as  poor — blind  in  the 
eye  that  sees  God.     They  said,  "  We  see,"  and  believed  it.    But  enter  the  region  of 
spiritual  truths  and  realities — bring  up  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  and  the  hidden 
wisdom,  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual — they  are   foolishness   to  the 
Laodiceans,  neither  can  they  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned. 
If  spiritual  poverty  in  a  Christian  Church  is  sinful,  so  also  is  blindness.    It  is  not 
misfortune,  but  fault.    It  need  not  be.     The  Saviour  was  anointed  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  He  might  give  sight  to  the  blind,  and  He  has  lost  none  of  His  skill.    One 
thing  more  characterises  this  Laodicean  Church  :   instead  of  the  rich  and  glorious 
adorning  of  thy  fancy,  "  thou  art  naked."     Grace  clothes  the  happy  soul  with  the 
garment  of  salvation,  and  covers  it  with  the  robe  of  righteousness,  so  that  we  appear 
with  acceptance  in  the  presence  of  the  majesty  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  but  Laodicea 
in  its  pride  is  naked  as  a  beggar.    And  saddest  of  all,  "  thou  knowest  it  not  "  :  it  is 
hidden  from  thine  eyes.    Could  aught  be  more  deplorable  ?     {J.  Culross,  D.D.)       The 
Church  of  the  Laodiceans : — I.  The  opinion  which  the  Laodiceans  held  of  them- 
selves.   "  Thou  sayest."    It  is  not  likely  that  the  words  which  follow  were  spoken. 
The  saying  was  in  a  cherished  thought — not  in  a  thought  that  comes  in,  if  I  may  so 
speak,  at  one  door  of  the  spirit  and  passes  out  at  another,  but  a  thought  that  a  man 
makes  at  home  in  his  mind.     He  who  speaks  to  the  Laodiceans,  hears  this  speak- 
ing ;  though  the  speaking  be  only  thinking.  He  hears  it ;  though  only  in  feeling,  He 
hears  it.     Oh,  what  a  different  thing  life  would  be,  if  lived  out  under  the  eye  of 
God,  from  what  it  now  is  as  lived  out  under  the  eye  of  men  1    But,  mark,  every 
Church  presents  itself  in  a  particular  form  to  Jesus  Christ.     Every  Church  by  its 
worship    and    communion    and    fellowship   and    work  is,  according  to  this  text,, 
saying  something  perpetually  into  the  very  ear  of  God.     Now  these  people  said, 
*'  I  am  rich  " — rich  not  in  material  wealth,  though  that  most  likely  was  true.     And 
they  said,  "  I  am  increased  with  goods  "  :  that  is,  I  am  become  wealthy.     There  is 
a  force  in  the  word  that  gives  the  idea  of  their  having  gained  this  spiritual  treasure 
by  their  own  exertions,  so  that  it  was  to  their  credit  to  have  been  thus  spiritually 
rich.     "  And  have  need  of  nothing  "  ;  that  is,  they  were  perfectly  satisfied.    You 
see  there  is  a  sort  of  climax  here :    rich — become  rich — having  need  of  nothing. 
First  the  fact  of  wealth  is  stated,  then  the  means  by  which  it  was  obtained  is 
indicated,   and   then   the   result.     But   now,   what   does   aU  this   mean  in  plain 
language  ?     Christ  intends  to  say  to  these  people,  that  they  were  self-conceited  and 
self-sufficient.     The  men  who  are  great  in  their  own  eyes  are  men  who  have  very 
little  to  do  with  God,  and  very  little  to  do  with  the  works  of  God  ;    and  the 
Christians  and  the  Churches  that  are  great  in  their  own  eyes  are  Christians  and 
Churches  that  cannot  be  much  in  communion  with  Christ.      JI.  Their  real  con- 
dition, AS  DESCRIBED  BY  ONE  WHO  KNEW  IT  WELL.     "  And  kuowcst  not  that  thou  art 
wretched  " — literally,  "  that  thou  art  the  wretched  one  " — the  wretched  one  out  of 
these  Asiatic  Churches — the  wretched  one  in  all  the  Churches  of  Christ.      The 
Laodicean  Church  thought  itself  to  be  the  great  one ;  and,  to  correct  them,  Christ 
is  represented  as  saying,  "  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  the  wretched  one." 
A  slave  to  vanity  and  to  delusion,  this  Church  was  verily  the  wretched  and  the 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION,  249 

pitiable  one,  a  true  object  for  compassion,  m.  The  counsel.  It  is  just  the  same 
■with  a  man  who  professes  to  cultivate  his  mind,  to  increase  his  knowledge,  and  to 
add  to  his  information — so  soon  as  he  begins  to  rest  in  what  he  has  gained,  and  to 
call  it  wealth,  and  to  feel  rich  in  it,  so  soon  he  arrests  his  progress  in  getting  to 
himself  the  treasures  of  information  and  of  knowledge.  This  counsel,  I  say  again, 
is  offered  to  those  who  assume  and  assert  that  they  do  not  need  it.  But  what  ia 
here  meant  by  the  word  *'  buy  "  ? — "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me  gold  tried  in  the 
fire."  The  word  "  buy "  here  does  not  mean  to  give  an  equivalent,  but  to  part 
with  this  self-sufficiency,  and  to  part  with  it  for  something  valuable.  We  often  see 
God  bring  a  conceited  man  down  to  no  faith  at  all  in  order  to  lift  him  up  to  the 
position  of  a  true  believer.  What  Christ  suggests  to  these  people  is  this,  that  they 
shall  part  with  their  self-conceit  and  with  their  self-sufficiency.  By  this  '*  gold 
tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  be  rich,"  we  may  understand  sterling  godliness 
as  opposed  to  "  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power."  Of  what  use  is  a  sham 
Christian?  Of  what  benefit  is  an  unreal  Church?  Things  are  precious  only 
as  they  be  true  and  thorough  and  entire.  **  And  white  raiment  that 
thou  mayest  be  clothed,"  &c.  Put  into  plain  language,  this  simply  means, 
get  what  is  really  valuable  ;  put  on  what  is  really  fair  and  true  ;  and 
try  to  see  things  by  a  proper  and  spiritual  discernment  to  be  derived 
from  above  just  as  they  really  are.  {S.  Martin.)  Shallowness  in  religion: — 
Setting  aside  for  a  little  the  question  what  this  lukewarmness  or  shallow- 
ness is,  in  the  higher  spiritual  life  of  the  soul,  we  are  all  of  us  perfectly 
well  acquainted  with  those  whose  characters  it  marks  in  common  life — 
shallow,  surface,  outside  men.  We  see  it  in  one  man  in  the  life  of  the  affections. 
He  is  full  of  a  ready,  courteous,  skin-deep  kindliness  of  demeanour,  which  reaches 
down  to  no  self-sacrifice,  which  implies  no  wearing  anxiety  for  others,  which  reveals 
no  deep,  disturbing  love,  perhaps,  for  any  one  person  upon  the  earth,  nay,  which 
perhaps  is  thoroughly  compatible  with  absolute  cruelty  of  heart.  This  character  is 
one  of  utter  shallowness ;  it  is  marked  by  an  essential  poverty  in  the  life  of  the 
affections.  They  are  called  up  by  the  lightest  surface-touch,  because  to  them  the 
surface  is  all.  They  are  mere  land-springs  of  kindness,  easy  to  break  out  after  a 
summer  shower,  easy  to  dry  up  after  a  twelve  hours'  drought.  It  is  demonstration 
without  depth,  the  brook  of  shallow  love,  babbling  of  its  shallowness  as  it  flows. 
Here  is  one  of  these  shallow  characters :  now  look  at  it  from  another  point,  and  see 
it  in  the  Hfe  of  science.  See  the  poor  scioUst,  with  his  ready  smattering  of  aU 
learning,  veiling  even  from  himself  his  universal  ignorance.  For  what  worth 
knowing  does  the  man  know  ?  His  readiness  to  acquire  and  his  readiness  to  pro- 
duce are  of  the  very  essence  of  his  disease.  Again,  you  may  see  the  self-same 
character  in  the  public  man.  He  is  the  easy  repeater  of  the  watchwords  of  a  party, 
the  retailer  of  other  men's  aphorisms,  the  uncomprehending  inheritor  of  a  traditional 
policy.  There  is  not  in  this  man,  perhaps,  one  atom  of  real  knowledge,  one  acting 
of  any  deep  principle  which  could  govern,  could  strengthen,  or  could  ennoble  a 
public  life.  Here,  then,  in  the  ordinary  life  of  this  world — having  put  for  the  time 
the  higher  spiritual  world  aside — here  is  this  famihar  phase  of  shallowness.  And 
now,  how  is  it  to  be  cured?  How  are  we  ourselves  to  get  free  from  it?  We  must 
trace  the  cause  of  the  evil.  The  master  root  of  this  vice  is  the  selfishness  of  our 
fallen  nature,  working  under  the  peculiar  circumstances  which  belong  to  ease,  to 
abundance,  and  to  a  refined  civilisation.  Men  shaken  daily  together  in  the  vast 
sack  of  common  respectabilities  round  off  from  one  another  the  sharp  corners  of 
their  individuality,  and  thus  the  curse  of  shallowness  is  imparted,  like  some  con- 
tagious disorder,  from  one  to  another ;  and  all  combine  to  banish,  as  the  source  of 
continual  trouble,  from  their  life  of  painted  complacency,  deeper  and  more  real 
qualities.  Here  is  the  working  of  the  evil  and  its  cause  ;  and  now  where  is  the  cure 
to  come  from?  Wealth  cannot  buy  it;  civilisation  cannot  give  it;  intellectual 
power  cannot  command  it.  Where  then  is  the  cure  against  all  this  degradation  of 
humanity  ?  In  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  in  it  alone,  is  stored  the  sufficient  remedy. 
The  Lord  imparts  Himself  to  the  soul  that  will  receive  Him.  This  is  the  new  life 
of  the  regenerate.  This  is  the  mystery  of  the  new  birth  in  its  perfection,  in  the  soul 
that  follows  after  Christ.  And  so  the  shallownesses  of  his  nature  are  swept  away  by 
the  mighty  burst ;  the  rock  is  struck  and  the  streams  flow,  and  those  whom  the  Lord 
has  healed,  witness  of  that  healing  to  others.  The  emptiness  of  fallen  man  is  filled 
full  by  the  awful  in-dwelling  of  the  Incarnate  God.  "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me." 
And  what  is  needed  to  buy  of  Him  ?  First,  you  must  believe  in  the  reality  of  the 
renewed  life.     How  many  fail  here  I     They  Uve  in  the  perpetual  dream  that  for  the 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

present  they  mv3t  be  shallow,  instead  of  believing  in  the  mighty  enfranchisement 
which  the  Eternal  Son  has  wrought  out  for  them.  Oh,  claim  it  for  thyself,  and 
claim  it  here.  Next,  join  in  desire,  join  in  prayer,  join  in  perpetual  aspiration,  your 
present  life  to  the  life  of  Christ.  This  is  the  great  sacramental  mystery  of  our  new 
being.  By  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Christ  will  work  daily  within  you,  if  you 
^will  seek  His  working.  Only  thirdly,  seek  all  this  not  as  a  mere  apprehension  of 
the  understanding,  for  that  will  do  no  good,  but  seek  it  as  part  of  a  renewed  life. 
Seek  it  in  a  life  of  greater  brightness  and  greater  obedience  in  service.  (Bp.  S. 
WUberforce.)  The  great  and  dangerous  mistake  of  some  professors  : — All  flattery 
is  dangerous ;  self -flattery  is  more  dangerous  ;  but  self -flattery  in  the  business  of 
salvation,  is  the  most  dangerous  of  all.    I.  That  thebe  are  multitudes  of  such 

SELF-DECEIVERS    AMONG    PROFESSORS.      II.    ThE    GROUNDS    AND    CAUSES    OF     THIS    SELF- 
DECEIT  AMONG  PROFESSORS.     1.  The  natural  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  than  which 
nothing  is  more  treacherous  and  false  (Jer.  xvii.  9).    2.  Satan  is  a  chief  conspirator 
in  this  treacherous  design.     3.  Tne  common  works  found   in  unregenerate  souls 
deceive  many,  who  cannot  distinguish  them  from  the  special  works  of  the  Spirit  in 
God's  elect  (Heb.  vi.  4).    4.  To  add  no  more,  this  strengthens  self -deceit  exceedingly 
in  many,  viz.,  their  observations  of  and  comparing  themselves  with  others.    Use  1' 
shall  be  for  caution  to  professors.    Before  I  tell  you  what  use  you  should  make  of  it, 
I  must  tell  you  what  use  you  may  not  make  of  it.     (1)  Do  not  make  this  use  of  it — 
to  conclude  from  what  hath  been  said,  that  all  professors  are  but  a  pack  of  hypocrites. 
(2)  Do  not  make  this  use  of  it — that  assurance  must  needs  be  impossible,  because  so 
many  professors  are  found  to  be  self-deceivers.     (3)  Do  not  make  this  use  of  it — to 
conceal  or  hide  the  truths  or  graces  of  God,  or  refuse  to  profess  or  confess  them  before 
men,  because  many  professors  deceive  themselves  and  others  also  by  a  vain  profession. 
Use  2.  Surely  you  cannot  improve  this  point  to  a  better  purpose  than  from  it  to 
take  warning,  and  look  to  yourselves,  that  you  be  not  of  that  number  who  deceive 
themselves  in  their  profession.    {John  Flavel.)         The  unconverted  sinner^s  estimate 
of  himself: — I.  The  unconverted  sinner's  estimate  of  his  own  condition.     1.  "I 
am  rich."    The  word  "rich"  is  here  used  in  its  most  extended  meaning,  as  de- 
scriptive of  the  possession  of  that  which  is  of  great  value.     "  1  am  rich."    I  possess 
much ;  and  what  I  possess  is  well  worth  having.    If  the  unconverted  sinner  has 
money,  he  is  proud  of  it.     He  looks  upon  it  as  a  great  portion.    But  many  of  the 
unconverted  have  no  money  to  be  proud  of.    That  circumstance,  however,  does  not 
prevent  them  from  finding  out  that  they  are  rich.    Perhaps  they  have  respectable 
family  connections,  or  they  have  a  goodly  personal  appearance,  or  they  possess 
superior  talents.    In  any  such  case,  the  mind  fastens  with  special  complacency 
upon  the  circumstance,  and  feels  all  the  satisfaction  attendant  upon  the  conscious- 
ness of  being  rich.     2.   "And  increased  with  goods."    These  words  embody  an 
additional  conceit  of  the  unconverted  man.    He  is  rich,  and  his  wealth  is  not  in  the 
course  of  decay  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  rising  in  its  amount,  it  is  accumulating  fast. 
If  he  is  a  young  man,  he,  peradventure,  rejoices  in  the  rapid  growth  and  extensive 
range  of  his  literary  and  scientific  and  professional  acquirements,  and  his  heart 
bounds  within  him  as  the  strong  hope  arises  of  approaching  distinction  and  fame. 
See,  again,  that  man  who  has  left  behind  him  the  gay  period  of  youth,  and  has 
arrived  at  the  years  of  maturity  and  wisdom.     He  is  no  longer  what  he  once  was. 
The  fire  of  passion  is  moderated,  and  the  grosser  immoralities  of  early  life  are 
abandoned.    From  being  a  person  of  no  character,  he  is  become  a  person  of  good 
character.    He  is  a  prudent,  a  well-behaved,  an  honourable  citizen.     3.  "  And  have 
need  of  nothing."    In  these  words  we  are  presented  with  the  unconverted  man's 
climax.    The  prosperity  of  his  state  has  arrived  at  the  superlative  degree.    H.  The 
unconverted  sinner's  real  state.     1.  "  He  is  wretched."    Consider  the  original 
state  of  mankind.    Think  of  its  enjoyments,  its  privileges,  its  honours,  its  prospects. 
What  a  happy  condition !  and  how  wretched  the  condition  which  has  succeeded  I 
They  might  be  free,  but  instead  of  that  they  are  slaves  to  Satan,  to  the  world,  to 
their  own  lusts.     They  might  be  noble  princes ;  but,  alas !  they  are  disgraced  out- 
casts from  the  Divine  favour.    They  might  be  kings  and  priests  unto  God ;  but  they 
are  doomed  criminals,  the  branded  victims  of  coming  vengeance.    Surely  they  are  in 
a  wretched  condition ;  they  have  the  Almighty  Potentate  of  heaven  and  earth  for 
their  foe.     2.  "  Miserable."     It  is  intimated  here,  that  when  the  mind  comes  to  the 
consideration  of  the  state  of  the  unconverted,  the  appropriate  emotion  is  pity.     The 
thraldom  they  are  held  in  calls  for  pity ;  the  forfeiture  they  have  incurred,  the  doom 
they  have  provoked,  the  self-deception  they  are  practising,  the  false  security  they 
are  indulging,  the  infatuation  they  are  exemplifying,  demand  our  pity.    3.  "  Poor." 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  251 

If  the  tattered  garment  around  the  body  be  recognised  as  the  symbol  of  poverty 
surely  we  have  the  synabol  of  a  deeper  poverty  when  the  soul  is  enveloped  in  the 
unclean  rags  of  self-righteousness!  4.  "Blind."  Sinai  overhangs  him,  but  he 
heeds  not  the  frowning  mountain.  One  fairer  than  the  sons  of  men,  and  chief 
among  ten  thousand,  appears  to  him  ;  but  he  evinces  no  sense  of  His  attractions. 
The  deformities  of  sin  do  not  hinder  him  from  embracing  it.  Though  it  be  the 
noon-day  of  the  Gospel,  he  gropes  as  one  in  darkness.  The  road  which  he  travels 
is  marked  for  his  warning,  as  the  way  to  everlasting  misery  and  ruin,  but  he  slackens 
not  his  pace.  Can  it  be,  then,  that  he  sees  ?  Would  beauty  have  no  power  to  draw 
a  man,  deformity  none  to  repel  him,  or  dangers  to  dismay  him,  unless  he  were 
blind?  5.  "Naked."  This  completes  the  picture  of  an  unconverted  state.  The 
unconverted  are  naked  in  a  two-fold  respect — in  that  they  want  the  garment  of 
justification,  and  likewise  the  garment  of  sanctification.  III.  Some  inferences 
DESCRIPTIVE  OF  THE  UNCONVERTED  man's  ERROR.  1.  It  is  a  great  crror.  It  is  just  as 
great  an  error  as  possibly  can  be.  It  is  not,  for  example,  the  error  of  the  man  who 
says  it  is  an  hour  before  noon,  or  an  hour  after  noon,  when  it  is  actually  just  noon ; 
but  it  is  the  error  of  him  who  declares  it  is  midnight  while  he  stands  under  the  blaze 
of  the  meridian  sun.  2.  It  is  a  surprising  error.  It  is  surprising  from  its  very 
grossness.  Man  is  so  prone  to  err  that  the  occurrence  of  small  mistakes  excites  no 
astonishment ;  on  the  contrary,  we  look  for  it.  But  it  is  startling  to  find  men  calling 
bitter  sweet,  emptiness  abundance,  disgrace  honour,  and  misery  comfort  and  happi- 
ness. The  error  in  question  is  the  more  extraordinary,  when  it  is  considered  that 
there  are  such  ample  means  of  getting  at  the  truth.  3.  It  is  a  pernicious  error. 
Death  is  the  consequence  of  adhering  to  this  error — death  in  its  most  appalling 
form — the  eternal  ruin  of  body  and  soul.  4.  It  is  an  error  which,  by  human  means, 
is  incorrigible.  We  say  not  that  its  correction  is  beyond  the  power  of  God.  {A. 
Gray.)  Human  need : — Man  is  by  nature  the  neediest  of  all  beings.  Nor  is  it,  as 
some  might  maintain,  his  disgrace  and  the  signal  of  his  inferiority  that  he  is  thus 
needy,  but  rather  the  mark  of  his  native  glory  and  pre-eminence.  For  it  points  to 
the  number  and  greatness  of  his  faculties.  The  lower  the  creature,  the  less  his 
need ;  for  the  more  feeble  his  sensibilities,  narrow  his  powers,  and  torpid  his 
desires.  But,  from  the  most  sagacious  and  strongest  of  the  animal  tribes,  how  vast 
the  difference,  in  capacity  of  intellect  and  feeling,  to  man !  And  no  less  vast  the 
difference  of  need.  He  draws  from  the  earth,  from  the  water,  and  from  the  air,  to 
satisfy  his  appetites  and  to  satiate  his  curiosity;  he  ransacks  every  kingdom  of 
nature  for  his  comfort  and  aggrandisement,  and  is  not  content.  Is  there,  then,  no 
satisfaction  for  a  man  ?  God  has  not  made  His  noblest  creature  for  a  wretched 
failure  and  a  miserable  want.  Let  him  bring  into  light  all  his  abilities  and  desires — 
they  are  not  too  many  or  too  strong ;  those  of  the  higher  nature  as  well  as  the  lower ; 
those  that  tend  up  to  God  Himself  and  heaven  and  immortality,  as  well  as  those  that 
tend  downwards  and  abroad  to  earthly  things.  Let  him  unfold  them  without  fear. 
The  vast  supplies  from  the  foreseeing  Creator,  in  the  treasury  of  His  truth,  are 
ready.  Let  him  appropriate  them  to  his  need.  Man  is  a  being  that  does  not  need 
daily  bread  and  clothing  and  shelter  alone  ;  but  he  needs  truth,  needs  duty,  needs 
love,  needs  God.  The  mistake  is  in  trying  to  gratify  fully  his  nature  with  such  out- 
ward things,  neglecting  the  spiritual.  It  is  just  this  foolhardy  and  hazardous 
assurance  of  satisfaction  in  outward  prosperity,  that  I  apprehend,  the  author  of  our 
text  means  to  expose.  Man — whosoever  thou  art,  content  with  sensual  good  and 
clinging  to  outward  treasure — that  is  not  the  true  gold  with  which  thou  fiUest  thy 
coffers.  That  is  not  the  durable  raiment  with  which  thou  art  clad.  There  are  riches 
of  goodness  for  the  heart.  To  sustain  this  exhortation,  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak 
in  the  exclusive  ardour  of  one  idea,  but  the  sober  proportion  that  takes  in  man's  whole 
estate.  He  needs,  by  various  education,  to  get  possession  of  all  his  members  and 
faculties.  He  needs  to  fabricate,  needs  to  manufacture,  needs  to  discover  and  invent, 
needs  to  trade,  needs  to  accumulate ;  so  that  every  industrial  faculty  may  be  brought 
out,  every  hand  employed,  every  talent  put  in  motion — nay,  so  that  the  community 
itself  may  not  fail,  but  be  civilised.  In  setting  before  you  a  moral  and  spiritual 
need,  I  certainly  do  not  forget  these  personal,  social,  and  political  necessities,  nor 
would  shove  them  by  an  inch  from  their  place ;  but,  admitting  the  latter,  maintain 
the  supreme  importance,  the  predominating  position  of  the  former.  The  dull  cater- 
pillar may  be  content  with  lying  upon  the  ground,  hardly  appearing  animated,  like 
a  lump  or  brown  leaf,  when  the  wings  are  actually  folded  up  within,  to  bear  it  into 
the  sunshine  and  among  all  the  blossoms  of  the  landscape.  So  a  man  may  be  con- 
tent with  a  low,  earth-bound  life,  a  state  of  half -manhood,  because  unconscious  of 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

the  heaven-bestowed  capacities  by  which  he  might  live  above  the  world.    But  the 
mere  force  of  nature  will  not  unfold  the  man  as  it  does  the  insect.    He  may 
discourage  and  keep  down  these  wings  of  the  soul.    He  may,  by  sin  and  his  rebellious 
will,  wound  and  mutilate  them  as  they  instinctively  strive  to  expand.    Yet  he  cannot 
remain  for  ever  unconscious  of  their  existence.    He  cannot  exercise  them  in  the  mean 
ways  of  the  world  in  which  he  treads.     Lacking  their  true  element  and  use,  they  will 
pine  and  wither  with  dissatisfaction  and  remorse.    We  need  the  principle  of  devotion 
to  God  and  others'  good.     We  need  the  practice  of  the  two  great  commandments  of 
love  to  God  and  man.    We  need  to  be  humble,  need  to  be  patient,  need  to  be  meek, 
to  the  Father  above  and  our  brethren  below.    We  need  these  dispositions,  not  only 
as  paying  our  debt  to  them,  though  they  are  our  debt,  but  as  the  indispensable 
requisites  of  our  own  weU-being.     (C.  A.  Bartol.)        Moral  wealth: — I.  Moral 
WEALTH  IS  MOST  FOREIGN  TO  THE  SELF-RIGHTEOUS.    In  morals,  the  richer  a  man  thinks 
himself  to  be,  the  poorer  he  is.    Pharisaic  souls  are  in  utter  destitution.    II,  Moral 
WEALTH  IS  THE  GREAT  WANT  OF  HUMANITY.     Men,  whatever  clsc  they  possess,  are 
abject  without  it.     1.  It  is  the  only  wealth  that  is  intrinsically  valuable.     2.  The 
only  wealth  that  enriches  the  man,    3.  The  only  wealth  that  procures  an  honourable 
status  in  being.     4.  The  only  wealth  that  secures  a  true  and  lasting  interest  in  the 
universe.     III.  Moral    wealth    is    to    be   obtained   only  in    connection  with 
Christ.     Jesus    has    •*  the   gold,"    "  the    white    garment,"    the    eyesalve,"    the 
"unsearchable    riches."    IV,  Moral  wealth    must    be    obtained    by    purchase. 
"  Buy   of    Me."     You  must  give   up   something  for  it — ease,    self -righteousness, 
prejudices,  worldly  gain  and  pleasures.    You  must  sell  that  you  have.     {Homilist.) 
The   spiritually   luxurious  and  proud : — What  is  the  condition  of  the  individual 
Christian  (so  called)  who  is  represented  in  the  Laodicean  Church?    Is  not  this  a 
description  of  one  who  is  spiritually  luxurious  and  proud  ?    Do  not  confound  the 
spiritually   luxurious   with   the   temporally  luxurious.     One  spiritually  luxurious 
Christian   may  be  a  man  poor  in  this  world's  goods.     He  may  be  the  farthest 
removed  from  the  world's  luxury.    He  may  wear  hair-cloth  and  walk  with  bare 
feet.     His  outward  condition  has  nothing  to  do  with  his  spiritual  state.    His 
supposed  riches,  his  increase  of  goods,  his  need  of  nothing — all  refer  to  his  spiritual 
condition.    He  thinks  he  is  full  of  the  Divine  life.    He  is  one  of  the  Lord's 
favourites.      He  serenely  looks  down  upon  mankind  from  the  high  level  of  a 
spiritual  nobility.     He  takes  his  delicious  ease  amid  his  good  thoughts  of  himself, 
and  has  a  lofty  scorn  for  the  common  herd  of  Christians.     He  may  be  an  observer 
of  forms.     He  may  go  to  church.     He  may  bow  his  head  reverently.    He  may 
even  enter  a  brotherhood  and  take  the  vows  of  poverty,  chastity,  and  obedience ; 
or,  on  the  other  hand,  he  may  be  a  neglecter  of  all  public  worship — above  all  the 
means  of  grace.     They  are  good  enough  for  the  crowd,  but  he  has  no  need  of  them. 
In  either  case  he  considers  himself  a  model  Christian,  and  never  thinks  of  applying 
to  himself  any  of  the  Divine  rebukes  for  shortcomings  and  inconsistency.    You 
have  often  seen  such.     They  are  very  varied  in  their  earthly  conditions,  and  also 
in  their  mode  of  exhibiting  their  conceit,  but  they  all  have  the  same  satisfaction 
with  themselves,     1,  They  are  spiritually  poverty-stricken.     The  spiritual  wealth 
consisting  of  appreciation  of  the  Divine  promises,  close  communion  with  God,  and  the 
glorious  visions  of  hope  and  faith,  is  altogether  lacking.     The  wealth  of  sympathy 
and  helpfulness,  the  wealth  of  energy  for  Christ  and  His  salvation,  has  no  represen- 
tation in  them.     2.  They  are  spiritually  naked.     The  grateful  sense  of  indebtedness 
to  a  gracious  Saviour,  melting  the  soul  and  humbling  it  before  Him,  has  never  been 
felt.     3,  They  are  spiritually  blind.     That  is  why  they  do  not  detect  their  naked- 
ness.    That  is  why  they  do  not  know  their  coin  is  all  spurious  and  their  wealth  but 
poverty.    {H.  Crosby.)        What  does  God  think  of  me  ? — A  young  lady  of  thoughtful 
turn  of  mind  once  said  to  the  late  Dr.  Jowett,  Master  of  Balliol,  "Doctor,  what 
do  you  think  of  God  ?  "    For  a  while  the  doctor  was  silent,  and  then,  with  great 
solemnity  and  pathos,  he  replied,  "  My  dear,  it  is  not  what  I  think  of  God,  but  what 
does  God  think  of  me."     What  we  are  before  God : — The  Laodiceans  said,  "  We  are 
rich  and  have  need  of  nothing,"  but  God  said,  "  Thou  art  poor  and  wretched  and 
miserable."    In  the  old  tombs  of  our  cathedrals  there  were  frequently  two  figures  on 
the  monuments,  one  of  the  deceased  king,  or  knight,  or  bishop,  resting  above  in  his 
full  robes  of  state  as  he  wore  them  abroad  in  life,  and  another  beneath  of  a  thin, 
emaciated  skeleton,  which  recalled  to  the  eyes  of  the  beholder  the  realities  of  the 
grave  below.    It  is  well  to  have  in  thought  this  double  image  of  ourselves,  what  we 
are  before  the  world,  and  what  we  are  before  God.     {Free  Methodist. )        Poor  and 
needy : — Dr.  T,  L.  Cuyler  teUs  us  that  when  the  richest  American  of  his  day  was  in 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  253 

his  last  fatal  sickness,  a  Christian  friend  proposed  to  sing  to  him ;  and  the  hymn 
he  named  was,  "  Come,  ye  sinners,  poor  and  needy."    "  Yes,  yes,"  replied  the  dying 
millionaire,  "  sing  that  to  me;  I  feel  poor  and  needy."     Yet  at  that  moment  the 
stock  markets  of  the  globe  were  watching  and  waiting  for  the  demise  of  the  man 
who  could  shake  them  with  a  nod  of  his  head.    I  coxmsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me. — Christ 
giving  counsel : — Looked  at  broadly,  these  words  intimate  that  the  Lord  has  not 
given  them  up,  however  desperate  their  condition.     To  the  hearing  ear  they  sound 
like  this,  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  Me  is  thine  help."    It  will  be 
found  that  the  grace  of  Christ  meets  the  Laodiceans  at  every  point.    Knowing  their 
poverty,  the  Lord  offers  to  provide  them  with  true  and  durable  riches — gold  bright 
from  the  fire.     The  fire-purged  gold  represents  those  spiritual  possessions  in  which 
the  true  wealth  of  a  Church  consists.     What  shall  we  count  in  under  this  head  ? 
Light  is  thrown  on  the  question  by  what  we  are  told  (2  Cor.  viii.  1-5)  concerning  the 
Churches  of  Macedonia.     They  were  marked  by  "  deep  poverty,"  but  that  poverty 
was  conjoined  with  "abundance  of  joy" — the  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  had 
never  failed  them  since  they  embraced  the  gospel ;  that  joy  of  theirs  was  "gold." 
Again,  even  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction,  the  abundance  of  their  joy  and  their  deep 
poverty  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their  liberality ;  that  liberality  of  theirs  was 
♦•  gold."    Again,  there  was  the  outflow  of  love  to  their  suffering  brethren  in  Christ 
at  a  distance ;  they  were  willing  to  contribute  to  their  help,  even  beyond  their 
power :   that  love  was  "  gold."    A  Church  that  is  rich  in  these  things  is  rich 
indeed.    Besides  being  poor,  the  Laodiceans  were  naked.     So  He  invites  them  to 
make  application  to  Him,  and  promises  to  give  "  white  raiment,"  &g.     This  repre- 
sents and  symbolises  the  saintUness  of  life  in  which  saintliness  of  heart  expresses 
itself.     As  the  dress  clothes  the  body,  and  answers  to  its  form  and  size,  so  a  saintly 
life  is  the  garb,  as  it  were,  and  expression  of  a  holy  heart.     The  "  weU-doing  "  in 
which  we  are  not  to  be  "  weary  "  is  not  the  mere  doing  of  what  is  "  good," 
but    of  what  is   "beautiful";    and  beauty  of  living  is  the  outward  of  heart- 
beauty,   as  a   smile  is  the   outward  of    heart-cheer.      Besides  being   poor    and 
inaked,  they  were  blind ;   answering  to  the  prophet's  description  of   "  the  blind 
people  who  have  eyes,"  or  like  those  men  who  appealed  to  Jesus  with  the  question, 
*♦  Are   we   blind  also  ? "     Now  we  must  settle  it  in  our   hearts    that  we  can 
find  what  we  need  only  in   Christ,  and  nowhere  else.     "  Buy,"  He  says,  "  of 
Me."    We  must  not  merely  look  away  from  man,  we  must  also  look  away  from 
ourselves  to  Him.      There  is  a  peculiar  and  very  delightful  emotion  produced 
in  the  mind  by  fine  scenery ;  almost  every  one,  I  suppose,  knows  what  it  is.    You 
sit  in  a  room  which  commands  one  of  the  finest  views  in  the  country.     Your  face, 
however,  as  it  happens,  is  turned  away  from  the  window.     You  shut  your  eyes  and 
strive  to  call  up  the  peculiar  emotion  to  which  I  have  referred.     Of  course  you  fail. 
All  the  striving  in  the  world  would  be  in  vain.     What,  then?    Else  from  your 
chair,  open  your  eyes,  step  to  the  window,  gaze  forth  upon  the  scene  outspread 
before  you,  and  let  it  produce  its  own  effect  upon  your  mind.    In  like  manner,  in 
religion,  we  shall  not  succeed  in  getting  the  right  feeling  by  our  trying  and  striving, 
we  must  look  out  of  ourselves  to  Christ.     {J.  Culross,  D.D.)         Jesus,  the  heavenly 
counsellor : — Uncertainty  and  doubt  will  make  themselves  felt  in  the  history  of  all 
who  have  the  journey  of  life  to  accomplish.    We  cannot  wonder,  then,  that  in  the 
present  day  so  many  guides  should  present  themselves,  all  professedly  eager  to  help 
us  in  our  great  uncertainties.    I.  The  counsel  Jesus  gives.     1.  Jesus  counsels  us 
what  we  are  to  believe.     The  faculty  of  belief  is  as  certainly  possessed  by  man  as  is 
the  faculty  of  vision ;  the  one  is  a  physical  and  the  other  a  mental  power,  but  both 
are  possessed  by  us,  and  both  are  to  be  exercised.    Jesus  says,  "I  counsel  thee 
what  to  believe."    To  believe  in  God,  in  His  perfections.  His  power,  wisdom, 
justice,  grace,  mercy,  truth,  love.    In  His  providence  and  care  over  you,  to  believe 
in  such  a  way  as  that  we  shall  revere,  obey,  and  love  God.     To  believe  in  Jesus — 
"Ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  Me  " — that  I  am  what  the  prophets  said  I  should 
be,  the  true  Messiah.    Believe  in  the  fulness  of  My  love,  the  sufficiency  of  My 
atoning  work.  My  ability  and  willingness  to  pardon  and  cleanse,  and  in  the  absolute 
and  unchanging  truthfulness  of  all  My  words.    BeUeve  in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  in  His 
convincing,  converting,  renewing,  sustaining,  and  sanctifying  energy.    Believe  in 
the  duties  pertaining  to  personal  life  and  godliness  as  I  have  revealed  them.     2.  I 
have  met  with  not  a  few  young  folks  who  have  been  sadly  perplexed  with  the 
question  as  to  what  they  shall  be.     One  has  solved  it  by  saying,  "  I  shall  be  a  great 
merchant ;    my  ships  shall  sail  on  many  seas,  and  my  servants  and  warehousea 
shall  be  exceedingly  numerous."    Another  has  said,  "  Science  shall  be  my  study." 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

A  third  has  said,  "  I  will  be  a  physician,  and  I  will  try  to  relieve  the  poor  of  their 
maladies."  To  all  such  the  Heavenly  Counsellor  comes,  and  He  does  not  say  to 
such,  "  How  mistaken  you  all  are,  you  must  all  change  your  decisions."  Oh  no, 
but  He  counsels  the  farmer  as  he  sows  to  sow  goodness,  that  when  the  reaping  time 
comes  he  may  reap  the  same.  To  the  philosopher  He  counsels  the  study  of  the 
wisdom  which  is  from  on  high,  and  which  is  full  of  good  works  ;  and  to  the  mer- 
chant He  says,  "Let  goodness  be  the  article  in  which  you  shall  always  trade ;  let 
it  store  your  warehouses,  fill  the  holds  of  your  ships,  and  govern  all  your  transac- 
tions.", To  aU  the  Heavenly  Counsellor  says,  "  Be  good ;  have  a  good  heart,  a 
good  conscience,  a  good  intention,  a  good  life."  3.  This  Heavenly  Counsellor  tells 
us  also  what  we  are  to  do.  Activity,  under  His  advice,  is  always  to  characterise  us. 
The  Lord  Jesus  knows  as  no  one  else  the  great  evils  of  idleness,  and  how  such  evils 
must  afflict  and  torment  all  who  are  slothful ;  and  so  against  this  sin  He  plainly 
counsels  us.  In  the  cultivation  of  inward  holiness  and  in  the  development  of 
righteous  principles,  in  the  hope  of  winning  souls  for  heaven  and  God,  work.  II. 
Christ's  counsels  aee  all  and  always  golden,  so  that  not  any  mixture  can  be 
detected ;  they  have  all  passed  through,  and  been  stamped  in,  the  minting  house  of 
heaven.  But  how  shall  we  know  that  these  counsels  are  all  golden  ?  1.  In  the 
first  place,  because  of  their  genuineness.  It  matters  not  the  test  through  which 
we  put  them,  or  the  analysis  they  are  subjected  to;  not  all  the  testing  in  the 
world  can  either  detect  the  least  impurity  or  make  them  more  genuine  than 
they  are.  Who,  I  should  like  to  know,  seeks  the  good  of  every  man,  woman, 
boy,  and  girl,  as  Jesus  does?  And  whose  counsel  when  adopted  has  resulted 
in  such  untold  good  to  millions  of  our  fellow  creatures  as  His?  Yes,  look 
at  it  how,  when,  and  where  you  may,  ring  it  as  you  please,  weigh  it,  measure 
it,  or  bring  any  other  test  you  please  to  bear  upon  the  counsel  offered  by 
Jesus,  and  its  genuineness  will  be  made  the  more  evident.  2.  Because  of 
the  value  of  His  counsels.  AU  genuine  things  are  not  so  valuable  as  gold ; 
a  violet  is  a  genuine  violet,  but  we  don't  part  with  gold  for  violets.  The  paper 
on  which  I  am  writing  is  genuine  paper,  but  it  is  not  of  the  value  of  gold. 
The  counsel  Jesus  gives  is  not  only  as  valuable,  but  more  so  than  gold.  Do  you 
ask  what  the  advice  Jesus  gives  will  procure  ?  It  will  procure  for  us  the  favour  of 
God,  the  approval  of  angels,  and  the  esteem  of  all  good  men.  It  will  procure  for  us 
peace  within  and  purity  without,  enable  us  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly 
here,  and  then  to  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God  above  and  to  go  no  more  out. 
3.  Like  gold,  they  must  be  searched  for.  The  name  of  the  mine  is  "  the  Bible,"  the 
implements  with  which  we  are  to  work  are  prayer,  patience,  and  faith.  By  knee 
work  and  ceaseless  industry  they  will  be  amply  recompensed.  4.  Because,  like 
gold,  they  are  to  be  used.  Some  people  who  keep  a  shop  hang  up  His  counsels  in 
their  parlours  and  drawing-rooms ;  it  would  be  better  if  they  would  use  them  in 
their  business.  Some  look  at  them  when  they  put  on  their  Sunday  clothes,  and 
then  say  adieu  to  them  when  Sabbath  attire  is  laid  away.  Better  if  they  would 
walk  and  move  and  live  in  the  same  all  the  w.eek  through.  Then,  like  gold,  if  we 
use  Christ's  couosels  aright,  they  will  increase  more  and  more.    HI.  No  one  is 

ENTITLED  TO  EXPECT  THIS  GOLDEN  COUNSEL  FOR  NOTHING.      Men  do    not  part  with  gold 

on  such  terms,  nor  does  Jesus  part  with  His  counsels  thus,  and  so  He  says,  "  I 
counsel  thee  to  buy."  1.  We  are  to  obtain  this  counsel  in  the  first  place  by  giving 
up  aU  our  sins.  What  an  exchange  I  It  is  dross  of  the  worst  for  gold  of  the  very 
best  kind.  If  a  man  were  to  come  and  offer  gold  and  crowns,  titles  and  lands,  for 
old  rags  and  bones,  I  feel  sure  there  would  not  be  many  left  in  all  the  houses  put 
together ;  and  yet,  whilst  Jesus  offers  the  gold  of  heaven  if  we  will  only  forsake  our 
evil  ways  and  come  to  Him,  how  few  are  really  eager  to  make  the  exchange.  2. 
Then  in  a  sense  we  purchase  the  gold  of  heaven  by  using  aright  the  quantity 
already  given.  It  is  by  use  the  two  talents  become  five,  and  the  five  talents  ten. 
If  we  walk  in  the  light  already  given,  however  faint  and  feeble  it  may  be,  it 
will  conduct  us  to  greater  clearness  and  to  more  perfect  vision.  (J.  Goodacre.) 
Christ's  counsel  to  a  lukewarm  Church : — He  does  not  willingly  threaten,  and  He 
never  scolds ;  but  He  rather  speaks  to  men's  hearts,  and  their  reason,  and  comes  to 
them  as  a  friend,  than  addresses  Himself  to  their  fears.  1.  Now,  I  observe  that  the 
first  need  of  the  lukewarm  Church  is  to  open  its  eyes  to  see  facts.  Observe  that 
the  text  falls  into  two  distinct  parts,  and  that  the  counsel  to  buy  does  not  extend — 
though  it  is  ordinarily  read  as  if  it  did — to  the  last  item  in  our  Lord's  advice. 
These  Laodiceans  are  bid  to  "buy  of"  Him  "gold"  and  "raiment,"  but  they  are 
bid  to  use  the  "  eyesalve  "  that  they  "  may  see."    No  doubt,  whatever  is  meant  by 


CHAP,  in.]  REVELATION.  255 

that  "eyesalve"  comes  from  Him,  as  does  everything  else.  But  my  point  is  that 
these  people  are  supposed  already  to  possess  it,  and  that  they  are  bid  to  employ  it. 
No  doubt  the  exhortation,  "  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eyesalve  that  thou  mayest  see," 
may  be  so  extended  as  to  refer  to  the  general  condition  of  spiritual  blindness  which 
attaches  to  humanity,  apart  from  the  illuminating  and  sight-giving  work  of  Jesus 
Christ.  That  true  Light,  which  lighteneth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world, 
has  a  three-fold  office  as  the  result  of  all  the  parts  of  which  there  comes  to  our 
darkened  eyes  the  vision  of  the  things  that  are.  He  reveals  the  objects  to  see ;  He 
gives  the  light  by  which  we  see  them ;  and  He  gives  us  eyes  to  see  with.  •*  Behold 
Me  as  I  am,  and  the  things  that  I  reveal  to  you  as  they  are ;  and  then  you  will  see 
yourselves  as  you  are."  So,  then,  there  comes  out  of  this  exhortation  this  thought, 
that  a  symptom  constantly  accompanying  the  lukewarm  condition  is  absolute 
unconsciousness  of  it.  In  all  regions  the  worse  a  man  is  the  less  he  knows  it.  It 
'  is  the  good  people  that  know  themselves  to  be  bad ;  the  bad  ones,  when  they  think 
about  themselves,  conceit  themselves  to  be  good.  The  higher  a  man  climbs  in  any 
science,  or  in  the  practice  of  any  virtue,  the  more  clearly  he  sees  the  unsealed  peaks 
above  him.  The  frost-bitten  limb  is  quite  comfortable.  Another  thought  suggested 
by  this  part  of  the  counsel  is  that  the  blind  man  must  himself  rub  in  the  eyesalve. 
Nobody  else  can  do  it  for  him.  True  1  It  comes  like  every  other  good  thing,  from 
the  Chiist  in  the  heavens ;  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  if  we  will  attach  specific 
meanings  to  every  part  of  a  metaphor,  that  "  eyesalve  "  may  be  the  influence  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  who  convicts  men  of  sin.  But  whatever  it  is  you  have  to  apply  it  to 
your  own  eyes.  Our  forefathers  made  too  much  of  self-examination  as  a  Christian 
duty,  and  pursued  it  often  for  mistaken  purposes.  But  this  generation  makes  far 
too  light  of  it.  Apply  the  eyesalve;  it  will  be  keen,  it  will  bite;  welcome  the 
smart,  and  be  sure  that  anything  is  good  for  you  which  takes  away  the  veil  that 
self-complacency  casts  over  your  true  condition,  and  lets  the  light  of  God  into  the 
cellars  and  dark  places  of  your  souls.  II.  The  second  need  of  the  lukewarm  Church 
IS  THE  TKUE  WEALTH  WHICH  Christ  GIVES.  "I  couusel  thcc  to  buy  of  Me  gold  tried 
in  the  fire."  Now,  there  may  be  many  different  ways  of  putting  the  thought  that 
is  conveyed  here,  but  I  think  the  deepest  truth  of  human  nature  is  that  the  only 
wealth  for  a  man  is  the  possession  of  God.  That  wealth  alone  makes  us  paupers 
truly  rich.  For  there  is  nothing  else  that  satisfies  a  man's  craving,  and  supplies  a 
man's  needs.  That  wealth  has  immunity  from  all  accidents.  No  possession  is 
truly  mine  of  which  any  outward  contingency  or  circumstance  can  deprive  me. 
But  this  wealth,  the  wealth  of  a  heart  enriched  with  the  possession  of  God,  whom 
it  knows,  loves,  trusts,  and  obeys,  this  wealth  is  incorporated  with  a  man's  very 
being,  and  enters  into  the  substance  of  his  nature ;  and  so  nothing  can  deprive  him 
of  it.  The  only  possession  which  we  can  take  with  us  when  our  nerveless  hands 
drop  all  other  good,  and  our  hearts  are  untwined  from  all  other  loves,  is  this 
durable  riches.  III.  The  third  need  of  a  lukewarm  Church  is  the  raiment — that 
Christ  gives.  The  wealth  which  He  bids  us  buy  of  Him  belongs  mostly  to  our 
inward  life ;  the  raiment  which  He  proffers  us  to  wear,  as  is  natural  to  the  figure, 
appHes  mainly  to  our  outward  lives,  and  signifies  the  dress  of  our  spirits  as  these 
are  presented  to  the  world.  I  need  not  remind  you  of  how  frequently  this  metaphor 
is  employed  throughout  the  Scripture.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  vainer  than 
effort  after  righteousness  which  is  not  based  on  faith.  ♦•  Buy  of  Me  raiment,"  and 
then,  listen  to  the  voice  which  says,  "  Put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  and  put 
on  the  new  man  of  God  created  in  righteousness  and  holiness  of  truth."  IV.  Lastly, 
ALL  SUPPLY  OF  THESE  NEEDS  IS  TO  BE  BOUGHT.  "  Buy  of  Me."  There  is  nothing' 
in  that  counsel  contradictory  to  the  great  truth,  that  "  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal 
life."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Gold  tried  in  the  fire. — Tried  gold  : — I.  A  precious 
COMMODITY.  1.  Gold  represents  the  blessed  Saviour,  for  He  is  the  most  excellent 
of  beings.  2.  Gold  represents  the  gospel,  for  it  is  the  most  excellent  of  systems. 
3.  Gold  represents  the  Christian  graces,  for  they  are  the  most  permanent  of 
treasures.  Faith,  hope,  and  love  have  a  power  to  bless  beyond  this  world's 
wealth,  n.  This  precious  commodity  tried.  Even  philosophy  itself  has  con- 
fessed that  the  gold  of  the  gospel  alone  will  sustain  in  the  final  conflict.  III. 
This  tried  and  precious  commodity  is  offered  for  acceptance.  It  is  strange 
but  true  that  men  reject  salvation  because  it  is  freely  offered.  Pride  resents  the 
humbling  conditions.  Self-will  tramples  beneath  its  feet  offered  mercy.  IV.  The 
GLORIOUS  CONSEQUENCE  OF  ACCEPTING.  Soul  richcs  are  the  true  abiding  wealth.  (W. 
Burrows,  B.A.)  Aggravated  poverty  of  soul :— If  a  man's  gold  prove  counterfeit^ 
his  jewels  painted  glass,  his  silver  lead  or  dross,  he  will  not  only  be  found  poor 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

when  he  comes  to  be  tried,  and  want  the  benefit  of  riches,  but  will  also  have  a 
fearful  aggravation  of  his  poverty,  by  his  disappointment  and  surprisal.  If  a  man's 
faith,  which  should  be  more  precious  than  gold,  be  found  rotten  and  corrupt,  if  his 
light  be  darkness  ;  how  vile  is  that  faith,  how  great  is  that  darkness !  (J.  Owen,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19-22.  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten. — Divine  chastisement : — 
I.  In  befebence  to  the  sinneb,  what  is  the  object  of  Divine  chastisement? 
The  merciful  design  is  the  conviction  and  conversion  of  the  sinner,  his  restoration 
to  the  image  of  God.    And  what  are  the  means  employed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  for 
this  end  ?     Sickness,  poverty,  bereavements,  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  the  faithful 
admonition  of  a  loving  friend,   or  even  a  tract  offered  by  the  wayside.    11.  In 
begabd  to  the  Lobd's  own  people,  what  is  His  design  in  afflicting  them  ?    1.  To 
prevent  sin  in  them.    He  sees  the  beginning  of  mischief  in  the  heart,  and  He  nips 
the  sin  in  the  bud.    2.  To  wean  them  from  this  present  world.     3.  To  lead  them 
nearer  to  Himself.    III.  The  attitude  op  the  Savioub  towaeds  sinnebs.     {H.  E. 
Windle,  M.A.)        Christ  disclosing  His  love  : — The  Lord  next  declares  His  love  to 
Laodicea.    It  has  really  been  love  all  through ;  but  now  He  speaks  the  word  out — 
**  As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten."    What  He  has  already  said,  severe 
and  even  terrible,  has  been  said  in  love ;  and  indeed  love  is  the  root  of  His  whole 
dealing  with  them,  love  that  would  get  quit  of  their  sin.    Now  this  is  a  thing  that 
helps  to  cure  lukewarmness.    Love  is  the  key  that  opens  the  barred  door  of  the 
sinful  heart.    And  the  Saviour  discloses  His  love  to  the  Laodiceans  that  He  may 
thereby  touch  them,  melt  them,  restore  them.    I  think  there  is  a  lesson  here  that 
we  need  to  learn.    We  come  into  the  presence  of  Laodicean  lukewarmness.     We 
are  grieved  by  it.    We  are  angered  even  more  than  we  are  grieved.    We  are 
tempted  to  denounce  it.    Ah,  but  here  is  a  nobler  way — to  be  ourselves  loving ! 
Out  of  Christ's  love  there  spring  "  rebuke  "  and  "  chastening."    Eebuke  is  not  mere 
lault-finding,  or  "  coming  down  upon "  a  man,  or  '•  giving  it  hot " ;  that  is  easy 
enough  ;  commonly  it  is  the  outcome  of  the  wrath  of  man,  which  worketh  not  the 
righteousness  of  God ;  and  not  seldom  it  is  directed  against  those  who  do  not 
deserve  it.     One  of  the  sad  things  among  us,  indeed,  is  this  cruel  misdirection  of 
censure.    To  rebuke  means  to  bring  sin  home  convincingly  to  the  judgment  and 
the  conscience.    To  rebuke  is  a  very  different  thing  from  fault-finding,  and  as  high 
above  it  as  heaven  is  above  the  earth.    Nothing  but  love  can  do  it — high-purposed, 
firm,  holy  love.    It  means  the  setting  of  sin  so  clearly  and  fully  and  convincingly 
before  the  mind  and  conscience,  that  you  carry  the  person  with  you,  and  he  is 
convinced.     That  is  what  love  tries,  and  what  only  love  can  accomplish.    And  that 
is  what  Christ  is  doing  with  the  Laodiceans  now.    He  is  setting  the  truth  of  their 
condition  before  their  consciences,  in  holiest  and  tenderest  mercy,  that  shrinks  not 
from  giving  pain  in  order  that  it  may  heal.    But  this  were  not  enough,  unless 
something  is  done  to  help  the  sinner  out  of  his  evil  estate.    For  the  Lord  to 
have  reproved  or  convinced  the  Laodiceans  would  not  have  been  enough.    Without 
"  conviction  "  there  is  and  can  be  no  "  conversion  "  ;  but  He  could  not  have  stopped 
short  with  it,  any  more  than  the  physician  may  stop  short  with  telling  us  our 
disease.    Therefore  He  adds  "  chastening  "  to  rebuke.    We  must  dismiss  the  idea 
of  punishment.    That  does  not  Me  in  the  word.     Punishment  is  the  deed  of  a 
judge  ;  chastening  is  the  work  of  a  father.    We  must  start  from  the  realised  fact  of 
our  sonship  in  the  Divine  family.    The  word  "  chastening  "  brings  into  view,  under 
the  new  covenant,  the  whole  process  of  earthly  training  for  heavenly  issues,  which 
God  in  His  wisdom  ordains  and  conducts,  and  of  which  suffering  forms  so  large  an 
element.    And  this  is  the  issue  to  which  the  rebuke  and  chastening  of  love  should 
lead ;  *'  Be  zealous,  and  repent."        Let  the  zeal  show  itself  in  this  line.    It  is  a 
man  taking  God's  side  against  his  own  sin,  and  looking  to  God  to  deliver  him  from 
it.    It  results,  not  from  the  will  of  the  flesh  or  the  will  of  man,  but  from  God's 
work  in  the  conscience.    It  has  its  birth  in  a  true  apprehension  by  faith  of  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ.     {J.  Culross,  D.D,)        God  afflicts  for  our  good;   and 
what  that  good  is  : — I.  God's  eule.     1.  That  God  chastises  His  children  out  of  love, 
and  for  their  good.    (1)  Afflictions  to  them  whom  God  loves  are  medicinal,  and 
thereby  they  recover  their   health  by  repentance  from  some  spiritual  disease. 
(2)  Afflictions  are  preservatives  to  keep  them  whom  God  loveth  from  sin   (2  Cor. 
xii.  7).     (3)  Afflictions  make  the  fruitless  bring  forth  fruit,  beget  many  virtues, 
and  make  God's  graces  in  us  to  bloom  and  bring  forth  works  pleasing  unto  our 
Heavenly  Father.     (4)  Afflictions  draw  men  nearer  unto  God.     The  main  use  of 
all  is  for  comfort  in  all  our  sufferings  and  crosses  whensoever  God  sends  them:  tot 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  257 

they  are  signs  of  our  sonship  and  tokens  of  His  love.  2.  That  if  God  spares  not 
those  whom  He  loveth,  much  less  shall  His  enemies  escape  punishment.  3.  That 
God  rebukes  before  He  chastens.  (1)  If  this  then  be  God's  manner  of  dealing,  it 
should  behove  us  not  lightly  to  pass  by  His  warnings.  (2)  If  God  so  powerfully 
warns  His  creature  before  He  strikes  him,  how  dare  we  strike  our  brother  before  we 
warn  him  ?  II.  Our  duty.  We  must  be  zealous,  and  repent.  1.  Concerning 
zeal.  (1)  Zeal  is  the  intention  and  vehemency  of  all  our  affections  in  matters  of 
God  and  His  service.  It  hath  its  name  of  Zsw,  which  is,  to  burn  and  boil  as  water 
over  the  fire,  and  thence  may  be  styled  the  fervency  of  our  affections.  Such  a  one 
was  Apollos  (Acts  xviii.  25)  ;  and  such  St.  Paul  exhorts  the  Komans  to  be 
(Rom.  xii.  11).  For  as  burning  is  the  excess  or  highest  pitch  of  heat,  so  is  zeal  of 
our  affections.  But  as  in  our  bodies  we  find  aguish  burnings  as  well  as  the 
healthful  vigour  of  natural  heat ;  and  as  Nadab  and  Abihu  offered  fire  unto  God, 
but  not  the  right  and  holy  fire  (Lev.  x.  1),  so  are  there  some  counterfeits  of  zeal,  as 
it  were  false  fires,  abominable  unto  God  and  odious  unto  men.  The  kinds,  then,  of 
false  zeal  may  be  reduced  unto  three  heads,  (a)  Hypocritical  zeal,  which  wants 
sincerity.  (6)  Blind  zeal,  which  wants  knowledge,  (c)  Turbulent  zeal,  which 
wants  love  and  moderation.  Thus  I  have  briefly  described  these  false  fires,  that  by 
the  law  of  contraries  we  may  know  who  is  the  true  zealot.  (2)  But  why  should  this 
zeal  be  so  needful  ?  Let  us  therefore  now  see  the  reasons,  (a)  First,  therefore,  I 
will  seek  no  farther  than  my  text,  where  the  want  of  zeal  is  reckoned  for  a  sin,  a 
sin  to  be  repented  of,  "Be  zealous,  and  repent " :  is  not  that  needful,  without  which 
all  our  works  are  sinful  ?  (b)  It  is  the  ground  rule  of  the  whole  law  of  God,  and  of 
all  the  precepts  concerning  His  worship,  that  we  must  love  the  Lord  our  God  with 
all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  mind,  and  with  all  our  strength.  What 
else  is  this  but  to  love  Him  zealously,  to  worship  Him  with  the  highest  pitch  of  our 
affections  ?  For  He  is  the  sovereign  and  chief  est  good  ;  what  love  then  can  suit  to 
Him  but  the  very  top  and  sovereignty  of  love  ?  (c)  Zeal  is  that  which  carries  our 
devotions  up  to  heaven.  As  wings  to  a  fowl,  wheels  to  a  chariot,  sails  to  a  ship  ; 
60  is  zeal  to  the  soul  of  man.  Without  zeal  our  devotions  can  no  more  ascend  than 
vapours  from  a  still  without  fire  put  under  it.  2.  Eepentance  is  the  changing  of 
our  course  from  the  old  way  of  sin  unto  the  new  way  of  righteousness :  or  more 
briefly,  a  changing  of  the  course  of  sin  for  the  course  of  righteousness.  It  is  called 
also  conversion,  turning  and  returning  unto  God.  I  will  describe  it  briefly  in  five 
degrees,  which  are  as  five  steps  in  a  ladder,  by  which  we  ascend  up  to  heaven. 
(1)  The  first  step  is  the  sight  of  sin  and  the  punishment  due  unto  it.  For  how  can 
the  soul  be  possessed  with  fear  and  sorrow,  except  the  understanding  do  first 
apprehend  the  danger  ? — for  that  which  the  eye  sees  not,  the  heart  rues  not.  The 
serious  penitent  must  be  like  the  wary  factor,  he  must  retire  himself,  look  into  his 
books,  and  turn  over  the  leaves  of  his  life ;  he  must  consider  the  expense  of  his 
time,  the  employment  of  his  talent,  the  debt  of  his  sin,  and  the  strictness  of  his 
account.  (2)  And  so  he  shall  ascend  unto  the  next  step,  which  is  sorrow  for  sin. 
For  he  that  seriously  considers  how  he  hath  grieved  the  Spirit  of  God  and 
endangered  his  own  soul  by  his  sins,  cannot  but  have  his  spirit  grieved  with 
remorse.  (3)  The  third  step  up  this  ladder  is  the  loathing  of  sin.  A  surfeit  of 
meats,  how  dainty  and  delicate  soever,  will  afterwards  make  them  loathsome. 
(4)  The  fourth  step  is  the  leaving  off  sin.  To  what  purpose  doth  the  physician 
evacuate  iU  humours,  if  the  patient  still  distempers  himself  with  ill  diet  ?  What 
shall  it  avail  a  man  to  endure  the  lancing,  searching,  and  tending  of  a  wound,  if 
he  stay  not  for  the  cure  ?  (5)  The  fifth  and  last  step  is  the  cleaving  unto  God  with 
full  purpose  of  heart  to  walk  before  Him  in  newness  of  life.  All  the  former  degrees 
of  repentance  were  for  the  putting  off  of  the  old  man ;  this  is  for  the  putting  on 
of  the  new.  HI.  The  connection  and  dependence  of  these  latter  words  ("Be 
zealous  therefore,  and  repent")  upon  the  former  ("As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and 
chasten.")  Many  things  might  be  here  observed,  but  I  will  name  but  one,  which  is 
this,  that  repentance  is  the  means  to  avoid  and  prevent  God's  judgments.  For  (as 
Tertullian  observes)  He  that  hath  decreed  to  publish  by  justice,  hath  promised 
to  grant  pardon  by  repentance.  And  so  Jer.  xviii.  7.  {J.  Mede,  B.D.)  The 
love  and  the  discipline  : — How  soon  a  Church  goes  down  1  How  quickly  its 
love  and  holiness  and  zeal  fade  away !  One  generation  often  sees  its  rise,  decline, 
and  fall.  The  soul  withers ;  the  eye  that  looked  upward  now  looks  downward ; 
and  the  once  "  religious  man,"  who  "  did  run  well,"  takes  the  downward  path  into 
lukewarmness  or  death.  Yet  Jesus  leaves  him  not.  I.  The  love.  The  "  I  "  here 
is  emphatic,  and  by  its  prominence  Christ  presents  HimseK  specially  as  the  lover, 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  rebuker,  the  chastener.  His  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  nor  our  ways 
His  ways.  He  loves  where  others  would  hate.  He  shows  His  love  by  chastening 
where  others  would  show  theirs  by  indulging.  II,  The  discipline  of  love.  Mark 
the  way  in  which  this  love  deals  with  Laodicea.  It  deals  in  tenderness,  and  yet  in 
solemn  severity.  Instead  of  letting  Laodicea  escape,  it  takes  hold  of  her,  as  a  wise 
father  of  his  disobedient  child,  and  makes  her  sensible  how  much  it  hates  the  sin. 

1.  He  reproves  by  word  and  deed.  2.  What  the  chastening  was  we  know  not :  it 
would  be  something  specially  suited  to  the  self-sufficiency  and  worldliness  of  the 
Laodiceans.  Perhaps  they  were  stripped  of  their  riches ;  perhaps  visited  by  sickness 
and  death ;  laid  desolate  by  grievous  sorrow ;  some  long-continued  trial,  stroke 
upon  stroke,  crushing  and  emptying  them.  Whatever  it  may  cost,  they  must  be  made 
to  feel  the  evil  of  their  ways.  III.  The  exhortation  of  love.  Be  zealous,  therefore, 
and  repent.  The  word  "  zealous  "  contrasts  with  lukewarmness,  and  implies  true 
warmth  and  fervour.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Be  zealous.  — Religious  zeal : — It  is  evident 
that  the  zeal  which  is  here  recommended  has  religion  for  its  object.  Now  there  are 
some  who  are  mightily  afraid  of  zeal  as  connected  with  religion.  A  zealous  friend 
— a  zealous  teacher — a  zealous  patriot — are  characters  referred  to  with  expressions 
of  applause.  But  the  moment  that  zeal  mingles  with  religion,  then  there  is 
distrust  and  disapproval.  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  differently  zeal  in  matters 
of  religion  is  spoken  of  by  these  persons,  and  by  the  Word  of  God.  Christ  is  here 
introduced  as  rebuking  the  Church  of  Laodicea  for  the  want  of  it,  and  as  com- 
manding them  to  get  that  want  supplied.  But  His  will,  as  thus  expressed,  is  not 
arbitrary.  It  is  founded  in  the  nature  and  reason  of  the  case.  Why,  let  me  ask  you^ 
are  you  zealous  for  anything  whatever  ?  Is  it  not  because  that  thing,  in  your 
opinion,  is  important  to  be  attained,  and  because  the  attainment  of  it  requires 
energy  and  effort  ?  Now,  can  you  explain  how  it  is  that  the  same  mode  of  judging 
and  acting  should  not  be  adopted  in  reUgion?  In  the  first  place,  is  religion 
destitute  of  importance,  or  is  it  less  important  than  anything  else  which  attracts 
your  notice  and  interests  your  attention?  Then,  in  the  second  place,  do  yoQ 
consider  religion  to  be  of  such  easy  acquirement  that  a  man  may  be  invested  with 
all  its  character,  and  animated  by  all  its  spirit,  and  come  to  the  enjoyment  of  all 
its  blessings,  though  he  gives  himself  no  great  concern  about  it,  and  treats  it  with 
coldness  and  indifference  ?  And  then,  in  the  third  place,  if  for  the  reasons  now 
stated,  we  ought  to  be  zealous  in  acquiring  for  ourselves  an  interest  in  the  grace 
and  blessings  of  the  gospel,  the  same  reasons  should  constrain  us  to  be  zealous 
also  in  communicating  these  to  our  fellow-men  throughout  the  world.  Religion  is 
as  important  to  them  as  it  is  to  us.  Moreover,  if  you  are  actuated  by  zeal  in  other 
cases,  and  feel  it  to  be  at  once  becoming  and  necessary,  we  may  well  require  you  to 
vindicate,  if  you  can,  a  want  of  zeal  or  a  condemnation  of  it,  in  that  vocation 
wherewith  you  are  called  as  the  disciples  of  Christ.  If  it  be  right  to  cherish  and 
display  zeal  in  the  study  of  literature  and  philosophy,  in  promoting  the  prosperity 
of  your  country,  in  advancing  the  welfare  of  your  friends,  upon  what  principle  can 
it  be  wrong  to  cherish  and  display  zeal  in  procuring  for  religion  that  ascendancy 
which  it  is  entitled  to  hold  over  the  minds  and  destinies  of  those  for  whose  ever- 
lasting happiness  it  is  intended  ?  If  religion  be,  as  it  is  described  in  the  Bible,  and 
as  you  yourselves  profess  to  regard  it,  then  not  only  ought  you  to  be  zealous  for  it, 
but  your  zeal  for  it  cannot  be  too  great.  Now  what  is  the  degree  of  importance 
that  belongs  to  religion  ?  Why,  it  is  infinitely  important.  What !  can  you  be  too 
zealous  in  seeking  after  deliverance  from  "the  worm  that  never  dies,  and  from  the 
fire  that  shall  not  be  quenched  "  ?  Can  you  be  too  zealous  in  aspiring  to  that 
"  inheritance  which  is  incorruptible,  and  that  crown  of  glory  which  f  adeth  not  away  "  ? 
Can  you  be  too  zealous  in  the  pursuit  of  what  was  purchased  at  such  a  costly  price 
as  the  blood  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  ?  {A.  Thompson,  D.D.)  A  coal  from  the 
altar  .-—-The  true  zealot,  whose  fervency  is  in  the  spirit,  not  in  show  ;  in  substance, 
not  in  circumstance  ;  for  God,  not  himself  ;  guided  by  the  Word,  not  with  humours; 
tempered  with  charity,  not  with  bitterness :  such  a  man's  praise  is  of  God  though 
not  of  men  ;  such  a  man's  worth  cannot  be  set  forth  with  the  tongues  of  men  and 
of  angels.  1.  It  is  good  to  be  zealous  in  good  things,  and  is  it  not  best  in  the 
best  ?  Or  is  there  any  better  than  God,  or  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  Is  mean  and 
mediocrity  in  all  excellent  arts  excluded,  and  only  to  be  admitted  in  religion? 

2.  Consider  and  reason  thus  with  thyself,  canst  thou  brook  a  sluggard  in  thy  work, 
if  thou  be  of  any  spirit  thyself  ?  Do  men  choose  the  f orwardest  deer  in  the  herd, 
the  liveliest  colt  in  the  drove  ?  and  is  the  backwardest  man  fittest  for  God  ?  Is  not 
ail  His  delight  in  the  quickest  and  cheerfulest  givers  and  servitors?   3.  This  zeal  is 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  259 

so  gracious  a  favourite  with  God,  that  it  graces  with  Him  all  the  rest  of  His  graces. 
Prayer,  if  it  be  frequent,  prevaileth  much ;  the  zealous  witnesses  had  power  to  shut 
and  open  heaven  (chap.  xii.).  4.  Zeal  is  the  richest  evidence  of  faith,  and  the 
clearest  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  Yea,  but  by  what  means  shall  a  Christian 
attain  this  fire,  and  maintain  it  when  he  hath  gotten  it  ?  Say  not  in  thine  heart, 
What  Prometheus  shall  ascend  into  heaven  and  fetch  it  thence  ?  Thou  mayest 
fetch  it  thence  by  thine  own  prayer.  Sermons  are  bellows  ordained  for  this  purpose. 
But  here  methinks  I  hear  the  lukewarm  worldling  of  our  times  fume  and  chafe,  and 
ask  what  needs  all  this  ado  for  zeal,  as  if  all  God's  people  were  not  "zealous  enough. 
Such  as  think  they  are,  or  can  be  zealous  enough,  need  no  other  conviction  to  be 
poor,  blind,  naked,  wretched,  and  pitiful  Laodiceans.  Fire  is  ever  climbing  and 
aspiring  higher ;  zeal  is  ever  aiming  at  that  which  is  before ;  carried  toward 
perfection ;  thinking  meanly  of  that  which  is  past,  and  already  attained.  What 
would  you  have  us  to  do  ?  We  profess,  keep  our  church,  hear  sermons,  as  Christians 
ought  to  do.  Affectionate  friendship  and  service  is  not  only  for  public  show  upon 
festival  days,  but  for  domestical,  ordinary,  and  private  use ;  to  such  holiday  and 
church  retainers,  God  may  well  say,  Let  us  have  some  of  this  zeal  at  home  and 
apart.  (A.  Wood.)  Religious  zeal : — I.  Our  zeal  for  religion  should  be  real 
AND  conscientious.  There  is  a  zeal  of  sympathy,  which  is  awakened  and  kept 
alive  by  the  zeal  of  others  with  whom  we  happen  to  come  in  contact.  Be  "  renewed 
in  the  spirit  of  your  minds,"  that  religion  may  appear  to  you  in  all  its  genuine 
excellence,  and  that  it  may  hold  that  place  in  your  regard  to  which  it  is  justly  entitled. 
Meditate  seriously  on  the  interest  which  you  personally  have  in  all  that  it  requires 
you  to  believe,  and  in  all  that  it  commands  you  to  do.  Think  of  its  necessity  to 
the  redemption  and  well-being  of  every  one  of  the  human  race.    II.  Our  zeal  for 

BELIGION  must  BE  INTELLIGENT,  OB  ACCOMPANIED  WITH  KNOWLEDGE.  HI.  ThERB 
MUST    BE    PRUDENCE  IN   THE    EXERCISE    AND    MANIFESTATION   OF   OUR    RELIGIOUS   ZEAL. 

Prudence  does  not  damp  nor  discourage  our  zeal.  It  only  prevents  us  from  giving 
those  expressions  to  it  which,  on  the  one  hand,  would  be  attended  with  no  benefit, 
and,  on  the  other,  might  involve  us  in  difficulties  and  embarrassments.     IV.  Our 

ZEAL  FOR  RELIGION   MUST  ALWAYS   CONSIST  WITH   MORAL  INTEGRITY.      It  UCVCr  Can   be 

allowable  for  us  to  do  what  is  morally  wrong,  whatever  be  the  advantageous 
consequences  that  are  to  follow  it.  And  least  of  all,  one  should  suppose,  can  such 
a  proceeding  be  allowable,  when  we  are  striving  to  advance  the  interests  of  religion. 

V.  Our  religious  zeal  must  be  under  the  government  of  charity.  Our  zeal 
being  awakened  to  care  for  men,  charity  comes  in  to  soften  that  aspect  of  sternness 
and  severity,  which  it  might  otherwise  assume,  and  to  mould  it  into  a  form  more 
consonant  to  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  those  for  whom  it  is  to  labour,  as 
well  as  to  the  spirit  and  precepts  of  that  religion  which  it  is  desirous  to  propagate. 

VI.  Our  zeal  must   be  in  proportion   to  the  value   and   importance  of  the 

OBJECTS   which   EXCITE   IT,  AND  TO   THE   EXIGENCIES   IN   WHICH   THESE   MAY  HAPPEN   TO 

BE  PLACED.  Every  system  has  certain  leading  principles  and  properties  of  which 
it  cannot  be  divested,  while  there  are  other  subordinate  principles  and  properties, 
■which  appear,  neither  in  themselves  nor  in  their  relations,  to  be  necessary  to  its 
existence,  and  to  its  ultimate  purpose.  And  so  is  it  with  Christianity.  Being  a 
plan  of  Divine  contrivance,  all  that  is  to  be  found  in  it,  must  be  considered  as 
important  and  useful ;  but  it  is  evident  that  there  are  some  things  more  important 
and  useful  than  others.  And  this  being  the  case,  it  follows,  of  course,  that  whether 
we  be  cherishing  Christianity  in  ourselves,  or  pressing  it  on  the  attention  of 
others,  our  zeal  must  not  operate  with  equal  ardour  upon  every  subject,  but 
bear  some  sort  of  proportion  to  the  real  or  the  relative  importance  which 
they  possess — the  most  important  receiving  its  highest,  and  the  less 
important  its  lower  measure  of  warmth  and  energy  {A.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
The  nature,  importance,  and  right  exercise  of  Christian  zeal : — I.  Its  nature. 
n.  Its  IMPORTANCE.  Zeal  is  an  appropriate  quality  of  the  spiritual  life — the  genial 
heat  of  the  new  nature,  immediately  subservient  to  its  continuance  and  support, 
and  operating  to  maintain  its  powers  in  their  proper  capacity  for  action.  In  nature, 
heat  is  the  most  active  of  all  the  elements.  It  is  the  prime  agent  which  the  Author 
of  nature  employs  for  promoting  the  subsistence  and  well-being  of  the  universe. 
Animal  and  vegetable  life  have  an  immediate  dependence  on  it ;  nor  could  nature 
itself,  according  to  its  apparent  constitution  and  laws,  subsist  without  it.  To  the 
effects  of  heat  in  nature,  those  of  zeal  in  religion  are  directly  analagous.  How 
incapable  of  exertion,  how  indisposed  to  motion,  how  listless  and  insensible  are 
men  found,  when  their  spirits  are  benumbed  with  cold  affection  I    But  under  the 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

influence  of  that  kindly  warmth  which  the  Spirit  of  God  imparts,  how  quickly  do 
they  revive,  and  become  pliant  and  active !  While  zeal  is  thus  necessary  to  the 
effectual  pei'formance  of  the  Christian's  work,  it  contributes  also,  as  an  effectual 
qualification,  to  render  his  service  acceptable.  III.  Riohtly  exebcised.  1.  On 
right  objects — objects  which  are  intrinsically  good,  and  which  are  of  suitable  impor- 
tance. Should  the  furnace  be  heated  seven  times  more  than  usual  for  no  worthier 
purpose  than  the  burning  of  a  straw  ?  2.  Zeal  must  also  be  exercised  with  a  right 
mind.  (1)  Zeal  must  be  exercised  with  knowledge.  Perhaps  there  is  nothing  that 
is  either  more  unseemly  in  itself  or  more  mischievous  in  its  consequences  than 
^eal  without  knowledge.  Such  a  zeal,  considered  in  its  exercise,  may  be  compared 
to  a  ship,  driving  with  full  sail  before  the  wind,  without  either  compass  or  pUot — 
threatening  the  safety  of  everything  that  comes  in  her  way,  and  in  danger  of  driving 
at  last  upon  some  rock  or  shoal  that  shall  cause  her  destruction.  (2)  Zeal  must  be 
exercised  with  sincerity.  The  concern  which  is  expressed  for  religion  must  be  real — 
the  genuine  result  of  principle  and  feeling — not  affected,  merely  to  cover  sinister 
designs,  to  second  views  of  worldly  interest,  to  minister  to  secret  pride — to  the  selfish 
vain-glorious  desire  of  applause  and  estimation.  (3)  Genuine  zeal  must  be  exercised 
with  impartiaUty — with  an  equal  regard  to  the  attainment  of  its  object — whether  it 
has  respect  to  ourselves  or  to  others.  The  zeal  of  too  many  is  chiefly  occupied 
abroad,  in  detecting  and  exposing  the  sins  of  others.  (4)  Zeal  must  be  exercised 
with  kind  affection.  (T.  Fleming,  D.D.)  Christian  zeal: — 1.  True  Christian 
zeal  includes  knowledge.  It  is  not  a  blind  impulse  of  feeling,  an  ignorant  and 
infuriated  passion,  but  a  holy  intelligent  principle.  2.  True  Christian  zeal  includes 
indignation.  The  simple  effusions  of  the  heart  in  the  way  of  grief  on  account  of 
sin  do  not  come  up  to  the  idea  of  zeal.  It  is  grief  and  indignation  at  sin  roused  to 
the  very  utmost.  3.  True  Christian  zeal  includes  ardent  desire.  The  immediate 
object  of  this  zeal  is  the  declarative  glory  of  God.  It  is  a  holy  indignation  at  sin, 
because  this  evil  throws  a  dark  shade  over  God's  glory.  It  is  an  ardent  and 
passionate  concern  that  God  may  be  glorified.  4.  Christian  fortitude  and  magnani- 
mity are  also  branches  of  this  temper.  The  person  that  is  truly  zealous  is  not 
easily  intimidated.  5.  True  Christian  zeal  is  an  active  and  useful  principle.  It 
grasps  with  the  greatest  eagerness  every  means  which  may  be  subservient  to  the 
attainment  of  its  object.  {R.  Culhertson.)  Christian  zeal: — I.  The  natube  op 
Cheistian  zeal.  II.  The  soubce  of  Christian  zeal.  Christian  zeal  is  zeal  for 
Christ ;  it  has  Him  for  its  ultimate  source,  as  well  as  its  ultimate  end.  Christian 
"enthusiasm"  is  really  "the  state  of  inspiration  by  God."  III.  The  sphebe  op 
Chbistlajj  zeal.  True  zeal  is  of  course  "  zeal  for  God  "  and  for  good.  IV.  The 
QUALITIES  which  SHOULD  CHABACTEBISE  Cheistian  ZEAL.  1.  Truc  Christian  zeal  is 
intttoigent.  There  is  light  in  it  as  well  as  heat.  2.  It  is  prudent.  Plans  warily, 
and  works  calmly.  3.  It  is  loving  and  sympathetic.  4.  It  is  patient  and  persevering. 
Not  a  fitful  impulse,  but  a  steady  flame.  Based  on  principle,  it  is  the  habit  of  the 
Christian's  life.  V.  The  motives  which  sustain  Chbistian  zeal.  1.  Love  to  the 
Redeemer.  2.  The  salvation  of  the  world.  3.  The  prosperity  of  our  own  souls. 
What  a  protection  zeal  is  against  the  coldness  of  the  world — what  a  defence  against 
temptation — what  a  preservative  against  moral  deterioration — what  a  suitable 
preparation  for  the  holy  activities  of  heaven  1  {C.  Jordan,  M.A.)  Zeal : — When, 
a  man  dies  in  England,  his  friends  often  say  of  him,  in  praise  of  his  diligence, 
energy,  and  concentration :  "  Well,  he  lived  simply  to  carry  through  that  important 
line  of  railway  "  ;  or — "  His  only  object  was  to  extort  from  the  Government  a  more 
scientific  education  for  the  people  "  ;  or — "  He  devoted  himself  to  the  cause  of  Free 
Trade  "  ;  or — "  He  was  a  martyr  to  his  exertions  in  behalf  of  Protection."  It  was 
his  one  idea ;  it  grew  with  his  growth  ;  he  could  think  of  nothing  else  ;  he  spared 
neither  time  nor  expense  to  advance  ever  so  little  his  favourite  cause,  and  the 
interest  he  had  wedded  ;  it  was  his  monomania.  He  did  his  work  in  his  day,  and 
he  did  it  well,  because  he  was  heart  and  soul  in  it ;  and  the  world  is  in  debt  to  him 
for  it.  Now,  why  should  it  not  be  said  of  us  :  "  Well,  he  is  gone.  He  was  a  man 
of  one  idea :  he  cared  for  nothing  but  that  God's  kingdom  should  come,  and  His 
will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  He  was  eaten  up  with  this ;  waking  or 
Bleeping  it  was  always  upon  him ;  nothing  daunted  him  ;  he  spared  neither  time 
nor  expense  for  his  hobby,  and  when  neither  time  nor  money  were  at  his  disposal, 
he  besieged  heaven  with  prayers.  He  took  no  interest  in  anything  else ;  it  was 
meat  and  drink  to  him,  and  it  quite  mastered  him;  and  now  he  is  gone."  Yes !  he 
is  gone ;  but  whereas  the  other  man  left  behind  him  his  railway  and  his  cheap  bread, 
our  friend  has  taken  all  his  love  and  pains  and  prayers  away  with  him  to  the 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION,  261 

judgment-seat  of  Jesus  ;  and  what  they  have  done  for  him  there,  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  ear  heard,  nor  man's  heart  conceived. 

Ver.  20.  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock, — The  Guest  of  the  heart : — ^I.  The 

Stranger- Guest  WANTING  to  come  in.  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and  knock."  1. 
When  a  stranger  comes  to  your  door,  it  matters  a  good  deal  to  your  feeling  as  a 
host  whether  he  be  a  mean  man  or  a  great  one.  An  inhospitable  act  done  to  your 
Queen  might  never  vex  you  at  all  if  it  was  only  done  to  an  obscure  wanderer. 
Who,  then,  is  this?  Is  He  mean  ?  or  is  He  great  ?  He  does  not  look  very  great  in 
the  starlight.  But  He  is.  At  home  He  is  worshipped,  and  wields  all  command ; 
and  beings  before  whom  the  mightiest  of  the  earth  are  as  infants,  only  venture  to 
bow  themselves  at  His  feet  when  their  faces  are  shielded  from  the  lustre  of  His  glory. 
2.  When  a  stranger  comes  to  your  door,  it  is  a  consideration  for  you  whether  he 
has  come  to  a  door  only,  or  to  your  door ;  whether  he  has  come  to  your  door  by 
chance,  or  to  yourself  on  purpose.  Has  this  Stranger,  then,  just  happened  upon 
this  cottage-door  as  one  that  serves  His  turn  as  well  as  any  other  ?  or  does  He  mean 
to  seek  this  very  home  and  this  very  board,  if  haply  He  may  be  welcomed  as  a 
friend  ?  How  deeply  does  He  mean  it,  and  how  tenderly  !  3.  When  a  stranger 
comes  to  your  door,  it  is  of  some  moment  to  you  whether  he  has  come  but  a  short 
distance  to  see  you,  or  has  come  from  far.  This  waiting  Stranger — whence  comes 
He?  From  another  country  ?  He  has  come  from  another  world.  Through  peril, 
through  tribulation,  He  has  come  hither.  4.  When  a  stranger  comes  to  your  door, 
it  is  a  thing  of  influence  with  you  whether  your  visitor  is  in  earnest  to  get  in,  or 
shows  indifference,  and  soon  gives  up  the  endeavour.  A  caller  who  knocks  and  goes 
off  again  before  you  have  had  reasonable  time  to  answer.  5.  When  a  stranger 
comes  to  your  door,  it  is  of  every  consequence  to  you  what  may  be  the  character 
of  himself,  and  the  complexion  of  his  errand.  Is  he  good,  and  likely  come  for  good? 
or  is  he  evil,  and  likely  come  for  evil  ?  What  far-brought  tidings,  what  peace, 
what  hopes,  what  aids,  what  influence,  he  fetches  with  him  !  II.  The  Stranger- 
Guest  GETTING  IN.  "If  any  man  hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door."  1.  The 
Stranger  did  not  force  an  entrance.  It  is  from  the  inside,  after  all,  that  a  man's 
heart  opens  to  his  Saviour-King.  2,  At  the  same  time  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  note,  that  the  transaction,  with  this  indispensable  element  of  free  choice  in  it,  is 
the  veriest  simplicity,  "  If  any  man  hear,"  "  and  open  " — lo  !  it  is  accomplished, 
and  the  Son  of  God  is  within.  Very  natural  it  may  be—  after  you  have  at  last 
acknowledged  the  Voice  by  some  beginnings  of  faith,  and  have  arisen  at  its  call — 
to  bustle  long  about  the  apartment  in  a  process  of  rearranging,  cleansing,  tidying, 
adorning.  Not  less  natural  it  may  be  to  sit  down,  after  a  desponding  glance  around 
you,  and  endeavour  to  devise  some  plan  by  which  you  may  entertain  the  Guest 
more  worthily.  All  the  while,  and  all  the  same,  your  Guest  is  standing  without. 
The  one  luckless  fact  is  the  tardiness  of  your  hospitality.  The  honour  is  done  Him 
by  nothing  but  by  letting  Him  in.  And  more :  your  heart-home  will  only  be  made 
fit  for  His  presence  by  His  presence.  3.  But  there  may  be  some  one  who  is  saying 
with  a  certain  sincerity,  "  I  have  tried  to  open  my  heart  to  Christ,  and  I  could  not — 
cannot  1 "  It  will  baffle  your  own  strength.  But  what  of  your  Guest  Himself,  and 
that  power  of  His — so  freely  available  now  ?  HI.  The  Stranger-Guest  m.  "  I  wiU 
come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."  It  is  a  scene  with  much 
light  in  it,  and  an  atmosphere  of  security  and  deep  peace.  {J.  A.  Kerr  Bain,  M.A.) 
ChrisVs  loving  earnestness  : — I.  The  love  of  Christ.  It  is  free  love.  It  is  large  love. 
It  is  love  irrespective  of  goodness  in  us.  H,  The  patience  of  Christ.  He  stands, 
and  He  has  stood,  as  the  words  imply — not  afar  off,  but  nigh,  at  the  door.  He  stands. 
It  is  the  attitude  of  waiting,  of  perseverance  in  waiting.  He  does  not  come  and 
go ;  He  stands.  He  does  not  sit  down,  or  occupy  Himself  with  other  concerns. 
He  has  one  object  in  view,  HI.  The  earnestness  of  Christ.  If  the  standing 
marks  His  patience,  the  knocking  marks  His  earnestness — His  unwearied  earnest- 
ness. 1.  How  does  He  knock  ?  2.  When  does  He  knock  ?  IV.  The  appeal  of 
Christ  to  the  Laodiceans.  *'  If  any  man  will  hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door." 
It  is — 1.  A  loving  appeal.  2.  A  personal  appeal.  3,  An  honest  appeal.  4.  An  earnest 
appeal.  V.  The  promise  of  Christ.  1,  I  will  come  in  to  Him.  His  standing  on 
the  outside  is  of  no  use  to  us,  A  mere  outside  Christ  will  profit  us  nothing.  An 
outside  cross  will  not  pacify,  nor  heal,  nor  save,  2,  I  will  sup  with  him.  He 
comes  in  as  a  guest,  to  take  a  place  at  our  poor  table  and  to  partake  of  our  homely 
meal,  3.  He  shall  sup  with  Me,  Christ  has  a  banquet  in  preparation,  {H.  Bonar, 
D.D.)         The  Christ  at  the  door: — These  wonderful  words  need  no  heightening 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  in. 

of  their  impressiveness,  and  yet  there  are  two  considerations  which  add  pathos  and 
beauty  to  them.     The  one  is  that  they  are  all  but  the  last  words  which  the  seer 
in  Patmos  heard  in  his  vision,  from  the  lips  of  the  exalted  Christ.     Parting  words 
are  ever  impressive  words ;   and  this  is  the  attitude  in  which  Jesus  desired  to  be 
thought  of  by  all  coming  time.     Another  consideration  intensifying  the  impressive- 
ness of  the  utterance  is  that  it  is  the  speech  of  that  Christ  whose  exalted  glories 
are  so  marvellously  portrayed  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  book.     The  words  are 
marvellous  too,  not  only  for  that  picture,  but  for  the  clear  decisiveness  with  which 
they  recognise  the  solenm  power  that  men  have  of  giving  or  refusing  an  entrance  to 
Him ;   and  still  further,  for  the  grandeur  of  their  promises  to  the  yielding  heart 
which  welcomes  Him.     I.  The  exalted  Christ  asking  to  be  let  in  to  a  man's 
heart.     The  latter  words  of  the  verse  suggest  the  image  of  a  banqueting  hall.     The 
chamber  to  which  Christ  desires  entrance  is  full  of  feasters.     There  is  room  for 
everybody  else  there  but  Him.    Now  the  plain  sad  truth  which  that  stands  for  about 
us,  is  this :   That  we  are  more  wiljing  to  let  anybody  and  anything  come  into  our 
thoughts,  and  find  lodgment  in  our  affections,  than  we  are  to  let  Jesus  Christ  come 
in.     The  next  thought  here  is  of  the  reality  of  this  knocking.    Every  conviction, 
every  impression,  every  half  inclination  towards  Him  that  has  risen  in  your 
hearts,  though  you  fought  against  it,  has  been  His  knocking  there.     And  think 
of  what  a  revelation  of  Him  that  is !    We  are  mostly  too  proud  to  sue  for  love, 
especially  if  once  the  petition  has  been  repulsed ;  but  He  asks  to  be  let  into  your 
heart  because  His  nature  and  His  name  is  Love,  and  being  such.  He  yearns  to 
be  loved  by  you,  and  He  yearns  to  bless  you.    IE.  Notice  that  awful  power  which 
IS  RECOGNISED  HERB  AS  RESIDING  IN  US,  to  let  Him  in  or  to  keep  Him  out.    "  If 
any  man  will  open  the  door  " — the  door  has  no  handle  on  the  outside.    It  opens 
from  within.    Christ  knocks :  we  open.     What  we  call  faith  is  the  opening  of 
the  door.      And  is  it  not  plain  that  that  simple   condition  is  a  condition  not 
imposed  by  any  arbitrary  action  on  His  part,  but  a  condition  indispensable  from 
the  very  nature  of  the  case  ?    IH.  The  entrance  of  the  Christ,  with  His  hands 
full  of  blessing.    It  is  the  central  gift  and  promise  of  the  gospel  "  that  Christ  may 
dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith."    He  Himself  is  the  greatest  of  His  gifts.    He  never 
comes  empty-handed,  but  when  He  enters  in  He  endows  the  soul  with  untold 
riches.    We  have  here  also  Christ's  presence  as  a  Guest.    "  I  will  come  in  and 
sup  with  Him."    What  great  and  wonderful  things  are  contained  in  that  assur- 
ance I     Can  we  present  anything  to  Him  that  He  can  partake  of  ?    Yes !    We 
may  give  Him  our  service  and  He  will  take  that ;  we  may  give  Him  our  love  and 
He  will  take  that,  and  regard  it  as  dainty  and  delightsome  food.      We  have 
here  Christ's  presence  not  only  as  a  Guest,  but  also  as  Host — "  I  will  sup  with 
him  and  he  with  Me."     As  when  some  great  prince  offers  to  honour  a  poor 
subject  with  his  presence,  and  let  him  provide  some  insignificant  portion  of  the 
entertainment,   whilst  all  the  substantial  and  costly  parts  of    it  come  in  the 
retinue  of  the  monarch,  from  the  palace.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  heavenly 
Visitor: — I.  What  is  implied  by  the  expression,  "  I  stand  at  the  door."     1.  That 
Christ  is  outside  man's  heart.     2.  That  He  is  deliberately  excluded.    3.  That 
He  is  excluded  in  favour  of  other  guests.    4.  That  notwithstanding  He  wishes 
to  enter.    6.  That  He  recognises  our  liberty  to  admit  Him.    H.  By  what  means  He 
MAKES  His  presence  known.    III.   The  blessings  to  be  enjoyed  by  those  who 
ADMIT  Hm.     1.  Reconciliation.    2.  Communion.    3.  Refreshment.     {Thos.  Heath.) 
Christ  at  the  door: — I.  The  person.     The  Greatest  at  the  door  of  the  meanest. 
n.  The  ATTITUDE.    1.   Service.    2.  Waiting  expectation.    3.   Supplication.    IH. 
The  action.    IV.    The  object.     (Homilist.)         The  pleading  Saviour: — I.   The 
Saviour's  humility  and  condescension.     1.  Patience.    Repeated  application  where 
rudely  repulsed.    2.  Desire  to  enter.    Not  for  His  own  good  or  gratification,  but  for 
our  salvation,  because  He  delights  in  mercy.  H.  The  Saviour's  persistent  efforts. 
III.    The  Saviour's  proffered  reward.     The  presence  of  Christ  is  the  highest 
privilege  man  can  desire.    It  involves — 1.  Familiarity.    2.  Reciprocity.    3.  Unity. 
4.  Enjoyment.     (Ibid.)        Christ  at  the  door: — I.  The  suppliant  for  admission. 
A  strange  reversal  of  the  attitudes  of  the  great  and  of  the  lowly,  of  the  giver  and  of 
the  receiver,  of  the  Divine  and  of  the  human !     Christ  once  said,  "  Knock  and  it 
shall  be  opened  unto  you."    But  He  has  taken  the  suppliant's  place.     So,  then, 
there  is  here  a  revelation,  not  only  of  a  universal  truth,  but  a  most  tender  and 
pathetic  disclosure  of  Christ's  yearning  love  to  each  of  us.    What  do  you  call  that 
emotion  which  more  than  anything  else  desires  that  a  heart  should  open  and  let  it 
enter?    We  call  it  love  when  we  find  it  in  one  another.    Surely  it  bears  the  same 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  263 

name  when  it  is  sublimed  into  all  but  infinitude,  and  yet  is  as  individualising  and 
specific  as  it  is  great  and  universal,  as  it  is  found  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  then,  still 
further,  in  that  thought  of  the  suppliant  waiting  for  admission  there  is  the 
explanation  for  us  all  of  a  great  many  misunderstood  facts  in  our  experience. 
That  sorrow  that  darkened  your  days  and  made  your  heart  bleed,  what  was  it  but 
Christ's  hand  on  the  door  ?  Those  blessings  which  pour  into  your  life  day  by  day 
"beseech  you,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  yield  yourselves  living  sacrifices." 
That  unrest  which  dogs  the  steps  of  every  man  who  has  not  found  rest  in  Christ, 
what  is  it  but  the  application  of  His  hand  to  the  obstinately-closed  door  ?  The 
stings  of  conscience,  the  movements  of  the  Spirit,  the  definite  proclamation  of  His 
Word,  even  by  such  lips  as  mine,  what  are  they  all  except  His  appeals  lo  us  ?  And 
this  is  the  deepest  meaning  of  joys  and  sorrows,  of  gifts  and  losses,  of  fulfilled  and 
•disappointed  hopes.  If  we  understood  better  that  all  life  was  guided  by  Christ  and 
that  Christ's  guidance  of  life  was  guided  by  His  desire  that  He  should  find  a  place 
in  our  hearts,  we  should  less  frequently  wonder  at  sorrows,  and  should  better  under- 
stand our  blessings.  II.  The  door  opened.  Jesus  Christ  knocks,  but  Jesus  Christ 
cannot  break  the  door  open.  The  door  is  closed,  and  unless  there  be  a  definite  act 
on  your  part  it  will  not  be  opened,  and  He  will  not  enter.  So  we  come  to  this, 
that  to  do  nothing  is  to  keep  your  Saviour  outside ;  and  that  is  the  way  in  which 
most  men  that  miss  Him  do  miss  Him.  The  condition  of  His  entrance  is  simple 
trust  in  Him,  as  the  Saviour  of  my  soul.  That  is  opening  the  door,  and  if  you  will 
do  that,  then,  just  as  when  you  open  the  shutters,  in  comes  the  sunshine ;  just  as 
when  you  lift  the  sluice  in  flows  the  crystal  stream  into  the  slimy,  empty  lock  ;  so 
He  will  enter  in,  wherever  He  is  not  shut  out  by  unbelief  and  aversion  of  will.  HI. 
The  entrance  and  the  feast.  *'  I  will  come  in  to  him  and  sup  with  him,  and  he 
with  Me."  Well,  that  speaks  to  us"  in  lovely,  sympathetic  language,  of  a  close, 
familiar,  happy  communication  between  Christ  and  my  poor  self  which  shall  make 
all  life  as  a  feast  in  company  with  Him.  John,  as  he  wrote  down  the  words  "  I  will 
sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me,"  perhaps  remembered  that  upper  room  where, 
amidst  all  the  bitter  herbs,  there  was  such  strange  joy  and  tranquility.  But  whether 
he  did  or  no,  may  we  not  take  the  picture  as  suggesting  to  us  the  possibilities  of 
loving  fellowship,  of  quiet  repose,  of  absolute  satisfaction  of  all  desires  and  needs, 
which  will  be  ours  if  we  open  the  door  of  our  hearts  by  faith,  and  let  Jesus  Christ 
come  in?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Relation  to  Christ  of  the  human  soul : — I.  His 
attitude  towards  the  soul.  He  is  constantly  in  contact  with  the  soul.  He  does 
not  come  occasionally  and  then  depart ;  He  stands.  1.  His  deep  concern.  In  the 
eye  of  Christ  the  soul  is  no  trifling  object :  He  knows  its  capabilities,  relations, 
power,  influence,  interminable  history.  2.  His  infinite  condescension.  3.  His 
wonderful  patience.  II.  His  action  upon  the  soul.  He  does  not  stand  there  as  a 
statue  doing  nothing.  He  knocks :  He  knocks  at  the  door  of  intellect  with  Hia 
philosophic  truths ;  at  the  door  of  conscience,  with  His  ethical  principles ;  at  the 
door  of  love,  with  His  transcendent  charms  ;  at  the  door  of  hope,  with  His  heavenly 
glories ;  at  the  door  of  fear,  with  the  terrors  of  His  law.  1.  The  moral  power  of 
the  sinner.  The  soul  has  the  power  to  shut  out  Christ.  It  can  bolt  itself  against 
its  Creator.  This  it  does  by  directing  its  thoughts  to  other  subjects,  by  deadening 
its  convictions,  by  procrastinations.  2.  The  consummate  folly  of  the  sinner.  Who 
is  shut  out  ?  Not  a  foe  or  thief ;  but  a  friend,  a  physician,  a  deliverer.  3.  The 
awful  guiltiness  of  the  sinner.  It  shuts  out  its  proprietor,  its  rightful  Lord.  IH. 
His  AIM  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE  SOUL.  It  is  uot  to  destroy  it ;  but  to  come  into  it  and 
identify  Himself  with  all  its  feelings,  aspirations,  and  interests.  1.  Inhabitation. 
"I  will  come  unto  him."  We  are  perpetually  letting  people  into  our  hearts.  How- 
pleased  we  are  if  some  illustrious  personage  will  enter  our  humble  homes  and  Sit 
down  with  us,  &c.  2.  Identification.  "Sup  with  him  and  he  with  Me."  I  will 
be  at  home  with  him,  be  one  with  him.  A  conventionally  great  man  deems  it  a 
condescension  to  enter  the  house  of  an  inferior — he  never  thinks  of  identifying  him- 
self with  the  humble  inmate.  Christ  does  this  with  the  soul  that  lets  Him  in.  He 
makes  its  cares  His  own.  {Homilist.)  The  illustrious  Visitor : — I.  The  great 
KINDNESS  OF  THE  Kedeemer  TO  MAN.  1.  Compassiou  foT  man.  2.  Condescension  to 
man.  3.  Communion  with  man.  The  Saviour  does  not  come  as  a  stranger.  He 
comes  as  a  friend  and  a  guest.  4.  The  consummation  of  man.  He  takes  possession 
of  our  spirits  to  make  them  perfect  and  glorious.  This  will  be  the  perfecting  of  our 
humanity,  the  consummation  of  aU  our  best  and  brightest  hopes  and  capacities. 
n.  The  oreat  unkindness  of  man  to  the  Redeemer.  1.  Ignorance  is  the  cause  in 
some  cases  why  the  visit  of  the  Saviour  is  not  welcomed.    If  the  ignorance  be 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

involuntary  and  unavoidable,  then  it  is  not  culpable ;  but  if  it  be  the  result  of  a 
voluntary  refusal  to  know  who  the  Saviour  is,  and  what  His  knocking  means,  then 
it  shows  great  unkindness  to  the  Eedeemer,  and  is  regarded  by  Him  as  a  great  sin. 
2.  Another  cause  is  indifiference.  Some  know  that  it  is  the  Saviour  standing  at 
the  door  of  their  hearts ;  but  they  are  so  absorbed  with  other  engagements,  they  are 
so  careless  about  the  unseen  and  eternal,  that  they  let  Him  stand  outside,  and  make 
no  effort  to  let  Him  in.  3.  Another  cause  is  unbelief.  4.  Prejudice  is  another  cause 
of  the  unkindness  of  man  to  the  Redeemer.  The  Cross  is  an  offence  to  many. 
Prejudice  blinds  the  eyes  and  hardens  the  heart  and  prevents  man  seeing  Jesus  as 
He  really  is — "  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely."  5.  The 
last  cause  of  unkindness  we  will  mention  is  ingratitude.  {F.  W.  Brown.)  Christ 
at  the  door  : — I:  Fkiendship  with  God  is  proposed  as  the  grand  privilege  of  the 
RACE.  1.  The  friendship  which  God  offers  is  on  entirely  a  human  plane.  Christian 
life  is  only  a  transfiguration  of  every-day  life.  2.  The  friendship  which  God  pro- 
poses is  permanent  in  its  continuance.  II.  An  undoubted  proof  of  the  Divine 
sincerity.  1.  You  see  this  in  the  fact  that  the  entire  proposal  comes  from  Him, 
The  grace  of  this  transaction  is  absolutely  marvellous,  2.  You  see  this  in  the 
successive  and  persistent  endeavours  to  bring  this  friendship  within  reach  of  the 
soul.  Ill,  The  assurance  of  the  entire  fulness  of  the  atonement.  There  is  no 
restriction  in  the  offers  of  Divine  grace.  1.  There  is  no  limit  on  the  human  side. 
If  any  man  will  open  his  heart,  the  Saviour  will  come  in.  2.  There  is  positively  no 
limit  on  the  Divine  side  either.  The  offer  is  made  in  terms  utterly  without 
restriction.  IV.  An  explicit  recognition  of  human  free  agency  under  the  plan 
OF  SALVATION  BY  GRACE.  It  is  wcU  to  inquire  why  it  is  He  thus  pauses  on  the 
threshold.  1.  It  is  not  because  He  is  unable  to  force  His  way  in.  There  is  no 
opposition  so  violent  that  He  could  not  crush  it  beneath  His  Omnipotent  might. 
2.  The  reason  for  the  Divine  forbearance  is  found  in  the  inscrutable  counsels  of  the 
Divine  wisdom.  In  the  beginning.  He  drew  one  line  around  His  own  action.  He 
determined  to  create  a  class  of  beings  who  should  have  minds  and  hearts  of  their 
own.  A  free  chance  to  choose  between  serving  Him  and  resisting  Him  He  now 
gives  to  every  one  of  us.  And  when  He  had  thus  established  men  in  being.  He 
sovereignly  decided  never  to  interfere  with  the  free-will  He  had  bestowed,    V.  If 

ANY  MAN  IS  FINALLY  LOST,  THE  RESPONSIBILITY  RESTS  UPON  HIS  OWN  SOUL.    The  Saviour 

has  come  so  far,  but  it  is  perfectly  clear  He  is  coming  no  further.  1.  Observe  how 
unbeclouded  is  the  final  issue.  There  can  be  no  mystery,  there  is  no  mistake  about 
it.  The  Providence  of  God  always  clears  the  way  up  to  the  crisis,  removing  every 
side-consideration  which  can  possibly  confuse  it.  Education  that  fits  for  usefulness 
is  a  demand  for  usefulness ;  the  love  of  our  children  is  a  hint  for  us  to  love  God  as 
children;  social  position,  wealth,  official  station,  accomplishments,  popular  favour; 
whoever  has  any  of  these  ought  to  hear  in  them  the  accents  of  that  quiet  voice 
speaking  to  his  heart :  *'  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock,"  2.  Observe  the 
ease  of  the  condition  required  of  us.  It  is  only  to  open  the  door.  Great  things 
under  the  gospel  are  always  simple,  3,  Observe  then,  finally,  what  it  is  that  keeps 
the  Saviour  out.  Nothing  but  will.  This  is  the  inspired  declaration :  "  Ye  will  not 
come  unto  Me,  that  ye  might  have  life."  That  is,  you  set  a  definite  purpose  against 
the  purpose  of  grace.  Christ  came  and  you  resisted  Him.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Christ  knocking  at  the  door  of  the  soul : — I.  That  there  is  in  the  human  soul  a 
DOOR  for  the  entrance  OF  THE  TRUTH,  1,  The  intellect.  Is  not  the  theology 
of  the  Bible  in  its  broad  outlines  reasonable  ?  Christ,  in  the  evidence,  enlighten- 
ment, and  conviction  of  the  truth,  stands  knocking  at  the  mind  of  man,  and  the 
greater  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  the  louder  is  the  appeal  for  entrance.  2.  The 
heart,  Man  is  endowed  with  the  capability  of  love  and  sympathy.  He  has  warm 
affections.  He  is  so  constituted  as  to  be  attracted  by  the  pathetic  and  the  beautiful. 
Hence,  he  looks  out  upon  nature  with  admiring  eye.  And  it  is  to  this  capability  in 
man  that  the  truth  appeals.  It  presents  to  him  an  ideal  beauty  in  the  Life  of  Christ, 
as  recorded  by  the  gospel  narrative,  which  ought  to  win  his  spirit  into  an  imitation 
of  the  same.  3.  The  conscience.  Man  has  the  ability  to  turn  his  natural  judg- 
ment to  moral  and  spiritual  questions,  and  this  is  what  we  mean  by  conscience. 
To  this  faculty  the  truth  presents  its  requirements  ;  convinces  of  failure  in  the 
devotion  of  the  inner  life  to  Christ ;  and  spreads  out  before  it  the  threat  of  aveng- 
ing justice.  4.  But,  strange  to  say,  the  door  of  the  soul  is  closed  to  the  entrance 
of  the  truth.  The  door  of  the  mind  is  closed  by  error,  by  ignorance,  and  by 
prejudice.  The  door  of  the  heart  is  shut  by  pride,  by  unbelief,  and  by  wilful  sin. 
The  door  of  the  conscience  is  barred  by  a  continued  habit  of  evil.    11.  That  at 


CHAP,  in.]  REVELATION,  265 

THE    DOOR  OF   THE    HUMAN  SOUL  THE  TRUTH  MAKES    CONTINUED  APPEALS   FOR  ENTRANCE, 

1.  This  appeal  of  truth  is  authoritative.  Truth  comes  to  men  with  authority,  even 
with  the  claim  of  a  sinless  life,  and  with  the  emphasis  of  a  Divine  voice.  Its 
distinguished  character  should  gain  for  it  an  immediate  and  hearty  welcome  into- 
the  soul,  as  a  king  should  be  welcomed  into  a  cottage.  But  truth  comes  to  men 
not  only  with  the  authority  of  character,  but  also  with  the  authority  of  right.  The 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  were  made  to  receive  it.  2.  The  appeal  of  Truth  is 
patient.  Other  guests  have  entered — wealth  in  splendid  apparel,  ambition  with 
loud  clamour,  and  pride  with  haughty  mien — but  Christ  with  gentle  spirit  has 
remained  without.  His  patience  has  been  co-extensive  with  our  neglect  of  Him. 
It  is  Divine.  3.  The  appeal  of  truth  is  benevolent.  The  truth  does  not  seek  ta 
enter  the  soul  of  man  merely  to  spy  out  its  moral  defilement,  to  pass  wof  ul  sentence 
on  its  evil-doings,  but  to  cleanse  it  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  save  it  by  grace,  to 
enlighten  it  by  knowledge,  and  to  cheer  it  by  love.  4.  The  appeal  of  truth  is 
heard.  "  And  knock."  Knocks  at  the  door  are  generally  heard.  And  certainly 
this  is  the  case  in  reference  to  the  advent  of  Christ  to  the  soul.  It  is  impossible  to 
live  in  this  land  of  religious  light  and  agency  without  being  conscious  of  Divine 
knockings  at  the  portal  of  the  soul.     HI.  That  the  human  soul  has  the  ability 

OF  choice   as   to  whether   it    will  OPEN    ITS   DOOR  FOR   THE    ENTRANCE    OF  THE  TRUTH 

OB  NOT.  1.  The  door  of  the  soul  will  not  be  opened  by  any  coercive  methods. 
Does  it  not  seem  strange  that  Christ  should  have  the  key  of  the  soul  and  yet  stand 
without  ?  This  is  only  explained  by  the  free  agency  of  man.  But  though  He  enter 
not  to  dwell,  the  soul  is  visited  by  spiritual  influences  which  are  the  universal 
heritage  of  man.  2.  The  door  of  the  soul  must  be  opened  by  moral  methods. 
Calm  reflection,  earnest  prayer,  and  a  diligent  study  of  the  inspired  Word,  together 
with  the  gentle  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  will  open  the  soul  to  the  entrance  of 
Christ  (Acts  xvi.  14).  IV.  That  if  the  human  soul  will  open  its  door  to  the  reception 

OF    THE    TRUTH,     ChRIST    WILL    ENTER    INTO    CLOSE     COMMUNION     WITH    IT.        1.     Then 

Christ  will  inhabit  the  soul.  "  I  will  come  in  to  him."  Thus,  if  Christ  come  into 
the  soul  He  will  dwell  in  its  thoughts,  in  its  affections,  in  its  aspirations,  in  its  aims, 
and  in  all  its  activities.  He  will  elevate  and  consecrate  them  all.  True  religion 
just  means  this,  Christ  in  the  soul,  and  its  language  is  (Gal.  ii.  20).  2.  Then  Christ 
will  be  in  sympathy  with  the  soul.  "  And  will  sup  with  him."  It  is. impossible  to 
have  a  feast  in  the  soul  unless  Christ  spreads  the  table ;  then  the  meal  is  festive. 
It  removes  sorrow  ;  it  inspires  joy.  While  we  are  partaking  of  it  we  can  relate  to 
Christ  all  the  perplexities  of  life.  The  good  man  carries  a  feast  within  him  (John 
iv.  32).  3.  Then  Christ  will  strengthen  the  soul.  He  will  strengthen  the  moral 
nature  by  the  food  He  will  give,  by  the  counsel  He  will  impart,  and  by  the  hope  He 
will  inspire.  The  feast,  the  supply  of  holy  energy  will  be  resident  within.  {J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A .)  The  self-invited  Guest : — I.  That,  in  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel, 
Christ  is  the  uninvited  Guest,  pleading  for  admission.  Whatever  acquaint- 
ance any  of  us  may  have  with  Jesus,  the  acquaintance  began  on  His  side  :  by  Him 
are  the  first  overtures  invariably  made.  1.  The  written  gospel  is  a  proof  of  it.  2. 
The  Christian  ministry  is  another  proof.  3.  The  strivings  of  His  Spirit  are  another 
instance  of  this.  In  the  two  former  cases,  His  approach  can  more  easily  be  avoided. 
II.  That  consent  alone  is  required,  on  our  part,  to  give  us  a  full  partici- 
pation IN  His  friendship.  1.  The  consent  which  is  required.  2.  The  friendship 
which  is  offered.  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Christ  at  the  door  of  the  heart: — "Be- 
hold ! "  The  sight  is  indeed  a  most  astonishing  one,  which  ought  to  fill 
our  hearts  with  surprise  and  shame.  God  outside;  He  who  ought  to  be 
recognised  as  Lord  and  Master  of  the  human  being,  to  whom  we  owe  every- 
thing. I  question  whether  there  is  any  revelation  made  to  us  in  the  whole 
course  of  God's  Word  that  more  strongly  illustrates  the  persevering  love  of 
God.  The  love  of  God  is  not  content  with  redeeming  a  guilty  world,  but 
He  brings  the  redemption  to  the  door  of  every  human  being.  How,  it  is 
natural  we  should  ask,  is  this  extraordinary  phenomenon  to  be  explained?  If 
we  look  at  the  context,  we  discover  what  the  explanation  is.  "  Thou  sayest,  I  am 
rich  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  Ah  I  it  is  in  those 
words  that  the  clue  is  found  to  the  extraordinary  spectacle.  I  cannot  understand  a 
man  going  on,  year  after  year,  realising  his  own  inward  want,  and  yet  not  accepting 
the  supply  which  God  has  given.  How  is  it  that  Satan  prevents  this  ?  How  is  it 
that  he  brings  us  to  the  position  which  is  indicated  to  us  by  this  figure  ?  By  filling 
us  with  aU  sorts  of  things  which  are  not  God.  What  are  they  ?  Some  make  their 
religion  a  substitute  for  God.    That  is  one  of  the  very  worst  substitutes  that  we  can 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.ra.' 

possibly  fix  upon.    Again,  how  many  persona  there  are  who  find  an  excellent  substi- 
tute for  Christ  in  morality.    A  man  may  have  kept  all  the  Ten  Commandments, 
and  yet,  all  the  while,  be  shutting  the  door  of  his  heart  against  Christ,  and  if  a  maiii 
does  that,  he  keeps  the  letter  of  the  Commandments,  but  not  the  spirit.    Again, 
how  many  there  are  who  take  worldly  pleasures  as  a  substitute  for  God.     Another 
thing  set  up  in  the  place  of  God  is  the  love  of  wealth.     What  is  there  that  money 
«annot  do  ?    Another  man  puts  learning  in  the  place  of  God.    What  is  there  that 
intelligence  cannot  do  ?    All  these  attempts  to  create  substitutes,  what  are  they  ? 
They  are  simply  so  many  sins  against  your  own  soul.    It  would  not  have  been 
fl,t  all  a  thing  to  be  marvelled  at,  if  we  had  read  this  passage  thus :  "  The  Lord 
once  stood  outside  the  door  and  knocked."  Had  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  given  us  one 
offer  of  mercy,  and  given  one  loud,  thundering  "knock,"  and,  being  refused,  left  us 
to  take  the  consequence,  left  us  to  our  own  miserable  doom,  you  know  we  should 
have  deserved  it.     Oh,  deafen  not  your  ears,  men  and  women,  against  His  call :  do 
not  be  so  blind  to  your  own  interest  as  to  keep  Him  standing  there :  listen  to  what 
He  says,  "  If  any  man  hear  My  voice."    Notice  that.    He  does  not  say,  "  If  any 
man  makes  himself  moral ;  if  any  man  will  try  and  make  himself  better."    That 
is  not  it,  thank  God  I     "  If  any  man  will  shed  oceans  of  tears."    No,  that  is  not  it. 
"  If  any  man  has  deep  sorrow."    No,  that  is  not  it.     *'  If  any  man  has  powerful 
faith."   No,  that  is  not  it.   What  is  it  He  says?   "  If  any  man  will  hear  My  voice." 
As  the  preacher  is  speaking  now,  say,  "  God  is  speaking  to  my  soul ;  He  is  speaking 
in  all  the  infinity  of  His  mercy :  I  cannot,  I  won't  deafen  my  ear  against  Him." 
Well,  as  soon  as  the  man  hears  the  voice,  he  is  on  the  highway  to  salvation. 
What  more    is    wanted  ?      Just    one    thing    more.      "  If    any    man    hear    My 
voice,  and  will  open  unto  Me."    It  does  not  sound  very  much,  does  it?     "Ah, 
but,"  you  say,  "  faith  is  so  difficult.     One  man  says,  faith  is  this,  and  another  says 
it  is  another  thing."    Do  you  think  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  stand  back  if 
you  say  that?    I  tell  you,  you  wiD  find  those  bolts  and  bars  will  fly  back  the 
moment  you  tell  Him  you  are  willing.     Now,  what  are  you  going  to  do  ?    Nay, 
what  will  He  do  ?    He  says,  "  If  any  man  wiU  open  to  Me,  I  will  come  in."    Well, 
what  will  He  do  ?    Young  man !  you  are  thinking  to  yourself,  "  I  should  like  to 
have  Jesus  as  my  Saviour,  but  if  He  comes  to  my  heart  He  will  bring  a  funeral 
procession  with  Him ;  my  countenance  will  fall,  my  life  will  be  overshadowed,  my 
joy  wUl  be  gone  ;  my  youthful  pleasures  will  disappear,  and  I  shall  become  mournful 
and  morose."    I  tell  you  that  is  the  devil's  lie,  not  God's  truth.    Wherever  Jesus 
is,  He  carries  a  feast  along  with  Him,  and  so  He  says  to-night,  "  If  any  man  will 
open  unto  Me,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me." 
{W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)        Christ  at  the  door  of  the  heart  .-—This  door,   at 
which  the  Saviour  knocks,  is  the  heart  of  man.    In  the  gospel  there  is  more  than 
enough  to  give  full  exercise  to  the  most  powerful  intellect :  yet  the  final  aim  is  at 
the  heart.    What  the  heart  is,  that  the  man  is;  he  who  wins  the  heart  has  the 
whole  man.    The  door  is  the  sinner's  heart.    That  door  is  closed  against  Christ. 
He  stands,  and  knocks.    First,  observe  that  it  is  the  Lord  who  comes  to  us  men, 
not  we  to  Him.  He  not  only  comes  to  that  door;  He  stands  there  waiting;  nor  doth 
He  only  stand  and  wait,  but  meekly  standing  thus  and  waiting.  He  faiocks.    So 
deeply  does  He  long  for  entrance,  that  it  is  hard  to  make  Him  go.    Canst  thou  not 
recall  an  hour,  in  which  thy  Saviour  came  to  thee,  and  asked  for  entrance  into  thy 
thoughts  and  thy  life  ?    Many  are  called  while  yet  children.     The  mind  and  heart 
of  children  are  readier  for  the  Lord  than  those  of  hardened  men  and  women. 
Christ  knocks  at  the  hearts  of  children  ;  if  they  do  not  open  unto  Him  at  that  time, 
they  may  not  do  so  untU  after  many  years ;  they  may  never  do  so,  not  even  in  the 
hour  of  death.     •'  If  any  man  hear  My  voice  I  "    Can  this  be  imagined,  that  any 
should  not  hear?  or  worse,  that  any  would  not  hear?     "  The  voice  of  the  Lord  ia 
mighty  in  operation,"  saith  the  psalmist :  "  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  a  glorious 
voice."    That  voice  may  call ;  something  within  the  heart  may  deaden  the  sound 
or  shut  it  out.    How  dreadful  is  the  state  of  such  a  soul  I     Marvel  not,  with  this 
history  before  you,  that  the  door  is  shut.    The  longer  the  heart  is  closed  against  its 
God,  the  harder  to  open  it.     The  processes  of  nature  have  their  due  effect ;  the 
elements  do  their  work  in  silence  and  surely ;  a  work  which  every  day  makes  more 
effectual.    The  bars,  long  stationary,  rust  in  the  staples  ;  some  time  since,  a  child 
might  have  slipped  them  out  and  laid  them  aside ;  now,  the  strength  of  a  man 
would  essay  the  task  in  vain.     The  rains  and  snows  of  many  a  season  have  beaten 
into  the  lock  and  choked  it  up.     In  former  days,  a  path  led  to  this  door  ;  a  path  by 
irhich  the  good  angels  could  reach  it,  and  aU  honest  Christian  friends ;  a  pathway,, 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  267 

pleasant  to  the  eye,  fresh  with  flowers,  clean  of  rubbish,  and  easy  to  be  found. 
Alas !  how  great  the  change !  The  pathway  now  is  rough  with  stones,  or  seems  to 
be,  for  so  rankly  is  it  overgrown  with  weeds,  that  its  outline  is  all  but  lost.  Breast- 
high  on  either  hand  are  come  up  the  briar  and  the  thorn  ;  the  wall  crumbles  ;  it  is 
grey  with  mould  ;  an  aspect  of  desolation  weighs  down  the  spirit  as  we  gaze.  Who 
would  walk  on  yonder  pathway  ?  Who  would  try  to  approach  that  door  ?  Yet 
there  is  One,  who  cometh  up  this  way.  He  looks  toward  that  closed  and  rusted 
door ;  He  turns  His  holy  feet  to  that  forsaken  path.  His  face  is  grave  and  sad, 
earnest,  and  full  of  love.  He  hath  on  Him  the  vesture  of  the  High  Priest  who 
maketh  intercession  for  sin.  He  is  coming  up  the  path.  He  has  reached  the  gate. 
Behold,  He  standeth  at  the  door.  Without,  around,  all  is  silence.  He  knocks. 
Oh  soul  thus  called  by  Jesus  Christ,  what  answer  wilt  thou  make  ?  Perhaps  there 
shall  be  no  reply.  The  knock  resounds  within :  the  voice  is  heard  outside  ;  but  within 
there  is  silence  :  neither  knock  nor  voice  can  reach  the  ear  of  the  spiritually  dead. 
The  door  may  shake  in  its  rusty  hinges  ;  the  bars  may  creak  in  the  staples  ;  but  none 
comes  to  open.  No  wonder.  There  is  nothing  inside,  save  that  worse  than  nothing,  a 
dead  soul ;  dead  in  sin,  and  buried  in  f orgetf  ulness.  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  The 
Saviour  knocking  at  the  door : — I.  Who  knocks  ?  The  Son  of  God,  Immaniiel,  the 
Mediator  betwixt  God  and  man,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  Lord  of  glory,  the 
Redeemer  of  the  lost.  Almighty  to  save,  and  all-sufl&cient  to  satisfy  your  souls. 
What  hinders  that  you  should  not  let  Him  in  ?  II.  Different  hearts  are 
BOLTED  WITH  DIFFERENT  BARS.  Some  are  closed  by  carelessness,  and  some  by 
ignorance,  and  some  by  indolence,  and  some  by  frivolity,  and  some  by  pre- 
judice, and    some  by  pride,  and    some    by  strong    besetting    sins.    HI.   Webb 

YOU  TO  YIELD  TO  THE  STRIVING  SPIRIT — WERE  YOU  TO  WITHDRAW  THESE  BOLTS,  AND 
ADMIT  INTO   YOUR   SOUL  A    MIGHTY    AND    MERCIFUL    EeDEEMER,   WHAT    WOULD    BE    THB 

CONSEQUENCE  ?  Pardon  of  sin  would  come.  Peace  of  conscience  would  come.  The 
smile  of  God  would  come  into  your  soul.  (Jas.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Christ  standing 
at  the  door  : — I.  Who  is  He  ?  1.  It  is  clear  that  He  is  some  one  of  importance. 
"Behold,"  He  says,  "I  stand  at  the  door;  I  who  could  never  have  been  expected 
to  stand  there."  He  speaks,  you  observe,  as  though  His  coming  to  us  would 
surprise  us ;  just  as  we  might  suppose  a  monarch  to  speak  at  a  beggar's  door.  And 
there  is  a  reason  for  this.  It  is  the  glorious  Redeemer  who  is  here,  the  Monarch 
of  earth  and  heaven.  See  then  how  this  text  sets  forth  at  the  very  outset  of  it 
the  Divine  mercy.  We  think  it  a  great  thing  that  God  should  sit  on  a  throne  wait- 
ing for  sinners  to  come  to  Him,  but  here  He  describes  Himself  as  coming  to  sinners. 
n.  What  is  the  Lord  Jesus  doing  at  our  doob  ?  1.  On  our  part,  it  implies  this 
mournful  fact,  that  our  hearts  are  all  naturally  shut  against  Christ,  yea,  fastened, 
bolted,  and  barred,  against  Him.  2.  On  Christ's  part,  this  expression  implies  a 
willingness  to  enter  our  hearts ;  and  more  than  a  willingness,  an  earnest  desire  to 
enter  them.  HI.  What  does  this  gracious  stranger  at  our  door  wish  us  to  do  ? 
IV.  What  will  this  exalted  Being  at  oub  doob  do  for  us,  if  we  let  Him  nr  ? 
1.  *♦  I  will  come  in  to  him."  There  His  presence  is  promised,  and  with  it  the  Ught 
and  comfort  and  bliss  and  glory  of  it.  2.  "  I  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with 
Me."  This  implies  a  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  heart  He  dwells  in,  and  inter- 
course and  communion  with  it.  {C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  At  the  door: — I.  Who 
STANDS?  An  ancient  patriarch,  by  keeping  open  heart  and  open  house  for 
strangers,  was  privileged  to  entertain  angels  unawares.  This  day  we  may  obtain 
a  visit  of  the  Lord  of  angels,  if  only  we  will  let  Him  in.  II.  How  near  Hk 
COMES.  "Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door."  We  are  not  much  moved  by  anything 
that  is  far  distant.  Whether  the  visitant  be  coming  for  judgment  or  mercy, 
we  take  the  matter  lightly,  as  long  as  he  is  far  away.  A  distant  enemy  does 
not  make  us  tremble — a  distant  friend  fails  to  make  us  glad.  When  your 
protector  is  distant,  you  tremble  at  danger ;  when  he  is  near,  you  breathe  freely 
again.  How  near  the  Son  of  God  has  come  to  us  I  He  is  our  Brother :  He 
touches  us,  and  we  touch  Him,  at  all  points.  HI.  How  far  off  He  is  kept. 
**At  the  door."  He  in  great  kindness  comes  to  the  door;  we  in  great  folly 
keep  Him  at  the  door.  The  sunlight  travels  far  from  its  source  in  the  deep  of 
heaven — so  far,  that  though  it  can  be  expressed  in  figures,  the  imagination  fails 
to  take  in  the  magnitude  of  the  sum ;  but  when  the  rays  of  light  have  travelled 
unimpeded  so  far,  and  come  to  the  door  of  my  eye,  If  I  shut  that  door — a  thin  film 
of  flesh — the  light  is  kept  out,  and  I  remain  in  darkness.  Alas !  the  Hght  that 
travelled  so  far,  and  came  so  near — the  Light  that  sought  entrance  into  my  heart, 
and  that  I  kept  out — was  the  Light  of  life  1     If  I  keep  out  that  Light,  I  abide  in 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

the  darkness  of  death :  there  is  no  salvation  in  any  other.  IV.  He  knocks  fob 
JENTBANCE.  It  is  more  than  the  kindness  of  His  coming  and  the  patience  of 
His  waiting.  Besides  coming  near,  He  calls  aloud:  He  does  not  permit  us 
to  forget  His  presence.  V.  Many  things  hindeb  the  heabino.  Other  thoughts 
occupy  the  mind  ;  other  sounds  occupy  the  ear.  Either  joy  or  grief  may  become  a 
hindrance.  The  song  of  mirth  and  the  wail  of  sorrow  may  both,  by  turns,  drown 
the  voice  of  that  blessed  Visitant  who  stands  without  and  pleads  for  admission. 
VI.  Heab,  and  open.  Hearing  alone  is  not  enough.  It  is  not  the  wrath  of  God, 
but  His  mercy  in  Christ,  that  melts  the  iron  fastenings  and  lifts  up  these  shut 
gates,  that  the  King  of  Glory  may  come  in.  The  guilty  refuse  to  open  for  Christ, 
even  when  they  hear  Him  knocking.  They  have  hard  thoughts  of  Him.  They 
think  He  comes  to  demand  a  righteousness  which  they  cannot  give,  and  to  bind 
them  over  to  the  judgment  because  they  cannot  pay.  God  is  love,  and  Christ  is  the 
outcome  of  His  forgiving  love  to  lost  men.  He  comes  to  redeem  you,  and  save  you. 
It  is  when  you  know  Him  thus  that  you  will  open  at  His  call.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 
IThe  heavenly  Stranger  received : — I.  "  If  any  man  heab  My  voice."  1.  That  the 
'voice  of  Christ  is  either  external  or  internal ;  or,  that  which  is  addressed  to  the 
Benses  only,  and  that  which  reaches  the  heart.  2.  The  internal  voice  of  Christ  is 
various,  according  to  the  different  circumstances  of  the  persons  to  whom  it  is 
directed.  To  some  it  is  an  awakening  voice:  it  rouses  them  from  their  carnal 
security.  To  those  who  are  bowed  down  with  a  sense  of  sin,  and  wounded  with  the 
fiery  darts  of  Divine  wrath,  it  is  a  healing  and  comforting  voice.  3.  In  order  to 
hear  His  voice  aright,  our  hearts  must  be  renewed.  Dead  sinners  cannot  hear  the 
voice  of  Christ ;  but  His  is  a  life-giving  voice,  and  what  it  commands  it  communi- 
cates, n.  And  open  the  doob.  IH.  •'  I  will  come  in  to  him."  1.  Nearness. 
2.  Possession.  3.  Inhabitation.  He  not  only  comes  near  to  the  soul  to  converse 
with  it,  but  into  it  to  dwell  there,  and  becomes  the  vital  principle  of  all  holy  obedi- 
ence. IV.  "  And  I  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
The  heart  a  house : — Your  heart  is  a  house  with  many  rooms ;  one  apartment  is  deco- 
rated for  the  occupancy  of  pride ;  in  another  one  covetousness  may  keep  its  iron  safe ; 
on  the  walls  of  another,  perhaps,  sensuality  has  hung  some  pictures  that,  if  Christ 
enter,  must  be  pulled  down.  Unbelief  has  chilled  and  darkened  the  whole  house. 
Satan  has  a  mortgage  on  the  whole  of  it,  and  by  and  by  will  foreclose  it.  An 
enormous  amount  of  sin  has  accumulated  in  every  room  and  closet,  for  you  have 
never  had  a  "  house-cleaning  "  since  you  were  born.  To  that  dwelling-place  of  sin, 
which  may  yet  become  a  dwelling-place  of  endless  anguish,  my  loving  Saviour  has 
come  again.  If  you  will  stop  the  turmoil  of  business,  or  the  noise  of  merriment 
long  enough  to  listen,  you  will  hear  a  marvellously  sweet  voice  outside,  "Behold,  I 
stand  here  and  knock  ;  if  thou  wilt  open  this  door  I  will  come  in."  Christ  without 
means  guilt ;  Christ  within  means  pardon.  Christ  without  means  condemnation ; 
Christ  within  means  salvation.  Christ  shut  out  means  hell ;  Christ  admitted  is  the 
first  instalment  of  heaven.  {T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart : — 
A  widow  woman  lives  by  herself  in  a  little  cottage  by  the  seashore.  Of  all  whom  she 
loved,  only  one  survives — a  lad  at  sea ;  all  the  rest  have  passed  "  from  sunshine  to 
the  sunless  land."  She  has  not  set  her  eyes  upon  him  for  years.  But  her  heart  is 
full  of  him.  She  thinks  of  him  by  day,  and  dreams  of  him  by  night.  His  name  is 
never  missed  out  from  her  prayers.  The  winds  speak  about  him  ;  the  stars  speak 
about  him;  the  waves  speak  about  him,  both  in  storm  and  calm.  No  one  has 
difficulty  in  understanding  how  her  boy  dwells  in  her  heart.  Let  that  stand  as  a 
parable  of  what  may  be  for  every  believer  in  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
{J.  Culross,  D.D)  He  knocks  at  our  heart : — Jesus  stands  at  our  gate  and  knocks, 
and  there  are  many  who  never  open  to  Him  at  all,  and  many  more  who  open  the 
door  but  slightly.  The  latter,  while  they  may  receive  blessing,  yet  miss  the  fulness 
of  Divine  revealing  which  would  flood  their  souls  with  love ;  the  former  miss 
altogether    the    sweetest    benediction    of    life.      {J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  Christ 

standing  : — Whilst  a  man  is  standing  He  is  going.  {J.  Trapp.)  Many  fastenings 
to  the  sinner's  heart : — When  we  were  in  Dublin,  I  went  out  one  morning  to  an 
early  meeting,  and  I  found  the  servants  had  not  opened  the  front  door.  So  I 
pulled  back  a  bolt,  but  I  could  not  get  the  door  open.  Then  I  turned  a  key,  but 
the  door  would  not  open.  Then  I  found  there  was  another  bolt  at  the  top,  then  I 
found  there  was  another  bolt  at  the  bottom.  Still  the  door  would  not  open.  Then 
I  found  there  was  a  bar,  and  then  I  found  a  night-lock.  I  found  there  were  five  or 
six  different  fastenings.  I  am  afraid  that  door  represents  every  sinner's  heart. 
The  door  of  his  heart  is  locked,  double-bolted,  and  barred.    (D.  L.  Moody.)        The 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION. 


King  slighted : — When  your  King  and  Lord  comes  lo  claim  the  homage  of  your 
hearts,  and  to  pay  you  a  royal  visit,  you  receive  His  message  w^ith  coldness  and 
indifference.  You  treat  Him  as  the  people  of  Alsace  and  Lorraine  treated  the 
Emperor  of  Germany  and  the  Crown  Prince  after  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  when 
they  pulled  down  their  blinds,  and  locked  and  bolted  their  doors,  and  sat  in  gloomy 
silence  as  the  emperor  passed.  They  had  some  excuse  for  refusing  to  see  him,  as 
they  were  a  conquered  people,  and  his  presence  reminded  them  of  their  humiliation 
and  defeat.  But  there  is  no  excuse  for  you.  {Isaac  Marsden.)  God  respects 
man's  freedom  : — It  was  said  by  a  celebrated  orator  in  the  House  of  Lords  a  century 
ago,  that  an  Englishman's  house  is  his  castle,  that  the  winds  of  heaven  might 
enter  by  every  window,  that  the  rains  might  penetrate  through  every  cranny,  but 
that  not  even  the  sovereign  of  the  land  dare  enter  into  it,  however  humble,  without 
its  owner's  permission.  God  treats  you  in  the  same  way.  He  says,  "  Willingly 
open  your  heart  to  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  every  blessing ;  but  I  must  be  made 
welcome."  {G.  Warner.)  At  the  door : — In  Holman  Hunt's  great  picture  called 
•'The  Light  of  the  World,"  we  see  One  with  gentle,  patient  face,  standing  at  a  door, 
which  is  ivy-covered,  as  if  long  closed.  He  is  girt  with  the  priestly  breastplate. 
He  bears  in  His  hand  the  lamp  of  truth.  He  stands  and  knocks.  There  is  no 
answer,  and  He  stUl  stands  and  knocks.  His  eye  tells  of  love ;  His  face  beams 
with  yearning.  You  look  closely  and  you  perceive  that  there  is  no  knob  or  latch 
on  the  outside  of  the  door.  It  can  be  opened  only  from  within.  Do  you  not  see 
the  meaning  ?     {J.  R.  Miller,  D.B.) 

Ver.  21.  To  ^ini  that  overcometh  will  I  g^rant  to  sit  with  Me. — The  Christian 
raised  to  the  throne  of  Christ: — I.  "To  him  that  overcometh"  ;  this  supposes  a 
CONFLICT.  1.  You  must  contend  against  yourself.  The  main  battle  is  fought  on 
the  field  of  your  own  heart.  Your  closest  foes  are  the  affections  which  struggle 
there.  2.  Allied  with  your  heart  and  habits  stands  the  world.  God  has  so  mercifully 
made  us  that  we  hail  as  a  light  upon  our  path  the  beam  of  kindliness  in  the  eye 
of  a  fellow  man.  Even  this  will  be  turned  against  you.  3.  But  self  and  the  world 
are  but  visible  weapons  of  an  invisible  hand.  Behind  them,  setting  their  edge  and 
thrusting  them  home,  is  your  great  adversary  the  devil.  Watchful  when  you 
are  drowsy,  plotting  when  you  are  unsuspicious,  laying  snares  when  you  are 
tripping  heedlessly,  bending  the  bow  when  you  are  exposing  your  breast, 
he  is  ever  going  about  seeking  to  devour.  II.  Here  wb  have  a  promise  to 
STIMULATE  US  TO  OVERCOME.  1.  Whatever  this  promise  means,  it  must  mean  at 
least  that  the  faithful  Christian  will  be  received  into  the  immediate  presence  of 
his  Lord.  And  this  is  a  thought  you  must  set  well  before  you.  2.  But  as  you 
linger  on  these  words  of  promise  your  heart  feels  that  they  tell  of  more  than  merely 
of  the  abundant  entrance.  *'  I  will  grant  to  sit  with  Me  in  My  throne."  Ah  1  this 
seems,  you  think,  to  say  that  you  shall  be  wondrously  close  to  Him.  3.  This  seems 
to  declare  also  that,  if  faithful,  you  shall  share  at  last  in  the  very  honours  which 
invest  your  adorable  Head.  4.  But,  lingering  still  on  this  rich  promise,  your  heart 
gathers  from  it  another  assurance,  and  one  that  to  us  in  our  struggles  is  wondrous 
sweet.  "  In  His  throne,"  you  repeat,  "  in  His  throne,"  what  foe  can  approach  me 
there?  In  this  wide  world  I  can  find  no  inviolable  rest.  But  "  on  His  throne," 
surely  eternal  repose  dwells  there.  III.  Here  you  have  the  example  set  before 
YOU  FOR  YOUR  ENCOURAGEMENT.  1.  Your  Captain  does  not  lead  you  to  a  warfare  in 
which  He  is  a  stranger.  You  wUl  meet  no  foe  whom  He  has  not  met.  2,  Consider, 
then,  the  example  of  Him  who  passed  through  every  kind  of  temptation  which 
can  assail  you,  and  in  a  degree  of  aggravation  to  which  it  is  not  possible  that 
you  should  be  liable.  His  victory  is  the  pledge  of  yours,  for  His  strength  is  your 
strength,  and  your  only  foes  are  His  vanquished  assailants.  {W.  Arthur,  M.A.) 
The  condition  of  celestial  kingship  : — This  is  the  promise  of  the  ascended,  victorious, 
crowned,  and  almighty  Saviour  to  men  whom  He  would  have  imitate  and  repro- 
duce the  life  which  He  lived  while  upon  the  earth.  This  promise  implies  that  life 
is  a  struggle  with  foes  which  assail  it  for  the  mastery.  This  truth  has  its  illustra- 
tions in  all  forms  and  spheres  of  life.  Many  ftdl  where  one  succeeds.  The  higher 
you  rise  in  any  sphere  in  life  the  smaller  do  the  classes  become.  There  are  more 
Canadian  thistles  than  Yosemite  pines.  There  are  more  ants  than  eagles.  There 
are  more  men  who  can  read  and  write  than  can  weigh  the  planets  in  scales  and  call 
them  by  name,  paint  a  Madonna,  build  a  Parthenon,  write  an  epic.  So  there  are 
more  men  who  succeed  in  temporal  pursuits  than  attain  grand  Christian  characters 
and  live  a  Christlike  life.     The  first  great  trutL  -mplied  in  our  text  is,  if  men  wouM 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

live  that  higher  life  which  is  governed  by  the  principles  of  the  gospel  and  in  the 
eternal  world  sit  down  with  their  Lord  and  Master  on  His  throne,  they  must  resist 
the  temptations  which  assail  them,  vanquish  the  foes  which  would  destroy  them. 
The  dangers  which  beset  each  one  in  this  life-battle  are  special.  The  rock  on  which 
your  neighbour  struck,  the  reef  on  which  your  friend  lies  stranded,  may  not  imperil 
your  safety  because  you  are  steering  in  another  direction.  There  are  men  whose 
integrity  money  could  not  buy,  in  whose  keeping  the  uncounted  millions  of  the 
mints  and  treasury  of  the  nations  would  be  safe.  But  there  are  others  who  are 
ready  at  any  moment  to  part  with  reputation,  character,  aye,  sell  their  very  souls 
for  its  possession.  Take  spirituous  liquor.  There  are  some  to  whom  in  any  form 
it  is  as  distasteful  as  vitriol,  as  poisonous  as  croton  oil.  There  are  others — God 
pity  them ! — in  whom  the  appetite  is  so  fierce,  powerful,  overmastering,  that  if  they 
saw  a  glass  of  rum  on  one  side  of  the  mouth  of  hell,  and  they  stood  on  the  other 
side,  they  would  leap  across,  at  the  risk  of  falling  in,  to  get  it.  There  are  two  things 
which  differentiate  and  specialise  each  human  being's  danger.  The  first  is  natural 
constitution.  No  one  denies  the  law  of  heredity,  that  physical  resemblances, 
mental  aptitudes,  and  moral  qualities  are  transmissible,  and  sometimes  travel  down 
family  and  national  lines  for  centuries.  But  while  a  man  may  inherit  tainted 
blood  and  receive  a  legacy  of  disabilities  from  his  progenitors,  it  does  not  relieve 
him  from  personal  responsibility.  What  are  the  weak  points  in  your  character  ? 
In  the  presence  of  what  temptations  do  you  most  easily  surrender  ?  Along  what 
lines  does  your  constitutional  predisposition  to  wrongdoing  lie  ?  As  you  confront 
these  weaknesses  the  command  of  the  great  Saviour  of  souls  is,  "  Overcome."  On 
this  your  salvation  depends.  The  second  thing  which  differentiates  and  specialises 
each  man's  peril  is  providential  circumstances.  John  Stuart  Mill  was  carefully 
trained  by  his  father  in  childhood  and  boyhood  in  the  principles  of  atheism. 
Young  Mill  had  no  voice  in  determining  the  character  of  his  childhood  instruction. 
But  did  that  fact  relieve  the  future  philosopher  of  responsibility  in  adhering  to  and 
teaching  others  the  principles  of  atheism  ?  Your  greatest  peril  may  lie  wrapped  up 
in  some  providential  event  which  you  had  no  voice  in  shaping  and  which  you  must 
meet.  It  may  be  money.  It  may  be  famQy  alliances.  It  may  be  social  relation- 
ships. It  may  be  a  business  crisis — such  a  business  crisis  as  sometimes  reveals  the 
whole  moral  mechanism  of  the  man.  I  know  not  whether  your  inherited  qualities 
of  mind  and  moral  aptitudes  are  helps  or  hindrances  to  you  in  life's  battle.  I  do 
not  know  the  revealing  tests  to  which  a  searching  Providence  may  subject  you. 
But  I  do  know  that  special  dangers  lie  along  your  pathway  and  menace  your 
eternal  well-beiag;  dangers  which  you  must  conquer  if  you  would  enter  yonder 
pearly  gate  and  sit  down  with  your  Lord  on  His  throne.  The  text  affords  glorious 
encouragement  in  the  blessed  assurance  that  it  is  possible  for  men  in  this  life-battle 
to  overcome.  The  success  possible  in  the  text  rests  on  surer  foundations  than 
human  resources  or  individual  reserve  power.  It  rests  on  the  truthfulness  and 
sincerity  of  Jesus.  He  does  not  mock  men  by  laying  down  impossible  conditions 
of  salvation.  That  God  is  on  the  side  of  the  man  who  is  struggling  to  preserve  his 
purity,  maintain  his  integrity,  and  vanquish  what  is  wrong  both  within  him  and 
without  him,  is  a  truth  taught  with  increasing  clearness  from  Eden  to  Calvary. 
Observe  the  greatness  and  grandeur  of  the  reward  of  him  who  overcomes :  "  To 
him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  Me  in  My  throne."  Can  you  conceive 
of  a  greater  incentive  to  be  offered  man  than  this  promise  of  eternal  participation 
in  the  regal  splendours  of  heaven  ?  Turning  to  the  practical  suggestions  of  this 
subject,  notice  that  religion  is  a  personal  matter  which  has  to  do  with  individual 
character.  Each  one  must  overcome  the  obstacles  which  lie  in  his  pathway.  You 
can  never  understand  how  much  Christ  is  to  men  until  you  realise  your  danger, 
feel  your  helplessness,  and  experience  His  saving  power.  You  can  never  appreciate 
the  towering  sublimity  of  His  peerless  life  until  you  attempt  to  walk  in  His  foot- 
steps and  regulate  your  life  by  the  same  principles  which  controlled  His  life.  The 
essence  of  the  Christian  religion  is  life,  life  shaped  and  controlled  by  supreme  love 
to  God  and  love  for  fellow-men  equal  to  the  love  cherished  for  self.  (T.  McCullagh, 
D.D.)  The  conqueror's  reward : — L  The  characteb  of  the  Christian.  It  is 
that  of  a  soldier — a  successful  soldier.  His  life  is  a  warfare.  It  was  such  unques- 
tionably in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  And  what  is  the  case  now  ?  The  antipathy 
of  the  carnal  mind  may  be  restrained  or  softened  by  the  influence  of  knowledge  and 
the  force  of  conviction,  but  the  fact  is  still  patent  that  we  must  take  up  our  cross  if 
we  will  win  the  crown.  Our  enemies  within,  whatever  they  may  be  without,  are 
neither  few  nor  weak.    And  to  subvert  our  eternal  salvation  is  the  one  thing  in 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  271 

which  they  are  all  united.  We  have,  therefore,  the  greatest  need  of  caution  and 
courage.  One  thing  must  be  ever  borne  in  mind,  namely,  our  constant  dependence 
upon  God.  As  long  as  we  abide  beneath  the  wing  of  Omnipotence  we  are  secure, 
n.  The  reward  which  shall  be  adjudged  to  the  successful  warrior.  He  shall 
sit  down  with  the  Saviour  on  His  throne.  1.  The  promise  may  be  understood  to 
shadow  forth  the  future  dignity  of  the  conquering  Christian.  He  shall  sit  down 
with  his  Lord,  and  on  the  same  throne.  The  faithful  unto  death  shall  thus  be 
exalted  above  the  angels  of  God.  2.  The  imagery  in  the  promise  is  intended  to 
indicate  the  future  holiness  of  the  saints.  Wherever  God  is  there  is  purity  itself. 
3,  The  promise  before  us  is  expressive  of  the  future  happiness  of  beHevers.  There 
we  shall  behold  a  sky  without  a  cloud,  light  without  shadow,  and  flowers  without  a 
thorn.     {American  National  Preacher.)  The  victory  and  the  crown  : — I.  The 

BATTLE.  Common  life  in  this  world  is  a  warfare.  1.  It  is  inner  warfare,  private, 
solitary,  with  no  eye  upon  the  warrior.  2.  It  is  outer  warfare.  The  enemies  are 
legion.  3.  It  is  daily  warfare ;  not  one  great  battle,  but  a  multitude  of  battles. 
The  enemy  wearies  not,  ceases  not,  nor  must  we.  4.  It  is  warfare  not  fought  with 
human  arms.  5.  It  is  warfare  in  which  we  are  sharers  with  Christ.  11.  The 
vicTOBT.  Here  it  is  spoken  of  as  one  great  final  victory,  but  in  reality  it  is  a  multi- 
tude. As  are  the  battles  so  are  the  victories.  III.  The  reward.  1.  A  throne. 
Not  salvation  merely,  or  life,  but  higher  than  these — glory,  honour,  dominion,  and 
power.  From  being  the  lowest  here  they  are  made  the  highest  hereafter.  2. 
Christ's  throne.  He  has  a  seat  on  the  Father's  throne  as  the  reward  of  His 
victory,  we  have  a  seat  on  His  as  the  reward  of  ours.  We  are  sharers  or  "  par- 
takers with   Christ"  in   aU  things.     We   share  His  battles.   His  victories,   His 

rewards,  His  cross,  and  His  crown.     {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)         The  great  victory  : I.  A 

LITE  OF  Christian  holiness  is  possible.  II.  It  is  not  to  be  sustained  without 
VIGOROUS  AND  PERSEVERING  EFFORTS.  1.  The  natural  inaptitude  and  aversion  of  the 
unrenewed  heart  to  the  things  of  God  and  eternal  life.  2.  The  world  is  against  us. 
3.  The  life  of  man  is  often  the  scene  of  distress.  Ill,  The  encouragements  to  a 
HOLT  AND  Christian  life  held  out  to  us  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  are  manifold  and 
great.  1.  In  this  arduous  undertaking  we  are  not  left  without  assistance.  2. 
Multitudes  of  our  fellow- men  have  already  accomplished  salvation,  and  are  for 
ever  with  the  Lord.  3.  Whatever  of  warfare  and  pain  may  attend  the  Christian 
life  they  who  maintain  it  are  already  the  happiest  of  men.  4.  Viewed  aright  it  is 
matter  of  encouragement  that  the  strife  will  soon  be  over.  5.  What  a  vast  reward 
awaits  the  faithful.  {Jas.  Bromley.)  The  Christian  conqueror : — The  word  used 
here  for  "  conqueror"  does  not  imply  one  who  has  conquered.  It  is  literaUy,  "  He 
that  is  conquering  I  wiU  give  to  him  to  sit  with  Me."  While  the  battle  is  raging 
he  shall  have  My  peace,  while  he  is  but  starting  he  shall  be  at  the  goal — as  the  boy 
has  his  prizes  and  his  scholarships  not  because  he  is  a  finished  scholar  but 
because  he  is  longing  and  learning  to  be  one.  And  as  this  continues  all  through 
life  to  be  the  law  of  life,  so  in  the  kingdom  that  is  coming  effort  is  victory  and 
victory  is  only  encouragement.  {Abp.  Benson.)  Overcoming  : — "  To  him  that 
overcometh."  There  is  a  tendency  very  common  which  these  words  may  be  taken 
to  warn  us  against — that  of  settling  down  to  the  daily  round  of  our  lives  without 
appeal  to  anything  high  or  holy  in  purpose.  Do  not  listen  for  a  moment  to  those 
who  tell  you  that  the  struggle  is  not  worth  engaging  in.  "  To  him  that  over- 
cometh," Men  have  tried  different  ways  to  accomplish  this.  A  favourite  way  in 
the  history  of  the  early  Christian  Church  was  to  withdraw  actually  from  the  world, 
to  seek  the  solitude  of  some  cave  or  monastery.  Others  who  would  think  it  very 
wrong  to  do  this,  spend  the  greater  part  of  their  leisure  in  attending  religious  meet- 
ings and  reading  their  Bibles,  and  tell  you  that  the  chief  end  of  man  in  this  world 
is  by  these  methods  to  prepare  for  the  next.  Both  of  these  attempts  to  overcome 
the  world  are  based  on  a  misconception.  The  text  says  to  us  that  we  are  to  over- 
come the  world  even  as  I  (Jesus)  overcame.  Now  in  what  way  did  our  Saviour 
overcome  the  world  ?  Not  after  the  manner  of  the  religious  ascetic.  His  life  was 
in  the  main  lived  among  ordinary  men  and  women  in  the  ordinary  vocations  of  life. 
If  the  life  of  Jesus  had  been  that  of  a  hermit  or  a  monk.  He  would  never  have  been 
called  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.  If,  again.  He  had  been  a  constant 
attendant  at  religious  meetings,  noonday  and  evening,  or  had  divided  His  life 
between  keenness  for  this  world's  success  in  money-making  and  eagerness  for  the 
salvation  of  His  soul  for  the  next,  He  would  never  have  been  put  to  death.  No,  it 
was  because  He  was  so  zealous  to  overcome  the  world — the  world  of  religious 
selfishness  and  of  worldly  selfishness  alike — it  was  because  He  was  devoting  Himself 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

amid  the  ordinary  pursuits  of  life  to  bring  about  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is,  of 
course,  not  to  be  forgotten  that  there  are  means,  such  as  the  reading  of  the  Bible, 
attendance  on  public  worship,  prayer,  and  fellowship  with  those  who  are  like- 
minded,  which,  if  rightly  used,  will  help  us  for  the  battle  we  have  to  fight.  It  is 
iby  forgetting  that  these  are  only  means  that  men  become  hypocrites,  and  the  form 
of  religion  becomes  the  all  in  all.  When  we  realise  what  Christ  meant  by  "  the 
world  "  and  what  He  meant  by  the  kingdom  of  God,  we  will  take  a  more  enlightened 
view  of  what  our  duty  is,  and  we  will  strive  more  eagerly  to  achieve  the  victory. 
Think  of  how  many  men  and  women  are  hindered  fi'om  overcoming  the  world — that 
is,  sin  in  all  its  forms — by  the  conditions  under  which  they  are  made  by  a  selfish 
society  to  live.  How  can  men  and  women  hope  to  realise  the  Christlike  life  if  they 
are  forced  to  toil  from  morning  to  night,  and  then  to  sleep  in  badly  ventilated 
houses,  only  to  rise  again  to  the  same  round  of  unrelieved  drudgery  ?  Those  who 
to-day  are  endeavouring  to  bring  about  a  better  state  of  affairs,  who  are  trying  to 
realise  to  some  small  degree  that  part  of  the  kingdom  of  God  which  consists  in 
better  houses  and  more  healthful  surroundings  for  the  toilers  in  our  midst  are  doing 
quite  as  much  to  enable  men  to  overcome  the  world — the  world  of  vice,  of  drunken- 
ness, of  coarseness — as  those  who  attend  to  what  are  considered  more  strictly  the 
needs  of  the  soul.  There  is  another  idea  in  the  text :  "  To  him  that  overcometh." 
That  is  the  battle.  The  reward  follows  :  "  I  will  give  him  to  sit  down  with  Me  in 
My  throne."  It  was  because  Christ  had  so  completely  overcome — had  so  unre- 
servedly rendered  up  His  own  will  to  the  will  of  His  Heavenly  Father — that  we  find 
such  a  royal,  kingly  sense  of  self-conquest  pervading  His  entire  life.  Jesus  Christ 
could  not  have  brought  so  much  of  the  kingdom  of  God  into  this  world,  He  could 
not  have  foreseen  with  so  much  confidence  a  time  when  it  would  be  universally 
established,  had  He  not  had  it  reigning  within  Himself.  Throughout  His  life  there 
■was  an  air  of  kingly  majesty  that  makes  Him  as  secure  as  if  He  sat  and  reigned 
upon  a  throne,  while  all  around  Him  seemed  to  indicate  defeat  and  disaster. 
Whence  did  this  come  but  from  His  oneness  with  the  Father  ?  Whence  can  we 
hope  to  receive  it  but  from  the  same  high,  never-failing  source?  {W.  Martin.) 
A  commomcealth  of  kings : — When  Cyneas,  the  ambassador  of  Pyrrhus,  after  his 
return  from  Rome,  was  asked  by  his  master,  "  What  he  thought  of  the  city  and 
state,"  he  answered,  "  that  it  seemed  to  him  to  be  a  state  of  none  but  great  states- 
men, and  a  (commonwealth  of  kings."  Such  is  heaven — no  other  than  a  parliament 
of  emperors,  a  commonwealth  of  kings :  every  humble  faithful  soul  in  that  kingdom 
is  co-heir  with  Christ,  hath  a  robe  of  honour,  and  a  sceptre  of  power,  and  a  throne 
of  majesty,  and  a  crown  of  glory.  (J.  Spencer.)  The  future  dominion  of  victors: 
— *'  So  you  intend  to  be  a  reformer  of  men's  morals,  young  man,"  said  an  aged 
peer  to  Wilberforce.  "  That,"  and  he  pointed  to  a  picture  of  the  crucifixion,  •'  that 
is  the  end  of  reformers."  "  Is  it  ?  I  have  read  in  an  old  Book  this,  •  I  am  He  that 
liveth,  and  was  dead ;  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore.  Amen ;  and  have  the 
keys  of  hell  and  of  death.'  That  is  the  end,  not  death,  but  dominion.  And  if  we  be 
faithful,  doing  our  duty,  the  end  shall  not  be  exhaustion,  but '  sit  with  Me  on  My 
throne.'"  {Sunday  School  Ghro7iicle.)  The  Christian  promise  of  empire  : — "To 
him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  Me  on  My  throne."  These  words  bear 
the  stamp  of  their  environment.  They  were  written  at  a  time  when  the  ideal  of  aU 
men  was  the  possession  of  a  throne.  Alike  to  the  Roman  and  to  the  Jew  the  dream 
of  life  was  the  dream  of  dominion.  The  son  of  Israel  contemplated  his  Messiah 
who  should  make  him  ruler  over  all  nations.  The  son  of  Rome  was  eager  to  com- 
plete his  almost  finished  work  of  universal  empire.  But  from  another  point  of 
view  it  was  in  striking  contrast  to  both.  Who  were  the  men  that  claimed  to  be 
the  recipients  of  this  promise  ?  A  band  of  obscure  slaves.  To  the  proud  Roman 
leading  his  armies  to  victory,  to  the  proud  Jew  counting  his  ancestors  by  hundreds, 
there  must  have  been  something  almost  grotesque  in  the  claim.  Must  it  not  to  the 
age  in  which  they  lived  have  appeared  the  presumption  of  insanity  ?  Nor  is  it 
only  to  a  Roman  age  that  the  claim  of  this  passage  seems  to  suggest  the  idea  of 
presumption.  Must  it  not  appear  so  at  all  times  to  every  man  ?  The  throne,  as  I 
have  said,  is  a  throne  of  judgment.  How  can  any  human  soul  aspire  to  such  a 
seat  ?  Is  not  the  state  of  the  Christian  one  of  humility  ?  Does  not  the  amount  of 
the  humility  increase  in  proportion  as  the  Christianity  grows  ?  Have  not  the  most 
purely  spiritual  souls  been  precisely  those  most  conscious  of  their  sin  ?  It  is  in 
the  incipient  stages  of  the  Christian  life  that  we  find  ambition.  But  let  us 
look  deeper.  I  think  we  shall  find  that  we  have  altogether  mistaken  the  meaning 
of  the  passage,  and  that  the  John  of  the  Apocalypse  is  nowhere  more  like  the  John 


CHAP.  III.]  REVELATION.  273 

of  the  Gospel  than  in  his  present  claim  to  Christian  empire.  So  far  from  being 
influenced  by  the  old  feeling  of  presumption,  he  is  actuated  by  the  direct  desire  to 
avoid  that  feeling.  His  position  is  that,  instead  of  being  presumption  to  claim  a 
seat  on  God's  judgment  throne,  it  is  presumption  that  prevents  the  Church  of 
Laodicea  from  having  a  right  to  claim  it.  If  that  Church  would  adopt  more 
humility,  it  would  be  more  entitled  to  a  place  on  the  throne.  "  Thou  say  est,  I  am 
rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing ;  and  knowest  not  that 
thou  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked."  What  is 
the  state  of  mind  here  indicated  ?  It  is  poverty  unconscious  of  itself.  It  is  the 
description  of  a  Church  which  has  no  elements  of  strength  within  it,  but  which 
believes  itself  to  be  strong  just  because  it  has  never  been  tried.  Accordingly  in 
verse  18  He  says,  "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  Me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich."  Nothing  could  reveal  the  weakness  but  exposure  to  the  fire. 
And  first,  let  us  consider  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  every  man  has  seated  himself  on 
a  throne  of  judgment.  The  difference  between  the  Christian  and  the  non-Christian 
is  not  the  occupation  of  a  throne.  It  is  that  the  occupation  of  the  one  is  legal,  and 
the  occupation  of  the  other  usurped.  Every  man  by  nature  has  constituted  himself 
the  judge  of  other  men.  But  to  all  such  the  seer  of  Patmos  exclaims,  '*  Come 
down  from  that  throne  ;  you  have  no  right  to  be  there ;  you  have  not  overcome." 
He  tells  them  that  until  they  have  felt  the  temptations  of  their  own  nature  they 
are  in  no  condition  to  judge  others.  Now,  the  next  question  is,  what  would  be  the 
effect  of  what  is  here  called  overcoming — of  vanquishing  the  temptation?  It 
would  clearly  be  to  transform  a  throne  of  judgment  into  a  throne  of  grace.  For, 
be  it  observed,  the  value  of  overcoming  is  not  the  victory  but  the  struggle.  There 
are  two  ways  in  which  a  man  may  reach  freedom  from  temptation — by  innocence 
or  by  virtue,  by  never  having  known  or  by  having  known  and  vanquished.  If 
mere  freedom  from  temptation  were  the  goal,  we  ought  to  be  content  with  the  first. 
What  makes  the  overcoming  better  than  the  innocence  is  the  fact  that  in  struggle 
we  learn  our  weakness,  and  that  in  learning  our  weakness  the  throne  of  judgment 
becomes  a  throne  of  mercy.  And  now  the  passage  takes  a  remarkable  turn.  To 
the  inspired  ear  of  the  seer  of  Patmos  the  Christ  who  offers  the  conditions  of 
empirB  is  heard  declaring  that  He  Himself  has  reached  empire  by  conforming  to 
these  conditions,  "  even  as  I  also  overcame  and  am  set  down  with  My  Father  on 
His  throne."  There  is  something  startling  here.  There  seems  at  first  sight  to  be 
no  analogy  between  the  case  of  Christ  and  the  case  of  ordinary  men.  Now,  Jesus 
was  tempted ;  that  is  one  of  the  cardinal  features  of  the  gospel.  He  was  tempted 
in  such  a  way  as  to  make  Him  feel  the  inherent  weakness  of  humanity ;  that  is 
one  of  the  cardinal  features  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  But  He  was  tempted 
also  "  without  sin."  The  idea  clearly  is  that  His  right  to  judge  others  rests  morally 
on  the  fact  of  His  own  struggle — the  struggle  with  the  thought  of  death.  In  His 
dealings  with  man  He  acknowledges  no  power  but  the  sympathetic.  And  what  is 
the  root  of  universal  sympathy  ?  Is  it  not  universal  experience  ?  If  I  would  have 
sympathy  with  all  nations,  I  must  know  experimentally  the  weakness  with  which 
all  nations  contend.  Jesus  emerges  from  the  conflict  with  death  wider  in  His 
human  capabilities,  stronger  in  His  hold  on  man.  He  is  able  to  promise  rest  to 
the  labouring  and  the  heavy-laden  because  He  has  known  a  kindred  labour  and 
felt  an  analogous  ladenness.  He  has  made  the  law  of  the  Christian  life  the  law  of 
His  own  spirit :  "  I  also  have  overcome,  and  am  sot  down  with  My  Father  on  His 
throne."     {George  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  Hear  what  the  Spirit  aaith  unto  the  Churches.— T/jg  Spirit  speaking  to 
the  Church : — I.  That  thebe  abe  certain  great  moral  elements  by  which  alone 

WE  CAN  determine  THE  CHABACTEB  OF  INDIVIDUALS  OR  OF  COMMUNITIES.  II.  ThAT  IN 
PROPORTION  TO  THE  DEPTH  AND  VITALITY  OF  HOLY  CHARACTER  WILL  BE  THE  STRUGGLE 
WITH  ERROR  AND  WITH  EVIL.  III.  ThAT  THE  REWARDS  AND  HONOURS  OP  THE  HEAVENLY 
STATE  WILL  BE  DETERMINED   BY   THE   STBUGGLES   AND   THE    CONQUESTS    OF   EARTH.       {R. 

Ferguson,  LL.D.)  Visible  Churches  warned  : — 1.  Let  me  warn  all  who  are  living 
only  for  the  world  to  take  heed  what  they  are  doing.  You  are  enemies  to  Christ, 
though  you  may  not  know  it.  2.  Let  me  warn  all  formalists  and  self-righteous 
people  to  take  heed  that  they  are  not  deceived.  Where  is  your  faith  ?  Where  are 
your  evidences  of  a  new  heart  ?  Where  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  ?  3.  Let  me 
warn  all  careless  members  of  Churches  to  beware  lest  they  trifle  their  souls  into  hell. 
4.  Let  me  warn  every  one  who  wants  to  be  saved  not  to  be  content  with  the  world's 
standard  of  religion.  5.  Let  me  warn  every  one  who  professes  to  be  a  believer  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  not  to  be  content  with  a  little  religion.    {Bp.  Ryle.) 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


CHAPTEE   IV. 

Vers.  1-11.  Behold,  a  door  was  opened  in  heaven. — The  open  door : — I.  The  open 

DOOR.  1.  The  place  where  the  open  door  was  seen :  "  In  heaven."  This  implies 
several  important  things.  (1)  The  changed  sphere  of  operation,  (a)  The  "  golden 
lampstands  "  represented  Churches,  not  in  heaven,  but  on  earth.  (6)  The  "  seven 
stars  "  represented  the  pastors  of  those  Churches,  (c)  Now  the  seer's  attention  is 
called  from  the  condition  of  things  on  earth  to  a  con<^ition  of  things  in  heaven. 
This  is  fruitful  of  suggestion.  (2)  That  the  door  is  represented  as  "  open  "  is 
noticeable,  (a)  That  now,  for  the  first  time,  heaven  is  to  be  laid  open  to  saints  on 
earth.  (&)  That  now  these  heavenly  things,  as  here  revealed,  should  be  prayerfully 
pondered :  an  open  door,  ever  inviting  entrance.  (3)  Though  this  is  a  vision  of  the 
heavenly  world,  the  objects  seen  are  symbols  ;  the  things  symbolised  are  as  real  as 
heaven  itself  is  real.  II.  The  invitation  :  "  Come  up  hither."  1.  The  authori- 
tative character  of  the  invitation.  The  speaker  is  no  less  than  the  risen  Lord,  2. 
The  distinguished  honour  of  the  invitation.  3.  The  gracious  purpose  of  the  invita- 
tion. (1)  These  "  things  "  contain  the  substance  of  the  Divine  purposes  concern- 
ing the  destiny  both  of  the  people  and  the  enemies  of  God.  (2)  These  purposes  had 
never  been  disclosed  till  now.  (3)  They  are  purposes  in  which  all  God's  people 
should  take  a  lively  interest.  III.  The  seer's  transformation.  1.  Its  sudden- 
ness. 2.  Its  significance.  IV.  The  sublime  vision.  Practical  lessons :  1.  The 
great  importance  of  the  study  of  the  laws  of  "  prophetic  symbols."  2.  The  symbols 
of  this  chapter  are  not  only  interesting  as  throwing  light  on  the  place  this  chapter 
occupies  in  the  prophetic  scheme  of  this  book,  but  they  are  also  full  of  practical 
value.  (1)  They  should  impress  us  profoundly  with  the  awe-inspiring  presentation 
of  the  majesty,  sovereignty,  and  holiness  of  God,  whose  name  we  should  revere. 
(2)  They  should  deeply  impress  us  with  the  Divine  activity,  and  the  multiplicity  of 
Divine  agents  in  the  bringing  about  the  Divine  purposes  concerning  the  children  of 
men.  (3)  They  should  impress  us  with  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  the  sure 
reward  of  those  who  love  and  serve  Him  on  earth.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  A  door 
opened  in  heaven  : — I.  A  door  of  intercourse  between  God  and  man.  A  door  of 
intercourse  was  virtually  opened  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  when  the  sacred  persons 
of  the  Divine  Trinity  entered  into  solemn  compact  that  the  chosen  should  be 
redeemed,  that  an  offering  should  be  presented  by  which  sin  should  be  atoned  for 
and  God's  broken  law  should  be  vindicated.  In  that  covenant  council  chamber 
where  the  sacred  Three  combined  to  plan  the  salvation,  a  door  was  virtually  opened 
in  heaven,  and  it  was  through  that  door  that  the  saints  who  lived  and  died  before 
the  coming  of  Christ  passed  into  their  rest.  But  the  door  was  actually  and 
evidently  opened  when  our  Lord  Jesus  came  down  to  the  sons  of  men  to  sojourn  in 
their  flesh.  There  is  no  little  comfort  in  the  belief  that  heaven's  gates  are  opened, 
because  then  our  prayers,  broken-winged  as  they  are,  shall  enter  there.  The  ports 
of  the  glory-land  are  not  blockaded  ;  we  have  access  by  Jesus  Christ  unto  the 
Father ;  and  there  is  free  trade  with  heaven  for  poor  broken-hearted  sinners.  II. 
A  DOOR  OF  observation.  1.  A  door  is  opened  in  heaven  whenever  we  are  elevated 
by  the  help  of  God's  Spirit  to  high  thoughts  of  the  glory  of  God.  Sometimes  by 
investigating  the  works  of  nature  we  obtain  a  glimpse  of  the  infinite.  More  often 
by  beholding  the  grace  and  mercy  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ  our  hearts  are  warmed 
towards  that  blessed  One  who  made  us,  who  sustains  us,  who  redeemed  us,  to  whom 
we  owe  all  things.  2.  A  door  is  opened  in  heaven  whenever  the  meditative  spirit  is 
able  to  perceive  Christ  Jesus  with  some  degree  of  clearness.  3.  We  sometimes  get 
a  door  opened  in  heaven  when  we  enjoy  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  souls. 
4.  A  door  is  often  opened  in  heaven  in  the  joys  of  Christian  worship.  Yes,  but  if  it 
be  sweet  to-day  to  mingle  now  with  Christians  in  their  praise  and  prayer,  when  we 
are  so  soon  to  separate  and  go  our  way,  how  passing  sweet  that  place  must  be  where 
the  saints  meet  in  eternal  session  of  worship,  the  King  ever  with  them,  &c.  6. 
Another  door  is  opened  in  heaven  in  the  fellowship  which  we  enjoy  with  the  saints 
on  earth.  6.  A  door  has  often  been  opened  in  heaven  to  us  at  the  communion 
table.  Astronomers  select  the  best  spots  for  observatories  ;  they  like  elevated  places 
which  are  free  from  traffic,  so  that  their  instruments  may  not  quiver  with  the 
rumbling  of  wheels ;  they  prefer  also  to  be  away  from  the  smoke  of  manufacturing 
towns,  that  they  may  discern  the  orbs  of  heaven  more  clearly.  Surely  if  any  one 
place  is  fitter  to  be  an  observatory  for  a  heaven-mind  than  another,  it  is  the  table  of 
communion.     7.  Another  door  that  is  opened  in  heaven  is  the  delights  of  know- 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  276 

ledge.  The  philosopher  rejoices  as  he  tracks  some  recondite  law  of  nature  to  it, 
source;  but  to  hunt  out  a  gospel  truth,  to  track  the  real  meaning  of  a  text  o 
Scripture,  to  get  some  fresh  light  upon  one  of  the  offices  of  the  Eedeemer,  to  see 
a  precious  type  stand  out  with  a  fresh  meaning,  to  get  to  know  Him  and  the  power 
of  His.  resurrection  experimentally ;  oh !  this  is  happiness.  8.  Another  door  of 
heaven  may  be  found  in  the  sweets  of  victory.  I  mean  not  the  world's  victory, 
where  there  are  garments  rolled  in  blood,  but  I  refer  to  victory  over  sin,  self,  and 
Satan.  HI.  A  door  of  entrance.  Christian,  the  message  will  soon  come  to  thee, 
"  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee."  Soon,  I  say,  that  door  will  open  ; 
surely  you  do  not  want  to  postpone  the  day.  What  is  there  amiss  between  you  and 
your  Husband  that  you  wish  to  tarry  away  from  Him  ?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  door 
in  heaven: — I.  The  nearness  op  the  heavenly  world.  We  are  at  its  "door." 
Heaven  is  simply  that  which  is  heaved  up.  An  uplifted  life.  We  are  always  on 
the  threshold  of  the  pure,  the  noble,  the  blessed.  H.  The  possible  revelation  op 
HEAVEN.  It  is  not  merely  near  and  closed  against  us.  It  is  near,  and  may  be 
known.  A  door  into  it  may  be  opened.  1.  The  Bible  is  such  a  door.  2.  The  death 
of  good  men  is  such  a  door.  3.  The  life  of  Christ  is  such  a  door.  4.  Our  own  best 
experience  is  such  a  door.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Heaven  near,  though  hidden  : — 
This  passage  derives  intense  interest  from  its  position  as  well  as  from  its  terms ;  for 
it  occurs  at  the  close  of  one  group  of  scenes  and  at  the  beginning  of  another.  My 
text,  then,  forms  the  transition  between  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  pictures. 
There  is  something  striking,  surely,  in  this  sudden  contrast,  for  the  former  chapters 
contain  the  most  emphatic  references  to  this  present  life  of  conflict  and  of  sadness. 
They  speak  to  those  whose  dwelling  is  "  where  Satan's  seat  is  " ;  they  speak  of  their 
labour  and  their  patience,  their  tribulation  and  their  poverty.  "  Watch,  repent, 
hold  fast,  overcome,"  are  the  solemn,  stirring  words  urged  repeatedly  on  those 
addressed.  How  well  we  can  understand  their  position,  for  it  is  our  own !  In- 
structed by  the  glorified  Son  of  Man,  the  apostle  saw  and  wrote  those  things.  But 
"  after  this,"  he  says,  "  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  door  was  opened  in  heaven,"  and 
through  that  open  door  he  saw  a  sight  how  different.  In  place  of  the  strife  and 
tears  and  guilty  stains  which  he  saw  before  there  was  perfect  splendour,  sanctity, 
and  bliss.  He  saw  God's  throne  with  its  rainbow  emblem  of  mercy,  &g.  How 
complete  the  contrast  between  that  world  above  and  this  world  below,  described 
before.  I  propose  now  to  regard  this  transition  passage  as  suggesting  some  relations 
between  these  two  separated  worlds.  I.  The  division  between  earth  and  heaven. 
1.  The  fact  that  heaven  and  earth  are  divided  by  so  wide  a  gulf  seems  to  me  one 
of  the  strangest  facts  in  our  experience,  though  long  habit  prevents  the  strangeness 
from  striking  us  so  much.  We  should  have  expected  the  very  opposite.  Com- 
paratively few  cross  the  Atlantic  to  America,  yet,  though  we  may  never  see  it,  we 
require  no  act  of  faith  to  realise  its  existence  and  condition.  But  the  world  of 
heaven  is  so  far  removed  beyond  the  range  of  our  knowledge  that  we  have  need  of 
faith  to  be  convinced  even  that  it  exists.  The  material  universe  has  been  called 
the  garment  of  God,  and  so  far  it  reveals  Him  ;  but  it  hides  Him  too.  Little  can 
be  said  in  explanation  of  our  exclusion  from  all  direct  knowledge  of  the  unseen 
•world  and  God  ;  but  that  little  springs  out  of  the  very  things  which  make  it  strange. 
If  heaven  were  not  invisible,  if  God  sometimes  appeared,  the  chief  trial  of  our  pre- 
sent life  would  be  removed,  and  we  should  have  perfect  assurance  instead  of  waver- 
ing faith.  Our  life,  in  fact,  would  cease  to  be  the  discipline  which  it  is  at  present. 
His  wisdom  appoints  that  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight ;  no  wonder,  then,  that  all 
the  arrangements  of  our  life  are  in  keeping  with  this  purpose.  Moreover,  to  this 
separation  of  earth  from  heaven  we  may  observe  several  analogies,  e.g.,  as  a  thought- 
ful writer  has  pointed  out,  the  material  universe  might  have  been  one  great  plain 
allowing  of  the  freest  intercourse  between  its  countless  inhabitants,  instead  of  which 
it  is  broken  up  into  myriads  of  globes,  divided  from  each  other  by  abysses  of  space 
impassable  to  those  who  inhabit  them.  We  are  separated  from  the  dwellers  in 
Jupiter  or  Sirius  (if  such  there  are)  as  completely  as  we  are  separated  from  the 
dwellers  in  heaven.  And  note  how  the  same  policy  is  carried  out  even  on  earth. 
Two-thirds  of  the  surface  of  our  globe  is  water ;  vast  oceans  separate  us  from  the 
inhabitants  of  America  or  Japan  almost  as  entirely  as  if  they  lived  on  another 
planet.  Nay,  the  majority  of  even  English  people  are  and  will  remain  perfect 
strangers  to  us.  Moreover,  the  periods  of  time  contribute  to  this  end  as  well  as  the 
expanse  of  space,  for  how  entirely  we  are  cut  off  from  intercourse  with  those  who 
lived  in  the  past,  and  we  are  still  more  completely  divided  from  future  generations, 
and  we  come  into  contact  with  only  a  few  of  the  people  who  are  now  living.    Now 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i v. 

these  facts  show  that  it  is  God's  will  to  break  up  His  vast  family  into  little  groups, 
in  order,  perhaps,  that  each  individual  may,  in  comparative  seclusion,  be  tried  by 
the  mystery  of  existence,  instead  of  finding  many  of  its  problems  solved  by  the 
combined  experiences  of  all.  All  this  is  in  keeping  with  the  strange  division 
between  heaven  and  earth.  II.  The  connection  between  earth  and  heaven.  One 
point  of  connection  between  the  two,  which  at  least  helps  to  make  heaven  seem 
nearer  to  us,  is  that  life  in  heaven,  just  as  much  as  our  life  here,  is  proceeding  now. 
We  cannot  see,  indeed,  that  bright  and  holy  world  for  which  we  yearn,  as  we  should 
like  to  do,  but  there  are  those  who  do  see  it,  who  do  enjoy  it  now.  Their  bhss  is 
a  present  feeling  arising  from  the  presence  of  God  now.  Their  endless  life  runs 
along  a  parallel  course  to  our  transient  life.  The  present,  which  we  call  time,  they 
call  eternity.  We  cannot  see  them  or  hear  of  them,  for  there  is  a  great  division 
between  earth  and  heaven,  but  there  is  a  real  connection,  too,  since  those  we  love 
are  present  with  the  Lord,  and  are  now  receiving  and  returning  the  love  of  Christ, 
whom  they  "  see  as  He  is."  But  there  is  a  deeper  lying  connection  between  the  two 
than  this.  We  mourn  over  God's  absence  from  our  earth,  but  what  would  earth  be 
without  Him  ?  *'  In  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  And  the  angels 
from  whom  we  are  so  divided,  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to 
minister  to  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation?  "  So  far  from  being  independent 
of  and  forgotten  by  God,  it  is  true  rather  that  all  we  see  and  all  we  are  was  made 
and  is  upheld  by  God's  ever  present  power,  and  the  ministrations  of  His  angels. 
And  if  nature's  laws  are  God's  will,  it  may  be  said  also  that  human  history  is  the 
evolution  of  His  providence.  Individuals  and  nations,  with  all  their  wild  and  reck- 
less freedom,  do  but  accomplish  what  God's  hand  and  God's  counsel  determined 
before  to  be  done.  We  may  trace  this  on  the  large  scale  when  we  note,  in  the  Bible 
history,  how  God's  purposes  have  been  wrought  out  by  men,  though  we  often  cannot 
trace  it  in  the  narrow  region  of  our  own  observations.  But  if  God  is  present  in  the 
great,  we  may  be  sure  He  is  present  in  the  little,  of  which  the  great  is  made  up. 
In  history  and  in  nature,  too,  we  see  effects,  an  endless  tangled  chain  of  them,  but 
causes  we  do  not  see  and  cannot  find  out.  Causes,  forces,  are  beyond  our  reach,  for 
there  is  a  great  division  between  earth  and  heaven.  Ours  is  a  God  who  hides  Him- 
self. But  as  we  must  believe  that  without  these  indiscoverable  forces  the  universe 
would  cease  to  be,  so  we  believe  that  all  depends  upon  the  unseen  God.  Earth  and 
heaven,  then,  are  divided  by  a  gulf  we  cannot  pass,  but  the  connection  between  the 
two  is  nothing  short  of  complete  dependence.  III.  The  door  is  set  open  between 
earth  and  heaven.  The  division  is  maintained  between  the  two  in  order  that  our 
discipline  may  not  cease.  But  sometimes  the  door  is  opened  that  our  faith  may  not 
fail.  That  has  happened  "  at  those  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners  when  God 
spake  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets."  And  in  later  days  there  was  a  still  more 
wonderful  exception.  The  door  was  opened  wider,  and,  attended  by  a  train  of 
angels  singing  "  glory  in  the  highest,"  the  Son  of  God  passed  through,  and  dwelt 
among  us,  and  men  beheld  His  glory.  And  whenever  a  Christian  pilgrim  reaches 
his  journey's  end,  then,  too,  it  may  be  said  that  the  door  between  earth  and  heaven 
is  set  open  to  let  the  wanderer  pass  into  his  home.  How  close,  then,  heaven  is  to 
earth  in  spite  of  the  separation,  for  at  any  moment  the  transit  may  be  made.  In 
yet  another  sense  we  may  say  that  to  us  on  earth  a  door  is  opened  in  heaven,  and 
that  is  when  we  worship.  The  prayers  and  praises  to  which  we  give  utterance  on 
earth  pass  that  strange  division  between  earth  and  heaven  which  we  cannot  cross, 
and  mingle  with  the  nobler  worship  of  the  temple  above,  making  us  one  with  friends 
already  there.  (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  The  heavenly  vision  of  the  soul : — I.  The 
souii  has  t.ie  ability  to  perceive  heavenly  visions.  1.  Man  has  the  ability  to  look 
into  the  world  around  him — in  nature,  in  society,  in  the  nation.  2.  Man  has  the 
abiUty  to  look  into  the  world  within  him.  It  would  be  well  for  the  moral  life  of 
men  if  they  would  enter  more  frequently  into  the  chamber  of  the  heart,  and  inspect 
the  sentiments  and  energies  reigning  there.  3.  Man  has  the  ability  to  look  into  the 
world  above  him.  This  is  his  noblest  ability.  It  brings  into  requisition  the  keen 
eye  of  a  Divinely-enlightened  soul.  This  vision  is  sublime,  captivating,  inspiring, 
elevating.  II.  The  soul  has  the  opportunity  to  perceive  heavenly  visions.  God 
allows  man  to  gaze  into  the  mysteries  of  the  life  above.  Kings  do  not  often  give 
men  free  access  to  their  presence-chamber.  Here  we  see  the  love  of  God,  in  that 
He  reveals  the  unseen  to  the  race ;  His  wisdom  in  that  He  casts  a  little  light  upon 
the  problems  of  futurity.  This  opportunity  is  the  most  frequently  given :  1.  To 
men  in  lonely  sorrow  (Kev.  i.  9,  Ezek.  i.  1).  Men  can  see  a  long  way  through  tears. 
2.  To  men  in  humble  duty  (Matt.  iii.  16).     3.   To  men  in  dying  circumstances 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  277 

(Acts  vii.  55).  III.  The  souii  is  called  by  many  voices  to  kise  to  heavenly 
VISION.  1.  It  is  called  by  the  voice  of  God  as  heard  in  Scripture ;  by  the  voice  of 
Christ,  whose  earthly  life  was  one  continued  gaze  into  heaven  ;  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  purifies  the  life  of  the  soul  that  it  may  be  capable  of  celestial  vision.  2.  The 
Boul  must  ascend  to  heavenly  vision.  Elevated  above  flesh,  above  the  world,  above 
reason,  even  to  faith.  IV.  The  soul  obtains  its  truest  knowledge  of  future 
DESTINIES  from  ITS  HEAVENLY  VISION.  1.  From  the  heavenly  vision  men  learn  that 
all  human  events  are  under  the  wise  providence  of  God.  2.  From  the  heavenly 
vision  men  learn  wisely  to  estimate  the  passing  events  of  life.  3.  From  the  heavenly 
vision  men  learn  calmly  to  wait  the  destinies  of  the  future.  Lessons :  (1)  Learn  in 
all  things  to  look  heavenward.  (2)  Seek  to  rise  morally  to  the  level  of  heavenly 
vision.  (3)  Learn  to  read  history  in  the  light  of  clear  prophecy.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Heaven  near  : — 1.  The  reality  of  a  heavenly  world,  and  of  its  concern  and  connec- 
tion with  this.  That  world  has  its  inhabitants,  its  plans  and  its  purposes,  its  pre- 
sences and  its  agencies,  even  like  this.  The  subjects  of  its  chief  deliberations  are 
the  interests  and  the  fortunes,  the  events  and  the  destinies,  of  this  lower  world.  2. 
What  an  astonishment  would  it  be  to  any  one  of  us,  to  see  that  door  into  heaven 
suddenly  opened !  Oh,  what  a  marvel,  what  a  confusion,  what  a  discomfiture,  must 
it  be  to  a  worldly  man  or  to  a  sinner  to  find  at  the  moment  of  death  that  this  thing 
which  we  have  so  long  seen  \nd  handled,  in  which  we  have  so  long  lived  and 
moved,  was  not,  after  all,  the  whole  or  the  chief  part  of  that  which  is !  3.  To 
Christian  persons,  to  those,  that  is,  who  mourn  for  sin,  and  renounce  and  forsake 
it,  and  trust  in  Christ  only,  and  pray  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  them 
and  keep  them  His,  it  ought  to  be  and  will  be  a  real  comfort  to  remember  that  just 
inside  that  door  there  is  a  heaven,  and  a  throne  set,  and  a  God  seated  thereon,  and 
a  holy  and  loving  council  gathered,  and  plans  under  preparation  for  purposes  of 
good  to  the  poor  struggling  and  suffering  people  below  ;  and  that  round  the  throne 
is  the  covenant  bow,  promising  evermore  a  clear  shining  after  rain,  and  pledging 
the  very  faithfulness  of  God  to  their  final  rescue  and  deliverance.  4.  Life  and 
death,  things  present  as  well  as  things  to  come,  accident  and  disease,  want  and  age ; 
yes,  things  more  outward  still,  the  bread  and  the  water,  the  fire  and  the  covering, 
the  judgments  of  sword  and  famine  and  pestilence,  the  mercies  of  dew  and  rain  and 
fruitful  seasons  ;  all  are  God's,  all  are  Christ's ;  and  if  God's,  if  Christ's,  then  the 
Christian's  too  (1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23).  Oh,  what  an  antidote  to  life's  cares,  for  those 
who  can  use  it !  It  springs  from  the  fact  that  creation  itself,  in  all  its  parts, 
rational  and  irrational,  has  its  representatives  before  the  throne  in  heaven,  and 
ascribes  the  glory,  the  honour,  and  the  strength  to  Him  who  sits  upon  the  throne. 

5.  But  if  the  thought  of  the  four  living  beings  which  typify  creation  has  something 
of  comfort  for  us  in  reference  to  the  world  above,  how  much  more  that  of  men  of 
our  own  flesh  and  likeness,  who  are  already  clad  in  the  robes  of  priesthood, 
and  admitted  to  the  sight  of  God  and  to  the  ministrations  of  the  heavenly 
temple  1      That  world  is   not   all  peopled   with  strange    and    unknown    forma. 

6.  Are  our  faces  and  our  feet  set  heavenwards  ?  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Heavenxcard : 
—  1.  After  the  first  vision,  John  gets  a  second,  which  shows  that  God 
continues  and  multiplies  His  favours  on  the  godly,  who  make  a  good  use  thereof, 
and  are  desirous  of  more.  2.  He  looked,  and  was  not  disappointed ;  neither  shall 
any  be  who  looks  up  to  God  for  grace,  or  growth  of  heavenly  knowledge.  3.  He 
could  not  see  till  a  door  was  open  to  him ;  neither  will  we  ever  see  heavenly 
mysteries  till  the  Lord  opens  the  door  of  our  mind  and  heart  (Luke  xxiv.  45 ;  Acts 
xvi.  14).  4.  This  and  the  other  visions  were  seen  in  heaven ;  which  shows  that 
all  that  falls  out  on  earth  is  first  decreed  in  heaven,  and  the  future  to  us  is  ever 
present  to  God.  5.  The  first  voice  that  talked  with  John  was  as  a  trumpet ;  and  so 
is  the  trumpet  of  the  law  the  first  voice  that  talks  with  a  sinner  for  his  conversion 
(Isa.  Iviii.  1).  6.  John  is  bidden  come  up  thither;  to  show  that  the  knowledge  of 
heavenly  things  requires  a  heavenly  and  elevated  mind.  7.  This  also  shows  that 
we  should  have  God's  warrant  for  all  our  doings,  and  be  bidden  do  what  we  do. 
8.  God  only  is  able  to  foretell  all  future  things,  because  He  is  omniscient,  and 
determines  the  event  thereof,  which  is  a  great  comfort  to  His  own  elect ;  there- 
fore it  is  said  here,  "  I  will  show  thee,"  &c.  9.  This  also  is  for  their  warning,  that 
trials  and  troubles  must  be ;  and  also  for  the  comfort,  that  their  delivery  must  be, 
and  shall  be  in  like  manner.     {Wm.  Guild,  D.D.)        The  vision  of  the  throne  : — 

I.    The  TIME,  AND  MANNER,  IN  WHICH  THIS  SECOND  VISION  WAS  GIVEN  TO  JoHN.       1.    The 

time.  "  After  this  I  looked."  He  looks  up  for  a  vision.  He  is  prepared  and 
looking  for  a  further  revelation.    Those  who  have  seen  heavenly  things  once  will 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

look  twice.  Oh,  how  much  nearer  than  we  commonly  imagine,  faith  borders  upon 
sight,  and  the  spiritual  upon  the  heavenly  state !  2.  The  manner  in  which  the 
vision  was  brought  under  the  notice  of  John.  (1)  He  saw  a  door  open  in  heaven. 
He  says  not  an  open  door  merely,  but  a  door  that  had  been  opened.  It  had  not 
been  always  open.  It  had  been  once  closed.  A  door  opened  in  heaven  signified 
to  John  that  more  of  the  counsels  of  heaven  were  about  to  be  revealed.  The 
door  of  the  Church  was  closed  against  him,  the  door  of  ministerial  usefulness 
was  closed,  the  door  of  liberty,  and  every  door  of  human  hospitality,  but  a 
door  was  opened  in  heaven.  In  proportion  as  the  people  of  God  are  precluded 
from  the  world,  they  have  intercourse  with  heaven.  They  find  readiness  of 
access  above,  when  hemmed  in  around ;  as  water  pressed  on  all  sides  rises 
in  a  fountain.  To  Isaiah  visions  were  given  in  affliction,  to  Jeremiah  in  prison, 
to  Ezekiel  in  captivity,  to  John  in  exile.  This  appearance  to  John  may  have 
been  emblematical,  in  some  degree,  of  renewed  supplies  of  the  Spirit  of 
prophecy.  In  allusion  to  the  manna  which  descended  round  the  camp  of  the 
Israelites,  God  is  said  to  have  "  opened  the  doors  of  heaven."  In  Malachi  you 
have  these  words  :  "  Prove  Me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  if  I  will  not 
open  you  the  windows  of  heaven  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing."  Compare  this  with 
"  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Spirit  descending  "  upon  Christ  at  His  baptism,  and 
the  descent  of  the  Spirit  upon  the  apostles  and  the  primitive  Churches.  (2)  John 
informs  us  of  what  he  heard.  The  tones  of  this  voice  were  encouraging  to  John, 
and  expressive  at  once  of  its  design.  (3)  John  tells  us  what  he  felt  on  this  occasion. 
Heaven  is  first  opened  by  God  to  sinful  man.  It  is  opened  by  His  mercy,  not  by 
our  prayers.  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us.  Having  opened  a  door  He 
invites  us  to  come,  and  promises  rich  manifestations  of  His  wisdom  and  grace  to 
our  souls.  But  how  can  we  come  to  Him  ?  How  rise  to  the  door  of  heaven  ?  By 
the  power  that  invites  us.  The  invitation  guarantees  the  ability  to  act,  and  the 
promise  ensures  success.  H.  The  ferst  two  objects  in  this  vision.  (G.  Rogers.) 
The  vision  of  the  throne  : — I.  The  opening  op  the  scene.  H.  The  Divinb 
THRONE.  1.  The  nature  of  the  throne.  There  is  a  manifold  throne  attributed 
to  God;  there  is  a  throne  of  grace  and  mercy,  of  glory  and  majesty,  of 
dominion  and  sovereignty.  2.  The  properties  of  the  throne.  These  are  great 
and  manifold.  It  is  a  throne  high  and  lifted  up ;  it  is  Divine,  supreme,  and 
universal ;  it  is  infinite,  eternal,  and  immutable ;  it  is  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting ;  it  is  eternal  in  its  date,  and  endless  in  duration ;  it  has  neither  beginning 
nor  end,  succession  nor  change.  3.  The  position  of  the  throne.  It  is  *'  set  in 
heaven."  The  throne  of  judgment,  the  great  white  throne,  is  placed  in  the  clouds; 
the  throne  of  grace  is  erected  in  the  Church ;  the  throne  of  glory  is  placed  within 
the  vail ;  the  throne  of  the  universe  is  placed  in  the  heavens  (Isa.  Ixvi.  1).  4.  The 
stability  of  the  throne.  It  is  "  established  in  the  heavens."  It  is  ordered  and 
arranged,  guarded  and  disposed  by  infinite  wisdom  and  unerring  skill.  It  is 
firmly  fixed,  stable,  and  immutable.  IH.  The  possessor  of  the  throne:  "One 
sat  upon  the  throne."  He  sits  on  the  throne,  in  a  state  of  deep  repose,  undisturbed 
felicity,  and  eternal  blessedness.  IV.  The  majesty  of  the  throne.  This  is  repre- 
sented by  two  sacred  emblems — sitting  and  similitude.  He  sat  upon  the  throne, 
and  He  was  to  look  upon  like  three  sacred  stones.  1.  Here  we  behold  the  fulness 
of  the  Divine  perfections.  He  is  possessed  of  infinite,  eternal,  and  immutable 
excellence — He  is  the  source,  the  centre,  and  the  sum  of  all  worth  and  glory.  2. 
Here  we  behold  the  variety  of  Divine  perfections :  "  I  am  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God, 
merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,"  <fec.  3.  Here  we  behold  the  unity  of  Divine 
perfection.  All  these  perfections  are  displayed  in  Immanuel,  who  is  the  image  of 
the  invisible  God.  V.  The  mercy  of  the  throne.  1.  The  history  of  the  rainbow 
is  very  remarkable.  We  first  find  it  in  the  clouds  ;  then  established  in  the  heavens, 
as  the  faithful  witness  of  God's  eternal  truth  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  39).  It  forms  the 
glorious  diadem  of  the  angel  of  the  covenant  (Rev.  x.  1.) ;  and  in  the  verse  before  us 
it  forms  the  gracious  canopy  of  God  the  Father's  throne.  2.  The  rainbow  round 
the  throne  was  the  blessed  symbol  of  God's  glory  and  perfections  ;  it  was  the  token 
of  His  love,  the  emblem  of  His  mercy,  and  the  pledge  of  His  faithfulness.  His 
counsel  and  His  covenant.  3.  The  position  of  the  rainbow :  "  The  rainbow  was 
round  about  the  throne."  It  surrounds  the  seat  of  Divine  majesty,  above,  below, 
and  on  every  side.  The  majesty  of  Deity,  the  glories  of  the  Godhead,  and  the 
splendours  of  the  Trinity  all  beam  benignantly  through  the  rainbow  of  the  covenant. 
4.  The  likeness  of  the  rainbow:  "  It  was  in  sight  like  unto  an  emerald."  Amid 
the  varied  hues  blended  in  the  rainbow,  green  is  the  prevailing ;  and  the  colour  of| 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  279 

the  emerald  is  a  deep,  living  green.  (1)  The  comparison  implies  the  beauty 
of  the  covenant.  God  beholds  His  people  enrobed  in  all  the  beauties  of  the 
rainbow,  and  the  deep,  living  loveliness  of  the  glowing  emerald.  (2)  It  also 
implies  the  riches  of  the  covenant.  (3)  It  likewise  supposes  the  perpetuity  of  the 
covenant.  The  rainbow,  like  the  emerald,  is  ever  fresh  and  green.  (4)  The  com- 
parison teaches  the  unity  and  variety  of  the  blessings  of  the  covenant.  VI.  Thb 
ATTENDANTS  ON  THE  THRONE.  1.  Their  uames.  They  are  called  "  elders."  This  is 
the  sign  of  their  age,  their  honourable  oflSce,  and  dignified  condition  ;  their  wisdom, 
experience,  and  venerable  character.  2.  The  number  of  the  elders :  •'  They  are 
four  and  twenty."  There  is  an  enlargement  of  the  Church  implied  in  the  number. 
He  was  then  the  God  of  Israel,  but  He  is  now  the  God  of  the  whole  earth.  3.  Their 
posture  and  position  :  "  There  were  four  and  twenty  seats."  The  saints  sometimes 
stand;  but  here  the  elders  sit,  the  emblem  of  dignity  and  undisturbed  felicity, 
dominion  and  authority,  rest  and  holy  happiness,  and  their  great  reward.  4.  Their 
glorious  clothing:  "They  were  clothed  in  white  raiment."  White  robes  are 
beautiful,  they  are  Zion's  loveliest  garments — white  robes  are  excellent,  they  form 
the  best  robe — white  raiment  is  resplendent,  it  is  both  white  and  shining.  5.  Their 
golden  crowns :  "  They  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold."  VH.  The  terrors 
OP  the  throne.  (Jas.  Young.)  The  first  voice  ...  as  it  were  of  a  trumpet. — 
Trumpet  voices  talking  with  us  : — ^I.  Revelations  are  made  to  us  of  great  and  solemn 
realities.  What  a  world  this  would  be  if  there  were  no  voices  from  heaven,  no 
Divine  utterances,  no  spiritual  revelations,  to  meet  our  needs  and  our  questionings ! 
We  have  a  gospel  not  of  figures  but  of  facts,  a  gospel  symbolised  by  the  priest 
blowing  the  trumpet  over  the  sacrifice,  by  the  blast  of  the  trumpet  through  the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  land,  ushering  in  the  year  of  jubilee,  by  the  great  trumpet 
which  was  blown,  that  men  in  exile  and  ready  to  perish  might  return  to  their  own 
land.  n.  The  revelations  made  to  us  are  present  and  personal.  We  hear  a 
voice  talking  with  us  (Heb.  i.  1,  2).  The  voice  of  Christ  is  reproduced  in  every 
believing  and  loving  heart.  His  words  do  not  die,  they  are  still  spirit  and  life. 
Revelation  is  not  a  dead,  imprisoned  truth,  but  a  living  fountain,  the  streams  are 
as  bright  and  pure  as  they  were  yesterday.  III.  The  revelations  to  which  we 
listen  are  often  trumpet-toned.  Those  voices  have  been  trumpet-toned  that  have 
uttered  great  truths  in  this  world ;  truths  that  yet  live  in  it,  speak  in  it,  rule  in  it. 
Those  voices  have  been  trumpet-toned  that  have  uttered  the  watchwords  of  liberty, 
that  have  raised  the  war-cry  round  which  men  have  rallied,  and  which  have  stirred 
their  souls  like  the  blast  of  a  trumpet.  The  voices  that  come  to  us  in  revelation  are 
trumpet-toned,  in  their  earnestness,  in  their  importance.  In  our  personal  history 
there  have  been  dispensations  of  Providence,  that  have  been  "  as  the  voice  of  a 
trumpet  talking  with  us."  How  clear  and  distinct  the  voice  that  came  to  us  in  the 
season  of  sickness,  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  when  death  entered  our  home,  <feo. 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  find  it  true,  that  the  "  first  voice  "  we  hear  is  "  as  of  a 
trumpet  talking  with  us."  We  hear  the  awful  words  of  the  Divine  law  in  the 
depths  of  our  souls,  and  are  convinced  of  our  sinfulness  and  become  conscious  of 
our  unrighteousness.  IV.  These  revelations  conduce  to  our  spiritualitt. 
♦'  Immediately  I  was  in  the  Spirit."  A  man  must  be  in  the  Spirit  to  see  the  glory 
that  streams  through  the  opened  door  in  heaven,  to  see  the  throne  and  Him  that 
sits  on  it,  to  see  the  sign  of  the  covenant  of  peace,  &c.  If  the  windows  of  our 
hearts  are  opened  towards  Jerusalem,  we  shall  sometimes  see  the  light  and  glory  of 
that  golden  city.  The  design  of  the  sanctuary,  of  the  Sabbath,  of  ordinances  and 
sacraments,  is  our  spirituality.  {H.  J.  Bevis.)  Come  up  hither. — An  invitation 
to  glory  : — I.  The  place  to  which  we  are  invited — "  hither."  Geographers, 
geologists,  and  travellers  have  described  the  earth,  its  islands,  continents,  mountains, 
rivers,  plains,  and  products ;  but  heaven  is  a  domain  beyond  all  merely  scientific 
research.  What  we  know  of  it  is  from  revelation  alone.  1.  It  will  be  a  place  exempt 
from  ignorance.  Seated  there,  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known ;  our  views  of  things 
will  not  be  as  "  through  a  glass,  darkly,"  "  but  face  to  face,"  and  in  the  highest 
sense  we  shall  "  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  know  all  things.  2.  It 
will  be  free  from  all  kinds  of  evil.  (1)  No  slavery  will  be  there.  All  its  sons,  of 
whatever  clime,  are  freeborn.  All  are  without  shackle,  brand,  or  chain.  All  walk 
at  liberty.  (2)  No  sin  wiU  be  there.  The  imagination  will  never  conceive  an 
unholy  thought,  the  lips  never  utter  a  corrupt  speech,  nor  the  judgment,  the 
conscience,  the  will  stoop  to  an  unholy  action.  (3)  No  famine  will  be  there.  The 
bread  is  enough  and  to  spare.  The  supply  of  fruit  from  the  tree  of  life  is  constant 
and  abundant.    (4)  No  tears,  sorrows,  pains,  or  death  will  be  there.    3.  Then  there 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

is  nothing  wanting  to  complete  its  happiness.     (1)  There  are  great  possessions. 

(2)  The  society  there  is  most  blessed.     (3)  The  joys  there  are  lasting.     (4)  The  life 

there  is  everlasting.     II.  The  invitation  itself — "  come  up  hitheb."     1.  There  is 

a  way  to  reach  this  place.     (1)  What  road  to  heaven  is  wrong?     (a)  Sin  is  the 

wrong  road.     (6)  Self -righteousness  is  the  wrong  road.     (2)  What  road  is  right  ? 

In  Virginia,  in  South  America,  and  other  parts,  there  are  natural  bridges  of  solid 

rock,  whose  stupendous  arches  join  mountains  together,  and  make  a  path  firm  and 

safe  over  the  rolling  rivers  and  dashing  torrents  beneath  them.    But  there  is  no 

natural  bridge  to  heaven.     There  was  once,  but  man  broke  it  down  by  sin.    But 

there  is  still  a  path  for  man,  formed  by  the  Son  of  God — a  path  formed  by  His 

blood  and  righteousness.    Along  this  path  our  pious  fathers  travelled  and  never 

found  it  give  way,  nor  shall  we.    It  is  the  path  that  leads  from  guilt  to  mercy, 

depravity  to  holiness,  earth  to  glory.     2.  Then  the  invitation  also  implies  you 

cannot  reach  the  place  unless  it  be  obeyed.    Heaven  in  the  gospel  is  set  before 

men  as  an  open  door.    It  is  not  Christ  that  closes  it,  but  unbelief.     Let  this  be 

gone.     (S.   Fisher.)        Element  of  the  ideal : — The  standpoint  from  which  God 

views  everything  is  vastly  different  from  that  which  men  commonly  regard  as  their 

standpoint.     God  is  for  quality,  clearness  of  vision  and  fundamental  principles ; 

man  too  often  for  mere  quantity,  haphazard  vision,  superficial  estimates.     God  is 

ever  seeking  to  draw  man  up  to  His  level,  man  thinks  to  reduce  the  things  of  God 

to  his  convenient  level,  from  which  he  hopes,  without  much  trouble,  or  even 

thinking,  to  form  some  opinion  or  gain  some  knowledge  of  that  which,  in  the 

deeper  moments  of  his  nature,  he  knows  to  be  of  vital  and  eternal  importance. 

The  higher  the  standards  are  the  more  must  energy  strive  to  reach  them.     It  is  a 

vastly  different  thing  to  brave  the  Matterhorn  or  Mont  Blanc,  or  those  gigantic 

mountains  which  rear  their  heads  heavenward  and  lose  their  summits  in  the 

clouds.     Climbing  them  means  the  hardest  kind  of  toil  and  steadfast  courage. 

Our  standards  determine  the  height  of  our  aspirations,  our  aspirations  press  us  on 

in  the  climbing  and  furnish  the  impetus  to  the  outreach  of  our  faith  and  courage, 

but  they  must  be  fed  by  God,  who  leads  us  to  His  own  standard  and  bids  us  look  up 

and  beyond,  even  beyond  the  material,  into  the  realms  of  the  spiritual,  with  a  faith 

that  does  not  shrink  from  the  lessons  such  leadings  bring.     The  question  of 

questions  is.  Do  we  see,  do  we  behold  these  high  level  truths  of  God  ?  or  have  we 

so  little  interest  in  beholding  that  we  skim  them  over,  as  we  do  the  pages  of  a  book 

that  has  proved  uninteresting?    John  says,  "After  this  I  looked  and,  behold." 

God  can  never  do  anything  for  a  man  who  is  blind,  unless  open  his  eyes ;  but 

God  will  not  do  anything  for  a  man  who  wants  to  be  blind.    Looking  shows  desire. 

Beholding  suggests  power.    John  saw,  and  behold  a  door  was  opened  in  heaven  and 

the  first  voice  which  he  heard  was  as  it  were  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  him,  which 

said,  •'  Come  up  hither  and  I  will  show  thee  things  which  must  be  hereafter." 

That  seems  to  us  to  be  a  beautiful  but  exceptional  sight.      Picture  John's  lonely 

exile  life  on  Patmos.     There  did  not  seem  to  be  much  for  him  to  live  for,  shut  out 

and  away  from  the  busy  work  of  life,  and  perhaps  we  have  a  theory  that  God  was 

very  gracious  to  him  for  that  very  reason.    But  such  visions  always  come  to  souls 

that  can  see — long  to  see — and  needing  the  blessing  of  such  a  vision.    Whatever 

the  outward  life,  the  inner  life  is  the  condition  of  beholding.     Lives  need  to  be 

broadened  and  exalted.     Heaven  is  not  only  to  make  life  more  tolerable,  but  life  is 

to  determine  heaven.     The  vision  came  not  to  the  place,  but  the  soul,  and  was 

determined  not  by  the  meagreness  of  the  surrounding,  but  by  the  condition  of  the 

heart-life  of  him  who  beheld.     By  every  analysis  we  are  to  know,  then,  that  life  is 

not  in  itself  either  omnipotent,  or  satisfying,  or  self-sufficient,  nor  has  it  any  high 

standard,  nor  is  it  enough  to  be  merely  practical — doing  without  seeing,  deeds 

without  visions.     God  gives  us  to  see  what  we  are,  in  order  that  we  may  see  by 

the  aid  of  this  revelation  what  we  may  become.    Ignorance  is  simply  fatal  to  all 

progress  and  enlightenment.     "  And  immediately  I  was  in  the  spirit,"  John  says. 

The  thought  for  us  is  this :  the  power  that  exalts  life  is  of  God  and  comes  from 

above.    Look  above,  then,  though  you  walk  the  earth.     Open  your  heart  and  mind 

and  soul  to  the  unseen  realities  of  the  eternal.     Higher  and  higher  we  must  go  and 

grow,  like  the  vine  upon  the  trellis,  abiding  in  the  branch,  lifting  its  myriad  shoots 

towards  the  summer  shining  and  the  clear,  pure  air.     From  His  standpoint,  God 

will  give  us  to  see  what  must  be  hereafter.     Our  privilege  is  to  hear  God's  blessed 

invitation,  "  Come  up  hither,  higher,  to  higher  altitudes,  with  waiting,  expectant 

attitude."     God  help  us  to  break  the  spell  that  keeps  us  down ;  God  help  us  to 

unlock  the  bolts  that  shut  us  in  ;  God  help  us  to  fling  aside  the  shutters  that  keep 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  281 

us  in  the  dimness ;  God  help  us  to  be  as  free  as  His  truth  makes  us,  and  then, 
when  we  truly  behold,  how  beautiful  everything  will  grow.  Just  as  the  little  child, 
long  blind,  having  at  last  her  sight  restored,  said  to  her  mother,  as  she  looked  for 
the  first  time  upon  the  beauty  of  nature,  "  How  beautiful !  Why  didn't  you  tell  me 
how  beautiful  everything  was  1  "  The  element  of  the  ideal  must  occupy  a  large 
place  in  our  practical  life  if  we  are  to  grow  at  all  strong,  buoyant,  and  symmetrical. 
Visions  are  not  mere  air  castles.  Some  one  has  said,  **  All  men  who  have 
shown  our  race  how  great  things  are  possible  have  had  their  inspiration  in 
dreaming  of  the  impossible."  The  vision  changes  and  goes  on  changing, 
adapting  itself  to  our  need  and  our  life,  but  the  reality  always  remains^ 
Visions,  therefore,  are  the  wings  which  bear  us  upward  and  aloft.  You  do  not 
hav'C  to  teach  a  bird  how  to  fly.  The  soul,  saved  by  the  power  of  the 
Divine  Christ,  rises  because  it  can ;  it  ascends  because  it  has  within  it  the 
irresistible  yearning  to  do  so,  and  faith  and  hope  give  impetus.  This  is  the 
revelation  which  is  constantly  coming  to  your  life,  to  my  life.  God  help  us,  above 
all,  to  be  "  in  the  Spirit,"  as  in  meditative  quietness  of  life  we  steadfastly  watch  for 
and  behold  the  visions  that  come  to  us.  The  cross  and  visions  of  the  Christ  are 
the  inspiring  themes  of  the  Christian  life.  Life  is  truly  potent,  as  we  see  its  lines 
shaped  according  to  the  Cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  symbol  of  our  salvation  and 
the  standard  of  our  service.  Look  and  live,  then  live  and  look,  is  the  whole  of  the 
Christian  life.  Let  us  not  be  satisfied  with  plodding,  but  let  us  be  climbing. 
Let  our  lives  take  on  daily  newer  beauty,  the  beauty  of  holiness,  which  is  the 
adornment  of  righteousness.  (C.  E.  Eberman.)  Soul  elevation  : — Of  course  it 
was  not  the  bodily  senses  of  John  that  were  thus  addressed — not  the  body  that  was 
commanded  to  ascend.  His  outward  eye  saw  not  the  material  heavens  open. 
Elevation  of  soul,  then,  is  our  subject.  What  is  it?  First,  is  it  the  elevation  of 
sensuous  excitement  ?  The  souls  of  all  men  have  great  variation  of  mood.  Some- 
times they  are  buoyant  and  sometimes  sluggish.  Such  souls  often  soar  aloft  on 
the  pinions  of  an  excited  imagination,  but  in  their  own  fancy  they  indulge  in  a 
kind  of  spiritual  reverie,  and  find  a  heaven  for  the  hour  upon  the  mountain  heights 
of  their  own  creation.  But  this  is  not  what  we  mean  by  elevation  of  soul.  Secondly, 
is  it  elevation  of  intellect  ?  'Js  it  the  elevation  which  arises  from  study  and  culture  ? 
This  is  important,  this  is  essential  to  soul  elevation  ;  but  this  is  not  it.  Some  of 
the  greatest  and  most  cultured  intellects  have  often  been  found  in  alliance  with  souls 
deeply  sunk  in  passion,  depravity,  and  vice.  It  may  be  represented  as  consisting 
in  three  things :  1.  An  uplifting  sense  of  the  Divine  favour.  2.  An  uplifting  sense 
of  moral  right.  3.  An  uplifting  sense  of  the  spiritual  world.  I.  That  soul 
ELEVATION  IS  ATTAINABLE.  The  apostle  saw  "  a  door  open  in  heaven."  Christ  is 
this  "  door."  By  His  teaching.  His  death,  and  His  ascension,  He  has  opened  the 
new  and  living  way  for  man  into  the  "  holy  of  holies."  1.  He  is  the  exclusive 
door  for  man's  spiritual  elevation.  2.  He  is  the  door  for  man's  spiritual  elevation, 
and  man's  only.  3.  He  is  the  door  for  man's  spiritual  elevation  available  only  for 
him  on  earth.  U.  That  soul  elevation  is  obligatory.  "  Come  up  hither."  1. 
I  hear  this  Divine  command  sounding  in  the  starry  firmament.  The  great  universe 
is  the  domain  of  mind.  "  Come  up  hither,"  immortal  man,  wing  your  flight  from 
orb  to  orb,  system  to  system ;  count  our  multitudes,  mark  our  movements,  gauge 
our  dimensions,  bathe  in  our  brightness,  rise  beyond  us,  scale  the  wondrous  heavens 
still  far  away,  revel  in  the  Infinite,  be  lost  in  God  !  2.  I  hear  the  Divine  command 
soimding  through  the  biography  of  the  sainted  dead.  Our  nature  speaks  from 
heaven.  There  are  the  voices  of  the  goodly  fellowship  of  prophets  and  apostles,  of 
the  glorious  army  of  martyrs  and  confessors,  <fec.  There  are  the  voices  of  our 
favourite  authors,  the  sacted  poet,  the  holy  sage  and  the  learned  divine.  3.  I  hear 
this  Divine  command  sounding  through  the  gospel  of  Christ.  4.  I  hear  this 
Divine  command  sounding  in  the  depths  of  our  higher  nature.  Eeason  and 
conscience  unite  in  urging  us  to  ascend,  &c.  HI.  That  soul  elevation  is 
desirable.  1.  Man's  happiness  is  greatly  dependent  upon  bright  prospects  of  the 
future.  2.  Those  bright  prospects  are  secured  by  soul  elevation.  {Homilist.) 
The  upward  call : — Suppose  that  I  had  gone  away  from  here  for  years,  and  came 
back  to  find  my  daughter  living  in  some  low,  obscure  place,  bound  out  to  hard 
labour.  Suppose  my  son  were  in  another  place,  half-clothed,  half-fed,  and 
suffering  all  manner  of  ill-treatment.  And  thus  with  all  my  children.  What 
should  I  be  likely  to  do  ?  Should  I  not  at  once  set  about  lifting  them  out  of  such 
situations,  and  getting  them  up  where  I  was?  I  should  say  to  them,  "  Come  up, 
my  children ;  you  were  not  born  to  hve  down  there.    Your  place  is  where  I  am. 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Come  up  here  to  me;  here  is  where  you  belong."  Well,  this  is  what  God  is  doing 
to  men.  He  has  a  few,  a  very  few,  children  living  in  the  high  places  of  spiritual 
life — those  regions  of  hope  and  love  where  He  Himself  dwells.  "  Come  up  hither — 
come  up  into  the  region  of  warmth  and  love,  where  your  Father  dwells.  You  were  not 
made  to  live  down  there.  This  is  where  you  belong.  Come  up  hither."  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Heaven  our  home  : — It  is  said  of  Anaxagoras,  the  philosopher,  that 
one  night  when  in  the  act  of  studying  the  stars,  his  countrymen  came  to  confer 
upon  him  an  inheritance,  in  token  of  their  appreciation  of  his  genius.  His  reply 
was,  "  I  wish  it  not — these  heavens  are  my  country."  Can  we  say  the  same  in  a 
gander,  Diviner  sense  ? 

Ters.  2-5.  A  throne  was  set  In  heaven. — The  majestic  government  of  the  great 
God  : — I.  The  majestic  government  of  the  great  God  has  heaven  fob  the 
CHIEF  SCENE  OF  ITS  ADMINISTRATION.  1.  When  a  good  man  is  privileged  to  look 
into  heaven,  the  first  thing  that  attracts  his  attention  is  the  majestic  government  of 
God.  2.  Earth  cloes  not  contain  the  supreme  power  of  law,  but  is  under  the  govern- 
ment of  heaven.  3.  The  government  of  God  is  in  sublime  contrast  to  that  which 
obtains  amongst  men.  (1)  Firm  in  stability.  (2)  Great  in  majesty.  (3)  Constant' 
in  exercise.  (4)  Calm  in  triumph.  II.  The  majestic  goaternment  of  the  great 
God  is  conducted  on  the  principles  of  purity,  equity,  and  mebcy.  1.  It  is 
pure  in  its  administration.  The  aim  of  His  rule  is  to  subdue  moral  evil,  and  to 
permeate  life  with  laws,  the  observance  of  which  will  sanctify  it.  This  cannot  be 
predicated  of  all  human  governments,  which  are  often  gained  by  the  sword,  and 
upheld  by  terror.  2.  It  is  righteous  in  its  administration.  Under  it  the  poor  and 
the  oppressed  may  take  welcome  refuge.  3.  It  is  merciful  in  its  administration. 
in.  The  majestic  government  of  the  great  God  is  approved  by  all  redeemed 
AND  glorified  INTELLIGENCES.  1.  In  exaltcd  station.  2.  In  peaceful  posture.  3. 
Of  unsullied  purity.  IV.  The  majestic  government  or  the  great  God  is  some- 
times ASSOCIATED  WITH  TERRIFIC  AGENCIES.  The  judgments  of  God  are  as — 1.  The 
crash  of  thunder.  2.  The  blaze  of  forked  lightning.  3.  Not  only  thunderings  and 
lightnings,  but  voices  proceeded  out  of  the  throne ;  the  meanings  of  Divine  judg- 
ments are  partially  unfolded  ;  all  judgment  is  vocal  to  the  soul  of  man.  Lessons : 
1.  That  God  rules  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power.  2.  That  the  Church  is  safe 
under  the  Divine  rule.  3.  That  men  must  not  provoke  the  terrible  agencies  of  the 
government  of  God.     (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  throne  of  God: — I.  The  throne 

OF  God  is  the  throne  of  universal  nature  and  providence.  1.  He  superintends 
all  the  affairs  of  His  creatures.  2.  He  governs  all  by  the  sceptre  of  His  power.  II. 
The  throne  of  God  is  the  throne  of  mercy  and  grace.  1.  His  throne  of  grace 
has  its  foundation  in  justice  and  holiness.  2.  The  throne  of  grace  is  accessible  to 
all.  III.  The  throne  of  God  is  the  throne  of  justice  and  judgment.  1.  God 
deals  justly  with  impenitent  sinners  in  this  world.  2.  God  will  eventually  appear 
in  general  judgment  on  all  mankind.  IV.  The  throne  op  God  is  the  throne  op 
GLORY  AND  OF  BLESSEDNESS.  1.  It  is  a  throue  of  glory.  God  is  the  King  of  glory 
(Psa.  xxiv.  10).  His  throne  is  a  throne  of  glory  (Jer.  xiv.  21 );  a  •'  glorious  high 
throne,  the  throne  of  our  God  "  (Jer.  xvii.  12).  2.  It  is  a  throne  of  bliss.  There 
the  wondrous  assembly  are  beyond  every  evil,  and  above  every  imperfection ;  they 
enjoy  without  any  interruption  the  beatific  vision  of  God,  manifested  in  the  person 
of  Christ.  (Pulpit  Studies.)  The  Triune  God  : — I.  The  throne.  1.  Above  all 
the  strife  and  discord  and  confusion  of  this  world,  above  those  thrones  and  dominions 
which  caricature  royalty  and  pervert  justice,  above  the  Neros  and  Domitians  and  all 
their  brood  of  lesser  tyrants,  there  is  a  dominion,  an  authority,  a  throne  which  is 
supreme.  The  world  is  not  without  a  Ruler  ;  it  is  not  rolling  on  from  age  to  age, 
like  a  ship  without  a  pilot;  it  has  a  Guide,  a  King,  whose  eternal  throne  is  established 
on  high.  2.  The  majestic  repose  and  ethereal  majesty  of  the  throne  of  God.  But 
before  the  throne  of  God  is  "a  sea  of  glass" — image  of  calmness  and  repose;  a  sea 
whose  smooth  surface  is  never  ruffled,  whose  transparent  depths  are  never 
disturbed.  II.  The  Monarch.  IH.  The  hymns  of  praise.  {R.  H.  McKim,  D.D.) 
The  throne  in  heaven  and  its  surroundings  : — It  is  a  curious  fact  that  the  last  book 
of  the  Bible  is,  upon  the  whole,  the  most  mysterious.  It  has  been  said  that  John 
Calvin  evinced  his  wisdom  by  declining  to  write  an  exposition  of  this  book.  To  a 
great  extent  the  book  is  prophetical ;  but  other  parts  are  doctrinal,  and  these  it  is 
our  privilege  to  endeavour  to  understand.  I.  The  throne  itself.  "  Behold,  a 
throne  was  set  in  heaven,  and  One  sat  upon  it."  St.  John's  vision  in  Patmos 
reminds  us  of  the  vision  of  Micaia'h  in  the  reign  of  Jehoshaphat.      "I  saw  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  283 

Lord,"  says  he,  "  sitting  on  His  throne  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  standing  by 
Him,  on  His  right  hand  and  on  His  left."  This  part  of  the  chapter  may  be 
considered  as  bringing  before  us  the  sovereignty  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty. 
God  is  no  epicurean,  taking  no  interest  in  the  welfare  of  His  creatures :  God  is 
King  of  all  the  earth.  His  sceptre  is  a  sceptre  of  righteousness.  To  acknowledge 
the  existence  of  a  God  is,  in  point  of  fact,  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  His 
reign.  Having  created  all  things  He  governs  all  things.  1.  The  sovereignty  of  God 
is  universal  in  its  extent.  "  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all" — over  angels,  men,  and 
devils,  over  the  good  and  the  bad,  over  birds  and  beasts  and  creeping  things, 
over  mountains  and  mole-hills,  storms  and  sunshine,  peace  and  war,  plague  and 
pestilence,  abundance  and  famine,  great  events  and  little  ones.  All  are  subservient 
to  His  governance  and  submissive  to  His  power.  2.  The  sovereignty  of  God  is  not 
only  universal  in  its  extent,  but  is  also  independent  and  absolute.  "  As  He  receives 
His  essence  from  none  so  He  derives  His  dominion  from  none,"  says  old  Stephen 
Charnock.  His  right  to  reign  has  not  been  won  by  war,  or  obtained  by  bribery :  it 
is  not  the  bequest  of  some  predecessor  or  the  gift  of  some  superior.  He  is  not 
a  King  by  the  votes  of  the  vassals  whom  He  governs,  but  by  His  own  eternal 
excellence  and  by  His  own  omnific  •  acts.  As  a  sovereign  whose  dominion  is 
absolute  you  see  Him  continuously  sustaining  creation  when  He  might,  in  an 
instant,  suffer  it  to  relapse  into  its  primeval  nothingness.  You  see  Him  redeeming 
men,  promulgating  laws,  instituting  rites,  and  appointing  conditions,  without  the 
observance  of  which  sinners  cannot  be  saved.  "  He  doeth  according  to  His  will." 
3.  Let  me  add  that  whilst  the  government  of  God  is  universal  and  absolute,  it  ia 
not  tyrannical,  but  wise  and  pure  and  just  and  good.  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are 
round  about  Him  "  often,  but  at  all  times  **  righteousness  and  judgment  are  the 
habitation  of  His  throne."  His  throne  is  a  throne  of  holiness.  We  may  often  be 
puzzled  by  His  proceedings:  we  ought  never  to  murmur  and  malign.  I  would 
remind  you  of  the  fearful  position  of  the  man  who  dares  to  rebel  against  such 
a  King.  Of  all  the  creatures  in  God  Almighty's  wide  creation,  except  the  lost 
in  hell,  man  is  the  only  one  in  whose  heart  lurks  rebellion.  Woe  to  the  man 
that  strives  against  his  Maker  1  Pharaoh  ventured  to  do  that  until  Pharaoh  and 
his  legions  sank  in  helplessness  just  at  the  moment  when  they  were  anticipating 
victory.  Nebuchadnezzar  set  himself  against  God,  the  result  being  that  Nebu- 
chadnezzar became  a  wild  and  wandering  maniac.  Man  cannot  sin  against  such 
a  sovereign  as  this  with  impunity,  without  his  sin  entailing  punishment  sooner  or 
later.  Do  not  forget  that  you  are  not  your  own  and,  therefore,  you  have  no  right 
to  live  for  your  own  aggrandisement  and  gratification.  God  governs  the  universe. 
Yes,  and  let  us  not  forget  that  God  our  Governor  is  infinite  in  greatness  and  also  in 
goodness,  and  if  so,  then  in  our  direst  emergencies  we  may  venture  safely  to  repose 
trust  in  Him.  We  may  be  mean  and  miserable,  but  do  not  forget  that  God's 
sovereignty  takes  cognisance  of  everything  God's  power  has  made.  If  there  ia 
nothing  too  little  for  God  to  make,  there  is  nothing  too  little  for  God  to  govern. 
II.  Leaving  the  throne  itself,  look  at  the  rainbow  which  spans  it.  "  There  was  a 
rainbow  round  about  the  throne,  in  sight  like  unto  an  emerald."  The  rainbow  round 
about  the  throne  naturally  leads  us  to  contemplate  God  as  entering  into  a  covenant 
engagement  with  man.  Glorious  is  the  fact  that  God  not  only  rules  as  a  sovereign, 
but  in  infinite  condescension  He  has  made  covenants  with  His  creatures  which  He 
cannot  break.  '*  I  will  make  a  covenant  of  peace  with  thee,"  says  God  by  the 
prophet  Ezekiel,  *'  and  it  shall  be  an  everlasting  covenant."  Oh,  how  infinite  is 
condescension  like  this!  God  the  uncreated,  the  infinite,  the  all-perfect  Being 
exercising  universal  sovereignty,  binds  Himself  by  promises  to  bless.  Man  makes 
leagues  and  covenants,  and  then  snaps  them  asunder  at  his  pleasure.  God's 
covenants  and  compacts,  like  Himself,  are  unchangeable.  "  The  mountains  shall 
depart,  and  the  hills  shall  be  removed ;  but  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee, 
nor  the  covenant  of  My  peace  be'  broken."  Oh,  for  faith  in  these  compacts  which 
God  has  made  with  man  !  After  daily  trusting  in  covenants  made  by  mortals  like 
yourselves,  will  you  dare  to  call  in  question  the  truthfulness  of  compacts  God  has 
made  ?  God  promises  me  a  pardon  through  Jesus  Christ  if  I  seek  it  in  penitence 
and  faith.  Shall  I  question  God's  readiness  to  fulfil  that  promise  ?  God  promises 
finally  a  mansion,  a  throne ;  and  shall  I  doubt  His  readiness  and  His  ability  to  fulfil 
His  covenant  ?  Did  He  fail  me  when  I  came  to  Him  a  burdened  penitent  for  the 
pardon  of  my  sins?  Patriarchs,  prophets,  and  others  believed  the  covenant  not 
because  they  had  seen  it  verified,  but  simply  because  God's  own  living  lips  had 
uttered  it ;  and,  if  so,  shall  I,  with  the  experience  of  six  thousand  years  before  me, 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

dare  to  doubt  it  ?  God  forbid  !  III.  Leaving  the  rainbow  which  spans  the  throne, 
let  us  go,  in  the  third  place,  to  the  lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voices  coming 
OUT  of  it  (ver.  3).  The  lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voices  coming  out  of  the 
throne  bring  us  a  step  farther  in  the  history  of  the  Divine  Being,  and  leads  us 
to  contemplate  Him  as  a  great  Lawgiver — a  Lawgiver  issuing  precepts  for  the 
guidance  and  discipline  of  man's  probationary  being.  This  part  of  the  chapter 
reminds  us  of  the  scene  which  was  witnessed  on  Mount  Sinai,  as  you  will  find 
if  you  turn  to  the  19th  chapter  of  Exodus,  beginning  at  the  16th  verse.  Oh,  that 
we  could  make  you  unconverted  sinners  to  feel  in  the  presence  of  this  legislative  God 
as  these  Hebrews  did  !  Let  me  say  that  in  order  to  be  saved  you  must  first  of  all, 
to  some  extent  at  least,  have  an  experience  like  that  to  which  I  am  now  adverting. 
Do  not  imagine  that  you  are  in  a  fit  frame  of  mind  to  come  and  ask  God  for  pardon 
until  you  feel  the  terrors  of  that  God  whose  laws  were  published  on  Mount  Sinai  in 
sounds  and  voices  so  terrific.  Issuing  from  the  legislative  mount,  thunders  and 
voices  and  flashing  lightning  scare  them,  and  they  are  made  willing  to  be  saved  on 
any  terms,  at  any  sacrifice.    IV.  I  pass  to  the  fourth  point,  namely,  the  sea  of 

GLASS   AND  THE   SEVEN   LAMPS  OF   FIBE   BEFORE  THE  THRONE  (vCrS.  5,  6).      I  will  simply 

say  that  by  the  sea  of  glass  we  are  reminded  of  a  text  in  the  Book  of  Exodus — the 
38th  chapter,  beginning  at  the  17th  verse :  •'  The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying, 
Thou  shalt  also  make  a  laver  of  brass,"  &c.  Accordingly,  we  are  told  in  the  8th 
verse  of  the  38th  chapter  of  Exodus,  that  Moses  made  a  laver  of  brass  of  the  brazen 
looking-glasses  presented  by  the  women.  Then,  again,  you  will  remember  that 
when  Solomon  built  his  temple,  he  also  made  a  similar  laver  capable  of  containing 
twenty-two  thousand  gallons,  and  he  designated  that  laver  a  molten  sea.  It  is 
intended  to  typify  the  provision  that  has  been  made  for  the  sanctification  of 
sinners  in  the  sacrifice  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  Then  as  respects  the  seven 
lamps  of  fire  which  are  the  seven  spirits  of  God,  I  have  as  little  doubt  that  that 
is  symbolical  language  intended  to  signify  the  sanctifying  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
I  will  just  remind  you  that  the  word  "  seven  "  in  the  Scriptures  is  a  sacred  number, 
and  is  often  used  in  the  same  sense  as  the  word  "perfection."  The  word  "horn" 
is  often  used  to  signify  authority,  power ;  the  word  "  eye  "  to  signify  intelligence, 
wisdom,  light.  Now  blend  all  these  things  together,  and  then  you  learn  from  these 
symbolical  texts  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  possessed  of  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect 
power,  and  is  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth.  Apply  all  that  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
you  will  find  it  strictly  true.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  an  all-perfect  Spirit.  He  is  the 
Spirit  of  the  Son  as  well  as  of  the  Father,  and  He  is  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth, 
for  the  grace  of  God  that  brings  salvation  has  appeared  to  all  men.  We  have  just 
now  been  reminded,  by  the  lightnings  and  thunderings  and  voices  coming  out  of  the 
throne,  of  the  law  which  God  published  in  the  days  of  Moses,  and  of  our  trans- 
gression of  that  law,  and  of  our  need  of  a  Mediator  to  obtain  for  us  pardon  and 
purity.  And  here,  in  the  sea  of  glass  and  in  the  seven  lamps  of  fire,  our  necessities 
are  fully  met.  In  the  blood  of  the  Mediator  atonement  is  made  for  our  transgres- 
sions, and  in  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  provision  is  made  for  the  removal  of  our 
darkness  and  depravity  and  sin.  As  a  sinner  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God — 
"  Wherewithal  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  High  God  ?  " 
How  shall  I  gain  access  to  His  mercy-seat  ?  How  shall  I  enter  the  tabernacle  in 
which  He  dwells?  Before  Moses  and  Aaron  were  allowed  to  avail  themselves  of 
bliss  like  this  they  had  to  wash  in  the  brazen  sea  ;  and  I  also  must  wash  in  the  sea 
of  glass,  or,  in  other  words,  in  that  fountain  which  has  been  opened  in  the  House 
of  David  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  Without  the  blood  there  is  no  admission  into 
heaven,  just  as  without  the  molten  sea  there  was  no  admission  into  the  temple's 
most  holy  place ;  and  without  the  Spirit  we  are  without  the  wish  to  wash  in  the 
cleansing  blood,  and,  in  point  of  fact,  despise  it.  V.  And  now,  as  a  result  of  the 
whole,  let  us  look  at  the  holy  ones  by  which  the  throne,  set  and  established  in 
THE  HEAVENS,  18  suRFOUNDED.  "  And  rouud  about  the  throne  were  four-and-twenty 
seats;  and  upon  the  seats  I  saw  four-and-twenty  elders  sitting,  clothed  in  white 
raiment;  and  they  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold."  Good  old  James  Kershaw, 
one  of  John  Wesley's  itinerant  preachers,  lays  it  down  with  authority  that  these 
elders — these  grand  seniors  of  heaven,  as  he  calls  them,  mean  the  four-and-twenty 
elders  or  presbyters  from  the  patriarchal  age,  from  Adam  to  Jacob,  and  including 
Job  and  Melchizedek.  I  am  not  going  to  controvert  it,  but  there  are  one  or  two 
other  kindred  interpretations,  perhaps,  equally  to  be  commended;  for  instance, 
some  of  you  are  well  aware  that  king  David  divided  the  Jewish  priests  into 
twenty-four  divisions,  and  at  the  head  of  each  division  placed  a  prince  or  chief 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  285 

priest ;  and  some  think  that  when  the  text  speaks  of  f our-and-twenty  elders,  there 
is  a  reference  to  these  twenty-four  priests  or  princes  of  the  priests  belonging  to  the 
Jewish  Church.  Another  interpretation  says  that  the  four-and-twenty  elders  are 
intended  to  signify  the  heads  of  the  twelve  tribes  and  the  twelve  apostles  of  the 
Lamb,  and  that  these  twenty -four  constitute  the  elders  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
Churches  united.  Any  one  of  them  will  serve  my  present  purpose,  namely,  to  show 
that  as  a  consequence  of  God's  care  of  His  creatures,  and  of  His  sovereignty,  and  of 
His  covenant  engagements,  and  of  His  legislative  acts,  and  of  His  redeeming  mercy 
— as  a  consequence  of  this,  I  find  men  in  heaven — men  who  were  once  sinners.  All  this 
has  a  tendency  to  strengthen  our  confidence  and  our  faith  in  God — in  His  ability  and 
willingness  to  bring  us  safe  to  the  realms  of  blessedness  and  peace.  (Luke  Tyerman.) 
A  rainbow  round  about  the  throne. — The  circle  rainbow  : — A  semi-circle  rainbow 
is  all  that  presents  itself  to  our  vision,  and  that  is  often  a  very  imperfect  half.  We 
see  things  in  this  world  only  by  halves.  Imperfection  characterises  all  our  powers, 
and  limitation  all  surrounding  objects,  and  incompleteness  all  our  pleasures.  •'  The 
things  that  shall  be  hereafter  "  shall  be  in  circles,  complete  and  perfect.  I.  The 
CIRCLE  OF  PROMISE.  H.  The  CIRCLE  OF  TRUTH.  The  ancicnt  philosophers  perplexed 
themselves  in  their  search  after  truth.  They  failed  to  see  that  while  truth  is  a 
perfect  circle,  it  is  not  visible  as  a  whole  to  mortals.  "  We  know  in  part,  and  pro- 
phesy in  part."  In  other  words,  we  know  but  a  small  part  of  truth,  and  can  teach 
only  the  part  we  know.  What  shall  be  said  when  we  ascend  to  the  higher  plane  of 
truth  ?  If  such  the  earthy,  what  of  the  heavenly  ?  But  we  shall  yet  know  in  full. 
Hereafter  the  whole  circle  shall  be  unfolded.  Then  our  knowledge  shall  be  perfected. 
in.  The  circle  of  providence.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  best  judged  of  by  the  view 
of  the  harmony  of  providence.  The  single  threads  may  seem  very  weak,  or  knotty 
and  uneven,  and  seem  to  administer  just  occasion  of  censure ;  but  will  it  not  as 
much  raise  the  admiration  to  see  them  all  woven  into  a  curious  piece  of  branched 
work  ?  [A  London  Minister.)  The  rainbow  round  about  the  throne  : — I.  Let  us 
VIEW  the  nature,  and  Scriptural  history,  op  the  rainbow.  II.  The  rainbow  is 
presented  to  our  notice  as  connected  with  the  most  splendid  representations  of 
THE  Divine  glory.  There  are  three  instances  of  this  in  the  Scriptures.  1.  The  first 
is  Ezekiel  i.  28.  Here  is  an  evident  reference  to  Jehovah,  as  governing  all  things 
in  the  person  of  His  Son,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  ver.  26  as  having  the 
appearance  of  a  man.  And  it  is  in  and  through  Christ  that  Jehovah  treats  with 
mankind,  and  by  whom  He  directs  and  upholds  all  things  both  in  heaven  and  earth. 
2.  The  second  instance  is  our  text,  where  the  Godhead,  high  and  lifted  up  on  His 
holy  throne,  and  surrounded  by  the  worshipping  hosts,  is  represented  as  encircled 
with  "a  rainbow,  in  sight  like  unto  an  emerald."  This  evidently  intimates  the 
gracious  connection  subsisting  between  God  and  man ;  and  that  however  elevated 
and  glorious  He  may  be,  yet  His  grandeur  and  majesty  are  made  to  act  in  blessed 
concert  with  the  arrangements  of  grace.  3.  The  last  representation  of  the  rainbow 
is  Rev.  X.  1,  where  we  are  taught  that  however  Jehovah  may  step  forth,  arrayed 
in  garments  of  terror,  or  however  black  the  dispensations  of  His  providence  may 
appear,  yet  that  His  head  is  ever  adorned  with  the  rainbow  of  grace,  and  that  as 
such  He  will  ever  be  recognised  by  all  those  who  love  and  put  their  trust  in  Him  ; 
that  while  He  is  the  destroyer  of  His  impenitent  enemies.  He  is  the  unchanging 
friend  and  consolation  of  His  people.  III.  A  striking  symbol  of  God's  gracious 
REGARDS  TO  OUR  FALLEN  WORLD.  1.  The  laiubow  is  tumed  up  towards  heaven — is 
unstrung — and  without  arrows.  And  here  we  have  a  representation,  or  symbol,  of 
God's  being  in  a  state  of  perfect  reconciliation  to  our  world.  2.  In  the  rainbow  is 
exhibited  the  union  of  the  various  prismatic  colours.  A  beautiful  symbol  of  the 
harmony  of  the  Divine  perfections  in  the  economy  of  Divine  grace.  3.  The  rainbow 
appears  to  reach  the  heavens.  Symbolical  of  the  origin  of  all  the  blessings  of  grace. 
4.  The  rainbow  seems  to  unite  both  heaven  and  earth.  And  this  union  is  truly 
effected  in  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  of  whom  the  whole  family  in 
heaven  and  earth  is  named.  5.  The  rainbow  is  all  God's  work.  Man  has  no 
part  in  making  it.  So  with  respect  to  our  salvation ;  all  is  of  God  from 
first  to  last.  6.  This  rainbow  is  said  to  be  "round  about  the  throne"  of 
God,  indicating  that  all  His  attributes  and  perfections  are  under  its 
influence.  7.  This  rainbow  is  likened  to  an  "emerald."  The  meaning 
of  which  is,  that  the  beautiful  green  colour  of  the  emerald  was  the  leading 
appearance  it  presented.  So  when  the  awakened  sinner  beholds  the  rigour  of 
Divine  justice  in  its  most  awful  form,  even  at  this  moment  the  Divine  compassion 
ifl  most  apparent,  and  demands  the  most  implicit  confidence.     8.  The  unmerited 


286  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

freeness  of  Divine  mercy.  So  salvation  is  not  of  debt  but  of  grace.  9.  The  unspeak- 
able delight  which  the  sight  of  this  rainbow  excited.  10.  Look  upon  the  rainbow, 
and  praise  Him  that  made  it.  11.  Let  the  mourning  penitent  look  at  the  bow,  and 
be  encouraged.  12.  Let  the  troubled  soul  look  and  be  comforted.  {R.  Simpson,  M.A.) 
The  rainbow  of  the  covenant : — I.  It  is  only  by  the  covenant  of  grace  and  peace, 

BEVEALED  TO  US  IN  THE  HOLT  SCRIPTURES,  THAT  WE  CAN  CONTEMPLATE,  WITH  CALM 
SERENITY,  THE  ATTRIBUTES  AND  PERFECTIONS  OF  G6d.  II.  It  IS  ONLY  BY  THE  COVENANT 
OF  GRACE  AND  PEACE,  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL,  THAT  WE  CAN  CONTEMPLATE  WITH  SATIS- 
FACTION AND  COMFORT  THE  DISPENSATIONS  OF  PROVIDENCE.  III.  It  IS,  IN  ALL  PROBA- 
BILITY, ONLY  THROUGH  THE  MEDIUM  OF  THE  COVENANT,  BY  WHICH  WE  ARE  SAVED  FROM 
PERDITION,    THAT  WE  SHALL  BEHOLD  AND  ADOBE   THE  GLORY  OF  GoD,  IN  THE  MANSIONS  OF 

CELESTIAL  BLISS.  1.  Consider  the  perfections  of  God,  as  they  shine  in  the  person  and 
work  of  Christ,  the  Mediator  and  Redeemer.  2.  Consider  the  dispensations  of  Provi- 
dence in  their  connection  with  the  covenant  of  grace  and  peace.  3.  Consider  the  glory 
which  shall  be  disclosed  to  you  in  a  future,  eternal  world.  {Essex  Remembrancer.) 
The  rainbow : — I.  Is  the  rainbow  a  reflection  of  the  rays  of  the  sun  upon 
A  THIN  watery  CLOUD?  The  covenant  of  grace  owes  all  its  excellences  to  Jesus 
Christ,  the  '*  Sun  of  righteousness."  II.  Are  our  minds  struck  with  the  diversi- 
fied COLOURS  OF  THIS  BEAUTIFUL  PHENOMENON  IN  NATURE  ?  Let  them  remind  us  of 
the  numerous  blessings  which  are  treasured  up  in  the  everlasting  covenant.  III. 
Was  the  rainbow  an  emblem  of  peace  between  God  and  man  after  the  flood  ? 
The  covenant  of  grace  declares  reconciliation,  and  secures  the  redeemed  for  ever 
from  the  deep  waters  of  affliction,  which  had  often  before  overwhelmed  them.  IV. 
Is  THE  rainbow  SAID  TO  BE  ROUND  ABOUT  THE  THRONE  OF  GoD?  The  covcuant  of  grace 
includes  in  it,  and  glorifies  all  the  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  and  is  ever  in  their  sight 
and  remembrance.  V.  Are  we  informed  that  the  rainbow  was  in  sight  "  like 
UNTO  AN  EMERALD,"  giccn,  bcautiful,  and  durable  ?  How  delightful  to  contemplate 
and  enjoy  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  of  grace!  It  is  always  new,  and  lasting  as 
the  throne  which  it  surrounds.  (T.  Spencer.)  The  throne  and  the  rainbow. — I.  First, 
let  us  look  up  at  this  wonderful  throne.  Of  course,  we  understand  such  a  thing  to 
be  the  symbol  of  government — of  the  Divine  government  in  the  universe — for  that 
Being  in  the  seat  of  royalty  is  God.  But  what  do  the  other  emblems  mean  ?  1. 
Observe  that  the  exalted  Monarch  is  said  to  be  "  like  a  jasper  and  a  sardine  stone." 
See  the  supreme  advantage  we  have  in  knowing  that  we  are  under  a  splendid  and 
sufficient  government  in  this  world  of  ours,  where  all  appears  so  confused  and 
independent.  I  confess  my  mind  grows  restful  and  glad  when  I  look  up  and  seem 
to  see  this  dazzling  diamond  of  infinite  perfection  subduing  itself  to  my  weak  com- 
prehension till  it  looks  like  a  carnelian,  which  I  gaze  upon  constantly  and  yet  live. 
2.  Then,  next  to  this,  observe  in  like  manner  the  attendants  which  are  represented 
as  forming  the  King's  retinue :  "  And  round  about  the  throne  were  four  and  twenty 
thrones,"  &c.  Here  again  is  a  disclosure  upon  which  it  will  cheer  the  Christian's 
heax-t  to  dwell.  This  is  more  than  a  splendid  government ;  it  must  be  amazingly 
potent  and  irresistibly  strong.  The  very  nobles  are  crowned,  and  wear  royal 
raiment :  their  ordinary  seats  are  thrones.  3.  But  does  God  know  what  His 
wicked  and  wilful  creatures  are  doing  so  far  away  from  His  presence  ?  That 
leads  us  forward  another  step  in  the  vision,  and  we  observe  that  this  must  be  a 
very  watchful  government ;  the  language  is  quite  peculiar :  there  was  "  before  the 
throne,  as  it  were  a  glassy  sea  like  unto  crystal,"  &c.  We  cannot  delay  to  examine 
in  turn  every  one  of  these  interesting  symbols.  It  must  be  enough  to  say  that  the 
lion  is  the  chief  of  wild  beasts,  as  the  ox  is  the  chief  of  those  tamed  and  domestic  ; 
the  eagle  is  the  king  of  the  air,  and  man  is  the  monarch  among  created  things;  each 
is  sovereign  and  supreme  of  his  kind,  for  the  Lord  God  could  receive  no  less  into  His 
court  for  His  servants.  But  the  main  particular  to  notice  in  this  description  is  the 
suggestion — here  twice  made — that  they  were  all  "full  of  eyes,"  and  the  floor 
beneath  the  throne  was  of  glass  as  transparent  as  crystal.  "And  thou  sayest,  how 
doth  God  know?  can  He  judge  through  the  dark  cloud?"  But  now  this  vision 
teaches  that  earth  can  always  and  everywhere  be  seen  from  heaven.  4.  Observe, 
once  more,  that  this  is  an  unimpeachable  government.  These  living  creatures  are 
worshipping  while  watching :  "  they  have  no  rest  day  and  night,  saying.  Holy,  holy, 
holy,"  &c.  No  one  can  know  better  than  those  nearest  to  a  monarch  how  pure  he 
is.  This  King  in  the  throne  never  broke  one  of  His  promises,  never  deceived  one  of 
His  subjects,  never  forgot  one  of  His  creatures  in  its  time  of  possible  need.  II. 
Thus  much  does  this  first  symbol  in  the  vision  teach.  Now  we  come  to  study  the 
second ;  the  "  rainbow,  in  sight  Hke  unto  an  emerald."    This  represents  a  covenant. 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  287 

as  the  other  represented  a  rule.  1.  Observe  first,  that  the  ancient  covenant  of 
reaction  has  in  it  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  This  is  Noah's  bow 
repeated  with  fresh  and  better  engagements  for  John.  2,  Notice -again,  that  its 
appearance  just  here  in  John's  vision  is  welcomed  more  for  its  graciousness  than 
for  its  antiquity.  No  one  can  read  the  Bible  without  noticing  more  and  more 
plainly  that  the  God  of  nature  desires  to  transfer  the  allegiance  of  His  creatures 
80  that  they  may  fully  recognise  Him  as  the  God  of  grace.  3.  Once  more :  observe 
how  well  this  vision  teaches  us  that  God's  covenant  is  completed.  A  perfect  circle 
is  the  finest  figure  we  could  imagine  of  the  covenant  of  God's  love  fully  complete. 
4.  The  symbols  here  employed  seem  to  teach  that  this  is  an  abiding  covenant :  it 
will  stand  for  ever.  In  oriental  countries  green  is  the  emblem  of  unchangeableness. 
It  signifies  fidelity,  incorruptible  and  for  ever  to  be  trusted,  5.  This  covenant  is  to 
each  of  us  individual  and  personal.  Each  beholder  is  the  master  and  owner  of  his 
particular  arch  in  the  heavens.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  we  are  sure  no  two 
persons  ever  see  the  same  iris  even  on  the  clouds  of  the  same,  storm,  though  they 
are  almost  side  by  side  in  their  outlook ;  for  there  are  different  drops  which  fall 
into  the  angle  of  range,  and  different  sunbeams  to  touch  them.  Do  not  waste  this 
conception  in  admiration  of  the  beautiful  phenomenon  of  nature.  God's  covenant 
is  made  with  a  generous  distribution  of  grace,  but  to  each  reception  and  bestowment 
of  favour  there  are  only  two  parties — Himself  and  a  single  believer.  III.  Thus  we 
reach  the  last  point  for  our  consideration;  namely,  the  collocation  of  the  two 
symbols.  "The  rainbow  was  round  about  the  throne."  1.  God's  promise  sur- 
rounds God's  majesty.  The  ancient  Kabbins  used  to  render  the  verse  in  Genesis 
concerning  the  rainbow  thus :  "It  shall  be  a  sign  between  My  word  and  all  the 
earth."  So  now  we  look  up  at  this  vision  of  John,  and  we  learn  to  rest  in  our 
Creator.  We  are  not  left  to  vague  considerations  of  Jehovah's  consistency  with  His 
own  character,  or,  as  we  sometimes  phrase  it,  "  His  name  " ;  we  dwell  upon  His 
recorded  language  of  blessing,  "  Thou  hast  magnified  Thy  word  above  all  Thy  name." 
The  word  is  "  round  about "  the  name,  the  rainbow  is  round  about  the  throne.  2. 
God's  grace  surrounds  God's  justice.  We  lift  our  eyes,  and  see  this  rainbow  as 
really  the  most  conspicuous  thing  in  the  vision.  Its  vast  emerald  arch  shines  all 
around  the  supreme  tribunal  on  the  floor  of  crystal.  The  suggestion  is  immediately 
clear,  it  is  a  comfort  that  we  are  now  under  the  New  Testament.  3.  God's  love 
surrounds  God's  power.  Love  is  symbolised  in  the  rainbow,  and  power  in  the 
throne;  and  the  rainbow  is  round  about  the  throne.  4.  God's  glory  surrounds 
God's  children.  For  just  look  up  and  see  the  position  and  collocation  of  these 
two  objects;  the  emerald  ring  is  all  around  the  sapphire  seat  of  royalty.  {G.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  Rainbow  and  throne : — I.  There  is  a  rainbow  round  about  the 
THRONE  IN  the  WORKS  OF  CREATION.  In  the  threefold  kingdom  of  nature  the  throne 
is  conspicuously  manifest,  for  authority  and  power  are  everywhere  obvious.  Law 
reigns  permanent  and  supreme,  and  sometimes  asserts  itself  with  apparent  severity 
and  sternness.  But  there  is  a  rainbow  encircling  the  throne — for  the  storms  that 
terrify  produce  in  their  train  fertility  and  health.  Processes  that  seem  to  produce 
death  give  birth  to  new  life.  Floods,  earthquakes,  volcanoes,  tempest,  <fec.,  work  upon 
the  whole  for  the  good  of  man.  11.  There  is  a  rainbow  round  about  the  throne  in 
THE  PROVIDENTIAL  GOVERNMENT  OF  GOD.  In  all  God's  dealings  with  man  there  have 
been  blended  mercy  with  judgment,  forgiveness  with  chastisement.  This  is  true  of 
nations  as  well  as  of  individuals.  III.  There  is  a  rainbow  about  the  throne  in 
FHE  SCENE  THAT  WAS  ENACTED  AT  Calvary.  In  the  death  of  Christ — the  sinless  One — 
the  throne  of  authority  and  righteousness  is  unveiled ;  but  the  rainbow  encircled 
the  head  of  the  suffering  Redeemer ;  on  the  Cross  mercy  and  truth  met  together, 
righteousness  and  peace  kissed  each  other.     IV.  There  is  a  rainbow  round  about 

THE    THRONE    IN    THE    PREACHING   OF   THE    GOSPEL   OF   THE    GLORY   OF   GOD.       The   glad 

tidings  of  salvation  proclaim  God's  righteous  indignation  against  sin,  and  to  some 
become  "  a  savour  of  death  unto  death."  The  rainbow  of  the  covenant  of  grace, 
full  of  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  encircles  that  throne  of  authority,  so 
that  whosoever  will  may  come  and  obtain  pardon  and  peace.      V.  There  is  a 

RAINBOW   ROUND    ABOUT   THE    THRONE   IN    THE   PREDICTIONS   OF   THE   DAY  OF   JUDGMENT. 

This  vision  of  John  gives  us  a  guarantee:  1.  Of  the  perpetuation  of  the  evolution 
of  the  seasons  in  the  world  of  nature.  2.  Of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  con- 
tained in  the  covenant  of  grace.  3.  Of  the  absolute  safety  of  all  who  cling  with 
deathless  tenacity  to  the  enthroned  Redeemer.  4.  Of  the  final  accomplishment  of 
God's  gracious  purposes  in  relation  to  our  race.  {F.  W.  Brown.)  The  raiyihnw 
round  the  throne : — The  picture  introduces  us  into  the  midst  of  the  hea\  enly 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

world,  and  shows  to  us  its  enthroned  Sovereign  spanned  with  an  arch  of  iri« 
descent  light,  ineffable  majesty  blossoming  out  in  forms  of  tender  beauty,  the 
beauty  brightening  the  majesty,  the  majesty  solemnising  the  beauty,  Divine  and 
eternal,  and  yet  raying  out  into  lines  of  genial  and  affectionate  colour  such  as  the 
eye  can  delight  in,  and  the  face  and  heart  grow  bright  and  cheerful  under.  There 
is  the  throne  and  there  is  the  rainbow,  the  solemnity  of  the  throne  qualifies  the 
rainbow  and  the  rainbow  qualifies  the  throne,  and  they  make  not  two  pictures,  but 
one  picture  ;  the  two  features  that  customary  thought  divorces,  the  imagery  marries 
in  solid  wedlock,  and  righteousness  and  peace  are  shown  to  have  kissed  each  other. 
That  is  a  wonderful  answer  that  stands  in  the  Westminster  Assembly  Shorter 
Catechism  in  response  to  the  question,  "  What  is  God  ? "  "  God  is  a  Spirit, 
infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  His  being,  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice, 
goodness,  and  truth."  That  is  a  wonderful  answer,  but  then  it  is  not  my  God  any 
more  than  putting  arms,  legs,  trunk,  and  head  alongside  of  one  another  compose 
my  father.  Considered  as  a  schedule  of  detail,  as  a  bill  of  Divine  particulars,  that 
answer  cannot  be  surpassed,  but  it  will  have  to  yield  instant  precedence  to  the 
imagery  of  our  verse  when  the  object  sought  is  not  a  God  dissected  in  the  interests 
of  philosophy,  but  God  whole,  and  entire,  in  the  interests  of  love  and  worship. 
What  I  feel  that  I  need  for  myself  in  my  religious  character  and  relations,  is  to  be 
able  to  come  to  God  in  the  entireness  of  His  personality — come  to  Him,  in  that 
respect,  in  the  same  way  in  which  a  boy  comes  to  his  father.  True  personal 
approach  combines  into  indistinguishable  unity  all  those  ingredients  that  to  pure 
speculation  stand  separate  and  distinct.  Now,  that  is  the  charm  and  the  truth  of 
the  Apocalyptic  picture  in  our  text.  It  brings  the  solemn  sovereignty  of  God  and  the 
sweet,  accessible  beauty  and  loveliness  of  God  so  into  relation  with  each  other,  and 
so  draws  them  through  one  another,  that  each  quality  is  felt  to  inhere  in  the  other, 
and  one  indivisible  God  to  be  the  issue  of  it,  all  whose  majesty  is  sweet,  and  all 
whose  sweetness  is  majestic.  You  behold  the  rainbow  about  the  throne,  and  you 
behold  the  throne  by  the  light  of  the  rainbow.  The  world  is  going  to  grow  better  by 
coming  to  know  God  better.  What  St.  Paul  said  at  Athens  still  holds,  "  Whom  ye 
ignorantly  worship,  Him  declare  I  unto  you."  To  help  people  to  feel  God  as  He  is, 
is  the  one  only  comprehensive  service  that  we  can  render  them  ;  and  if  the  peculiar 
glimpse  of  God  afforded  us  by  this  imagery  of  St.  John  once  becomes  an  appreciated 
and  a  conscious  truth  with  us,  it  will  easily,  not  to  say  necessarily,  work  practical 
results  in  our  theology  and  in  our  hearts  and  lives.  Once  let  us  feel,  as  John's 
picture  suggests,  that  God  all  belongs  together,  that  violence  is  done  Him  when- 
ever any  one  of  His  attributes  is  plucked  from  its  coherency  with  His  other 
attributes,  and  we  shall  be  saved  from  what  has  been  the  bane  of  all  theology — 
namely,  founding  on  some  individual  attribute  which  has  been  rudely  dislocated 
from  its  companion  attributes,  taking  the  amputated  member  and  electing  it  to  be 
the  vitals  of  a  living  system.  Now,  that  makes  theology  easy,  but  it  makes  it  a  lie. 
The  throne  is  a  lie  without  the  rainbow,  and  the  rainbow  is  a  lie  without  the  throne. 
Now,  that  conducts  directly  to  two  schools  of  theologic  thought.  One  starts  with 
the  solemnities  of  God,  and  the  other  starts  with  the  amenities ;  they  both  make  a 
bad  start,  and  consequently  they  both  make  a  bad  finish.  One  begins  with  the 
majesty  of  God,  and  gets  along  as  best  it  can  with  His  love ;  the  other  starts  with 
the  love  of  God,  and  gets  along  as  well  as  it  can  with  His  majesty.  One  gives  us  a 
solemn  despot,  and  the  other  gives  us  a  doting  old  grandfather.  One  is  just  as  good 
as  the  other,  and  neither  is  good  for  anything  so  far  as  being  a  just  statement  of  the 
truth  is  concerned.  We  often  conceive  of  God  as  acting  at  one  instant  out  of  His 
pure  mercy,  as  if  His  justice  had  for  a  time  been  put  in  a  dark  closet  or  gone  off  on 
a  vacation,  and  that  His  mercy  was  the  only  attribute  that  had  remained  at  home 
and  that  was  doing  all  the  work.  Then,  after  mercy  has  worked  until  it  is  tired, 
we  think  of  Him  as  putting  that  to  sleep  and  letting  everything  for  a  time  be 
managed  at  the  arbitrament  of  unassisted  justice.  I  venture  to  say  that  there 
is  not  among  us  the  conception  that,  when  God  acts.  He  acts  in  the  entire- 
ness of  His  being  always,  as  He  always  does,  and  always  will ;  that  His 
justice  and  His  mercy,  for  example,  have  no  existence  apart  from  each  other; 
that  He  never  surrenders  Himself  to  a  single  impulse,  has  no  pet  attribute, 
but  that  all  of  Him  is  in  everything  that  He  does.  {C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 
The  rainbow  a  pledge  of  mercy  : — I.  The  circumstances  under  which  the  rainbow 
WAS  GIVEN  AS  A  SIGN  TO  MEN.  1.  The  Most  High  had  proved  His  hatred  of  sin  by  the 
consuming  wrath  with  which  it  had  been  punished.  3.  The  Lord  had  also  recently 
accepted  the  sacrifice  of  Noah.    3.  The  rainbow  appeared  in  heaven  at  the  very  time 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION. 


when  the  patriarch's  fears  must  have  been  renewed.     II.  The  character  of  the 

COVENANT   OF   WHICH   THE   RAINBOW   WAS   THE   APPOINTED   PLEDGE.       1.    The   Unmerited 

freeness  of  Divine  mercy.  2.  The  faithfulness  of  God.  3.  The  infinite  compassion 
of  the  Lord.  4.  The  universality  of  Divine  mercy.  5.  The  perpetuity  of  redeeming 
mercy.  {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  The  rainbow  round  the  throne  : — I.  This  emblem. 
1.  It  tells  us  that  God  is  in  covenant  with  man.  Such  was  the  meaning  of  the  rain- 
bow in  the  time  of  Noah.  The  world,  which  had  been  taught  so  solemnly  the  terror 
of  God's  wrath,  was  now  to  learn  the  "  riches  of  His  goodness."  But  the  covenant 
which  God  makes  now  is  more  gracious  still — as  much  more,  as  the  soul  is  more 
precious  than  the  bodyv  and  things  eternal  more  important  than  things  temporal. 
And  with  whom  is  this  covenant  made  ?  With  all  who  will  accept  it :  that  is  to  say, 
with  all  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  acceptance  of  the 
covenant.  What  a  covenant ! — well  called  "  the  covenant  of  grace."  It  includes, 
first,  forgiveness ;  then,  renewal  of  heart ;  then,  preservation  from  sin ;  and  finally, 
the  eternal  joy  of  the  souls  of  believers.  2.  Again,  this  covenant  shows  all  the 
attributes  of  God  together.  "Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together;  righteousness 
and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  How  safe  then  the  shelter  of  those  who  have 
an  interest  in  this  covenant :  they  are  protected  by  the  combined  attributes  of  the 
eternal  God !  3.  By  this  covenant  God  binds  Himself.  Where  is  the  rainbow  ? 
"  Bound  about  the  throne."  Majestic  as  He  is,  and  just  and  holy,  He  is  content  to 
be  bound — bound  by  His  own  word,  His  sure  promise.  His  unchangeable  covenant. 
n.  Some  confirmation  of  this  truth.  The  doctrine  of  God's  covenant  of  grace 
is  not  only  clearly  revealed  in  Scripture  ;  it  is  also  not  opposed  to  reason.  1.  There 
is  nothing  in  it  unworthy  of  Him.  It  is  not  a  covenant  of  unjust  severity — nor  is 
it  one  of  unjust  mercy.  Mercy  there  is  in  it — conspicuous  mercy;  but  it  is 
in  harmonious  alliance  with  holiness  and  equity  and  truth.  What,  then,  is  to 
hinder  Him  from  carrying  out  the  covenant  of  grace  ?  Nothing  !  His  sovereignty 
is  free.  2.  It  is  a  covenant  that  promotes  His  glory.  Practical  lessons  from  the 
covenant  of  grace  :  1.  Here  is  joy  for  the  believer.  2.  Here,  too,  is  encouragement 
for  the  inquirer.  {F.  Tucker,  B.A.)  An  emerald  rainbow  : — I.  The  rainbow.  1. 
Let  us  see  in  what  respects  the  rainbow  serves  as  an  illustration  of  the  covenant, 
and  first — the  rainbow  is  the  chUd  of  the  cloud  and  the  sun.  No  sooner  did  man 
fall,  and  consequently  the  cloud  gather,  than  the  light  which  had  been  shining  from 
before  all  time  flew  apace,  and  darting  through  the  gloom,  kissed  with  its  golden 
rays  the  threatening  cloud.  In  a  moment  there  was  a  heavenly  transformation,  a 
belt  of  light  encircled  the  cloud  in  the  shape  of  that  sweet  promise  given  to  our 
parents,  "  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  2.  Mercy  met 
misery,  and  the  result  was  the  covenant  of  grace.  Man's  depravity  forms  the  dark 
background  that  throws  up  in  glorious  contrast  the  brightness  of  God's  grace,  but 
the  covenant  rests  on  other  foundations.  It  is  founded  on  the  purposes  of  God,  and 
although  its  sweet  engagements  are  for  man,  they  rest  not  on  man  ;  it  is  a  covenant 
of  "  I  will "  and  "  thou  shalt."  3.  Again,  the  rainbow  is  an  emblem  of  reconcilia- 
tion and  security.  It  was  so  to  Noah.  God  has  said,  "  I  will  look  upon  the  bow  "  ; 
well,  then,  do  you  look  upon  it  too,  for  in  that  you  are  reconciled  to  Him  with  a 
reconciliation  that  He  has  declared  shall  never  be  broken.  4.  The  rainbow  was 
God's  handiwork.  "  I  do  set  My  bow  in  the  cloud."  So  with  the  everlasting  cove- 
nant of  grace,  from  first  to  last  it  is  God's.  (1)  It  is  His  in  conception.  (2)  It  is 
His  in  provision.  All  that  was  necessary  for  its  accomplishment  has  been  provided 
by  the  same  One  who  sketched  the  marvellous  plan.  (3)  It  is  His  also  in  execution. 
The  power  that  convinces — the  grace  that  draws — the  faith  that  accepts — the  peace 
that  follows— the  security  that  abides,  are  all,  all  of  God.  5.  This  rainbow  never 
melts.  II.  Its  position.  Bound  about  the  throne.  1.  May  not  the  fact  of  the 
rainbow  being  all  round  the  throne  teach  that  God  in  all  His  persons  is  included  in 
the  covenant  of  grace  ?  It  is  a  blessed  truth  that  it  is  so.  The  covenant  embraces 
the  whole  Trinity — not  one  of  the  Persons  is  omitted.  The  bow  encircles  the  whole 
throne.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  all  have  their  glorious  part  in  the  salvation 
of  man  by  grace.  2.  Being  round  the  throne,  it  was  always  in  view.  I  speak  with 
reverence,  but  it  was  impossible  for  Him  who  sat  upon  the  throne  not  to  behold  the 
rainbow — it  was  around  Him  on  every  side  ;  its  emerald  hue  would  be  ever  attract- 
ing attention.  John  only  saw  Him  who  was  like  jasper  through  the  bow,  and 
He  only  looked  upon  John  through  the  same  hallowed  medium.  God  only  looks 
upon  His  people  as  they  are  in  covenant  relationship  with  himself.  3.  As  the 
rainbow  was  all  round  the  throne,  it  follows  tha  '  there  is  no  coming  unto  God  but 
through  it.     Sinner,  wouldst  thou  be  saved  ?    Then  thou  must  be  saved  by  grace. 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


(A.  G.  Broivn.)  The  rainbow  round  about  the  throne  : — I.  The  rainbow.  1.  It 
proclaimed  the  fact  of  the  Divine  reconciliation.  What!  is  the  rainbow  in  the 
cloud  the  symbol  of  the  God  of  peace  ?  And  can  the  rainbow  round  about  the 
throne  be  the  symbol  of  the  God  of  wrath,  the  God  of  war  ?  Nay,  it  bears  the 
same  import  in  both  the  one  case  and  the  other ;  and  how,  then,  like  the  elders 
before  the  throne,  should  the  new  song  be  ever  so  much  upon  our  lips  at  the  sight, 
and  even  at  the  very  thought,  of  it.  2.  And  then,  in  virtue  of  the  Divine  reconcilia- 
tion, the  rainbow  further  intimated  that  providence  is  administered  under  the  reign 
of  grace.  3.  After  all,  the  grand  purpose  of  the  rainbow  was  to  seal  or  ratify  the 
covenant  of  God.  It  is  certain  there  cannot  be  a  flood  in  presence  of  a  rainbow. , 
II.  The  position  of  the  bainbow.  The  rainbow  is  round  about  the  throne — not 
above,  as  dominating,  or  upon,  as  occupying,  but  round  about,  as  encompassing' 
the  throne ;  and  in  this  regard  its  position  is  as  significantly  instructive  as  it  is , 
itself.  1.  It  evidently  carries  us  up  to  the  Divine  origin  of  the  covenant.  This 
covenant  is  most  certainly  of  Divine  authorship.  It  is  an  exclusively  Divine, 
product.  The  rainbow  is  made  up  of  various  intermediate  elements,  the  eye,  the! 
sunshine,  and  the  rain.  But  not  the  covenant.  It  is  all  God  Himself.  2.  This 
further  intimates  that  the  Divine  majesty  rules  in  the  covenant  throughout.  Let; 
us  never  suppose  that  God  has  abdicated  His  throne  when  He  dispenses  mercy,  that 
He  has  laid  aside  His  majesty  when  He  exercises  grace.  3.  Once  more,  by  the 
position  of  the  rainbow,  we  are  assured  that  the  covenant  will  never  pass  from  the 
Divine  remembrance.  III.  The  aspect  of  the  bainbow.  The  natural  rainbow  is 
of  varied  hue ;  but  green  is  the  prevailing  colour  in  the  rainbow  round  about  the 
throne — here  said  to  be  "  in  sight  hke  unto  an  emerald."  Now,  let  us  observe  why, 
this  rainbow  has  so  much  in  it,  not  of  heaven's,  but  of  earth's  colour,  not  sky-blue, 
but  emerald-green.  1.  It  indicates  that  there  is  a  refreshing  beauty  in  the  covenant 
which  is  never  wearisome  to  look  at.  Some  colours,  even  heaven's  own  azure-blue, 
soon  dazzle  or  fatigue  the  vision.  The  earth's  soft  emerald-green  never  does. 
Hence  the  prevailing  colour  of  this  rainbow.  To  look  at  the  throne,  and  Him  who 
sits  on  it,  in  the  fire-light  resplendence  of  His  holiness,  "like  a  jasper  and  a 
sardine  stone,"  how  can  we  do  so  without  having  our  eyes,  as  it  were,  burned  out  ? 
But  with  this  emerald-green  of  covenant  love  and  grace  all  round,  how  the  sight  of 
that  very  glory  becomes  a  beatific  vision.  We  see  God  and  live.  2.  And  again, 
this  emerald-green  of  the  rainbow  may  be  held  to  intimate  that  there  is  an  essential 
unity  in  the  covenant,  whatever  variety  may  circumstantially  distinguish  it. 
There  is  no  rainbow  without  the  sevenfold  variety  of  the  prismatic  colours,  yet 
these  colours  are  all  harmoniously  blended  together  in  its  arch  of  beauty  ;  at  least, 
they  are  so  blended  together  by  the  prevailing  green  of  the  rainbow  round  about 
the  throne.  And  yet,  again,  the  symbol  is  in  this  regard  significant.  There  is  a 
manifold  variety  of  Divine  promises  and  blessings  which  at  sundry  times  and  in 
divers  manners  have  been  given  in  sovereign  manifestation  from  the  throne ;  but 
they  are  all  suffused  with  the  one  ever-permeating  tint  of  grace,  new  covenant  grace. 
3.  Yet,  once  again,  the  everlasting  duration  of  the  covenant  may  be  said  to  be 
shadowed  forth  in  the  emerald  aspect  of  "  the  rainbow  round  about  the  throne." 
{E.  A.  Thomson.)  The  rainbow  round  the  throne  : — I.  The  obvious  idea  con- 
nected with  a  •'  throne  "  is  that  of  poweb  or  dominion.  It  is  the  known  public  seat 
of  legislation,  government,  and  judgment,  surrounded  with  all  the  pomp  and  circum- 
stance of  state  ceremony  and  outward  splendour.  Before  it  the  loyal  are  proud  to 
bow  in  token  of  their  homage.  At  its  footstool  the  rebel  is  eager  to  fall  prostrate, 
that  he  may  sue  for  mercy.  And  from  it  the  traitor  hastens  to  flee  lest  his  sentence 
of  condemnation  should  be  pronounced  by  the  sovereign.  Now  let  us  carry  these 
simple  ideas  to  the  interpretation  of  the  symbol  employed  in  the  text.  Conceive  for 
a  moment  that  the  vision  vouchsafed  to  the  apostle  were  granted  to  you.  How 
inconceivably  exalted  would  your  views  of  the  Divine  glory  become  1  You  would 
feel  that  power  belongeth  unto  God  !.  Let  us  consider  how  it  is  exalted  by  His  other 
perfections.  Omnipotence  alone,  if  it  were  not  guided  by  omniscience,  would  only 
be  the  source  of  unmeasured  and  inconceivable  confusion  and  mercy.  But 
"  blessed,"  says  the  prophet,  "  be  the  name  of  our  God  for  ever  and  ever,  for 
wisdom  and  might  are  His."  Again,  even  this  combination  of  attributes  would 
not  afford  suflicient  security  for  the  happiness  of  His  subjects,  unless  it  were 
hallowed  by  the  most  perfect  purity.  But  He  is  emphatically  "  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel."  II.  A  second  emblem  connected  with  the  former,  which,  whilst  it  detracts 
nothing  from  its  glory,  softens  ils  splendours,  and  mitigates  its  terrors.  "And 
there  was  a  rainbow,"  it  is  said,  "  round  about  the  throne."     This  is  the  symbol  of 


CHAP.  !▼.]  REVELATION.  291 

MERCY ;  and  independently  of  its  being  God's  own  instituted  type,  it  has  a  native 
significance  which  it  is  delightful  to  notice.  The  most  striking  feature  in  the 
natural  rainbow  is  the  skill  in  which  its  beauteous  variety  of  colours  is  blended 
together.  Have  we  not  here  a  most  exquisite  emblem  of  the  way  in  which  the 
Divine  attributes  all  harmonise  together,  whilst  mercy,  so  to  speak,  is  the  emerald 
grace,  and  presents  the  prevailing  and  refreshing  hue?  What,  to  the  sinner,  is 
power  without  mercy  but  a  sure  pledge  of  his  destruction.  Infinite  wisdom  only 
closes  the  door  against  the  possibility  of  escaping  detection.  Holiness  banishes  him 
for  ever  from  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  "of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity," 
whilst  justice  records  the  sentence  of  His  condemnation  in  characters  of  flame. 
But  how  blessed  the  change  when  "  mercy  and  truth  meet  together — righteousness 
and  peace  kiss  each  other."  The  eternal  wisdom  is  engaged  to  plan,  almighty 
power  to  execute,  the  scheme  of  redemption — justice  is  appeased  in  the  person  of 
the  sinner's  surety — all  guilt  is  removed,  and  perfect  righteousness  imputed  through 
faith  in  the  blood  of  atonement ;  and  holiness  itself  is  satisfied  through  the 
sanctifying  work  of  the  Spirit.  But  the  most  precious  and  important  feature  of 
the  emblem  is  still  unnoticed.  It  not  merely  tells  of  mercy,  but  covenant  mercy  ; 
and  was  instituted  as  God's  own  sign  for  this  very  purpose.  And  blessed  indeed  are 
the  provisions  of  that  covenant !  It  tells  no  more  of  works  of  righteousness  to  be 
done  by  the  sinner  as  the  condition  of  his  eternal  salvation.  "But  this  is  the 
covenant  that  I  will  make  with  the  house  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord. 
I  will  put  My  laws  into  their  mind,"  &c.    (C.  F.  Childe,  M,A.) 

Ver.  4.  Upon  the  seats  I  saw  four  and  twenty  elders  sitting. — The  elders  before 
the  throne  : — I.  The  state  and  enjoyments  of  the  spirits  before  the  throne.  1. 
Mark,  first,  that  the  saints  in  heaven  are  represented  as  "  elders,"  which  we  take  to 
refer  not  merely  to  the  office  of  the  eldership  as  it  is  exercised  among  us,  but  rather 
to  the  fulness  of  growth  of  believers  before  the  throne.  The  elders  in  the  Church 
are  those  who  by  reason  of  years  have  had  their  senses  exercised  ;  they  are  not  the 
saplings  of  the  forest,  but  the  well-rooted  trees ;  they  are  not  the  blades  of  corn 
up-springing,  but  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  awaiting  the  reaper's  sickle.  As  to  the 
number — twenty-four.  I  think,  as  there  were  twenty-four  courses  of  Levites,  who 
were  porters  at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  and  twenty-four  courses  of  priests  who 
offered  sacrifice,  so  the  number  twenty-four  is  made  use  of  to  show  that  the  service 
of  God  in  His  temple  is  complete,  that  every  part  of  the  Divine  service  will  be  taken 
up,  and  around  that  altar  which  smokes  before  God  eternally  there  shall  be  a  full 
complement  of  those  who  shall  bow  before  Him,  and  do  Him  homage.  2.  These 
elders  are  said  to  be  around  the  throne.  We  suppose,  as  near  as  we  can  catch  the 
thought  of  John,  sitting  in  a  semi-circle,  as  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin  did  around  the 
Prince  of  Israel.  "  There  is  an  equality  among  the  saints."  There  shall  not  be 
some  near  the  centre,  and  others  far  away  on  the  verge  of  the  wide  circumference ; 
but  they  shall  all  be  near  to  Christ,  all  equally  His  favourites  and  His  friends.  3. 
The  elders  are  "  clothed  in  white  raiment."  In  this  they  are  an  example  to  us. 
Perfection  we  must  not  hope  to  see  here ;  but  oh,  we  must  aim  after  it.  4.  These 
elders  exercised  a  priesthood.  Indeed,  their  being  clothed  in  white  garments,  while 
it  is  an  emblem  of  their  purity,  also  represents  them  as  being  priests  unto  God. 
"  Thou  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests."  They  exercise  the  office  of 
priesthood,  as  you  perceive,  by  the  double  offering  of  prayer  and  praise.  Let  us 
look  up  to  them  as  the  priests  of  God,  and  then  ask  ourselves,  are  we  celebrating  His 
worship  too?  5.  They  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold.  Now  let  us  imitate 
them  in  this.  "  Oh !  "  say  you,  "  but  I  cannot  wear  a  crown  as  they  do."  Never- 
theless, you  are  a  king ;  for  they  who  are  Christ's  are  kings.  Keign  over  thy  sins. 
Reign  over  thy  passions.  Be  as  a  king  in  the  midst  of  all  that  would  lead  thee 
astray.  In  the  world  at  large  act  a  king's  part.  Let  your  liberality  of  spirit  be 
right  royal.  Let  your  actions  never  be  mean,  sneaking,  cowardly,  dastardly.  II. 
The  occupation  and  spirit  of  these  glorified  ones,  as  they  should  be  imitated 
BY  US  BELOW.  Notice  their  occupation.  1.  First  of  all  it  is  one  of  humility.  "  They 
fall  down  before  Him  "  (ver.  10).  The  more  holy,  the  more  humble.  2.  But  as 
they  fall  before  the  throne  in  humility,  you  will  note  that  they  express  their 
gratitude.  It  is  said  they  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne.  They  know  where 
they  got  them  from,  and  they  know  to  whom  to  ascribe  the  praise.  3.  These  elders 
spent  their  time  in  joyous  song.  "  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book."  4.  These 
saints  not  only  offered  praise,  but  prayer.  5.  I  must  not  forget,  however,  here, 
that  these  elders  before  the  throne  were  ready  not  only  for  prayer  and  praise,  but 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

for  all  kinds  of  service.  You  remember  there  was  one  of  them,  when  John  wept, 
who  said,  "  "Weep  not."  Then  there  was  another  of  the  elders  who  said  to  John, 
for  his  instruction,  "  Who  are  these?"  &c.  Now  those  before  the  throne  are  willing 
to  comfort  the  weeper  or  to  instruct  the  ignorant.  Let  us  do  the  same !  and  may 
it  be  ours  to  wipe  the  tear  from  many  an  eye,  to  chase  the  darkness  of  ignorance 
from  many  a  young  heart.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon,) 

Ver.  6.  A  sea  of  glass  like  unto  crystal. — The  spiritual  navigator  hound  for  the . 
holy  land: — "And  before  the  throne  there  was  a  sea  of  glass  like  unto  crystal." 
I  find  hereof  seven  several  expositions.  1.  Some  expound  this  glassy  and  crystal- 
like sea,  of  contemplative  men.  2.  Some  conceive  it  to  be  an  abundant  under- 
standing of  the  truth,  a  happy  and  excellent  knowledge  given  to  the  saints,  and' 
that  in  a  wonderful  plenitude.  3.  Some  understand  by  this  glassy  sea  like  crystal, 
the  fulness  of  all  those  gifts  and  graces  which  the  Church  derives  from  Christ.  4. 
Some  intend  this  glassy  sea  like  to  crystal  to  signify  the  crystalline  heaven,  where 
the  eternal  God  keeps  His  court  and  sits  in  His  throne.  5.  Some  expositions  give 
this  sea  for  the  gospel.  And  their  opinion  is  probably  deduced  from  the  two 
attributes,  glassy  and  crystalline.  (1)  The  first  expresseth  a  bright  and  clear 
matter.  Which  sets  a  difference  betwixt  that  legal  and  this  evangelical  sea.  That 
was  duskish  and  shadowy  matter,  not  penetrable  to  the  sight.  This  is  a  sea  of 
glass,  more  clear  and  transparent.  (2)  Crystalline  is  the  other  attribute.  Now  as 
the  other  attribute  takes  from  the  gospel  all  obscurity,  so  this  takes  from  it  all 
impurity.  6.  Some  by  this  glassy  and  crystal  sea  conceived  to  be  meant  baptism, 
prefigured  by  that  Eed  Sea  (Exod.  xiv.).  The  accordance  of  the  type  and  anti- 
type stands  thus :  as  none  of  the  children  of  Israel  entered  the  terrestrial  Caanan 
but  by  passing  the  Ked  Sea,  so,  ordinarily,  no  Christian  enters  the  celestial  Caanan 
but  through  this  glassy  sea.  The  laver  of  regeneration  is  that  sea,  wherein  we, 
must  all  wash.  7.  Lastly,  others  affirm  that  by  this  glassy  sea  is  meant  the  world. 
This  being  the  most  general  and  most  probable  opinion,  on  it  I  purpose  to  build  my 
subsequent  discourse.  A  special  reason  to  induce  me  I  derive  from  Rev.  xv.  2, 
where  the  saints,  having  passed  the  dangers  of  the  glassy  sea — all  the  perils  of  this 
slippery  world — and  now  setting  their  triumphant  feet  on  the  shores  of  happiness, 
they  sing  a  victorious  song.  Now  for  further  confirmation  of  this  opinion,  in  the 
third  verse,  the  exultation  which  they  sing  is  called  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant 
of  God.  So  that  it  seems  directly  to  answer  in  a  sweet  allusion  to  the  delivery  of 
Israel  from  the  Egyptians.  Our  adversaries  like  theirs,  our  dangers  like  theirs, 
our  warfare  like  theirs;  but  the  country  we  sail  to  far  transcends  that  earthly 
Caanan.  Against  this  construction  it  is  objected — (1)  This  sea  is  before  the 
throne ;  how  can  the  world  be  so  said  ?  Properly,  to  show  that  all  things  in  the 
world  are  not  subject  to  fortune,  but  governed  by  Him  that  sits  on  the  throne.  (2) 
The  world  is  rather  thick  and  muddy ;  how  can  it  be  called  crystal  ?  Fitly,  not 
in  regard  of  its  own  nature,  for  so  it  is  polluted  ;  but  in  regard  of  God  that  beholds 
it,  who  sees  all  things  done  in  it  so  clearly  as  in  crystal.  I.  A  sea.  1.  The  sea 
is  an  unquiet  element,  which  none  but  the  Maker's  hand  can  bridle  (Matt.  viii.  27). 
The  world  is  in  full  measure  as  unruly.  The  Psalmist  matcheth  roaring  waves 
and  roaring  men  ;  the  raging  of  the  sea  with  the  madness  of  the  world.  And  yet 
God  is  able  to  still  them  both  (Psa.  Ixv.  7).  The  prophet  calls  the  sea  a  raging 
creature,  and  therein  yokes  it  with  the  wicked  (Isa.  Ivii.  20).  The  world  is  full  of 
molesting  vexations  no  less  than  the  sea.  (1)  Sometimes  it  swells  with  pride,  as 
the  sea  with  waves.  (2)  Vain-glory  is  the  wind  that  raiseth  up  the  billows  of  this 
sea.  (3)  The  world,  like  the  sea,  is  blue  with  envy,  livid  with  malice.  (4)  Some- 
times it  boils  with  wrath :  and  herein  the  world  and  the  sea  are  very  similar. 
(5)  The  sea  is  not  more  deep  than  the  world.  A  bottomless  subtilty  is  in  men's 
hearts,  and  an  honest  man  wants  a  plummet  to  sound  it.  (6)  There  is  foaming 
luxury  in  this  sea ;  a  corrupt  and  stinking  froth,  which  the  world  casts  up.  The 
steam  of  lust  fumes  perpetually.  (7)  The  world,  as  the  sea,  is  a  swallowing  gulf. 
There  are  four  great  devourers  in  the  world,  luxury,  pride,  gluttony,  covetousness. 
2.  The  sea  is  bitter.  The  waters  thereof  are  salt  and  brinish.  All  demonstrates 
the  world  to  have  an  unsavoury  relish.  So  it  hath  truly,  whether  we  respect  the 
works  or  the  pleasures  of  it.  But  how  bitter,  saltish,  and  unsavoury  soever  the  sea 
is,  yet  the  fishes  that  swim  in  it  exceedingly  like  it.  The  world  is  not  so  distaste- 
ful to  the  heavenly  palate  as  it  is  sweet  to  the  wicked.  3.  The  sea  is  no  place  to 
continue  in.  No  man  sails  there  to  sail  there  ;  but  as  he  propounds  to  his  purpose 
a  voyage,  so  to  his  hopes  a  return.     The  world  in  like  sort  is  no  place  to  dwell  in 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  293 

for  ever.  Self-flattering  fools  that  so  esteem  it  (Psa.  xlix.  11).  4.  The  sea  is  full  of 
dangers.  11.  A  sea  of  glass.  1.  There  is  a  glassy  colour  congruent  to  the  sea.  All 
the  beauty  of  glass  consists  in  the  colour ;  and  what  in  the  world,  that  is  of  the  world, 
is  commendable  besides  the  colour  ?  A  cottage  would  serve  to  sleep  in  as  well  as 
a  sumptuous  palace,  but  for  the  colour.  Kussets  be  as  warm  as  silks,  but  for  the 
glistering  colour.  2.  Glass  is  a  slippery  metal.  The  wisest  Solomon,  the  strongest 
Samson,  have  been  fetched  up  by  this  wrestler,  and  measured  their  lengths  on  the 
ground.  How  dangerous,  then,  is  it  to  run  fast  on  this  sea,  where  men  are  scarce 
able  to  stand.  3.  This  glass  denotes  brittleness.  A  fit  attribute  to  express  the 
nature  of  worldly  things  ;  for  glass  is  not  more  fragile.  "  The  world  passeth  away 
and  the  lust  thereof,"  saith  St.  John.  Man  himself  is  but  brittle  stuff,  and  he  is  the 
noblest  part  of  the  world  (Job  xiv.  1).  Now,  since  the  world  is  a  sea,  and  so  brittle, 
a  sea  of  glass,  let  us  seek  to  pass  over  well,  but  especially  to  land  well.  A  ship  under 
sail  is  a  good  sight ;  but  it  is  better  to  see  her  well  moored  in  the  haven.  Be 
desirous  of  good  life,  not  of  long  life ;  the  shortest  cut  to  our  haven  is  the  happiest 
voyage.  Who  would  be  long  on  the  sea  ?  III.  Thus  far  we  have  surveyed  this 
glassy  sea,  the  world,  in  regard  of  itself.  The  other  two  attributes  concern  Axmighty 
God's  holding  and  beholding.  1.  That  God  may  most  clearly  view  all  things 
being  and  done  in  this  world ;  it  is  said  to  be  in  His  sight  as  clear  as  crystal.  As  in 
crystal  there  is  nothing  so  little  but  it  may  be  seen ;  so  there  is  nothing  on  earth, 
said  or  done,  so  slight  or  small,  that  it  may  escape  His  all-seeing  providence  (Heb. 
iv.  13).  God  beholds,  as  in  a  clear  mirror  of  crystal,  all  our  impurities,  impieties, 
our  contempt  of  sermons,  neglect  of  sacraments,  dishallowing  His  sabbaths.  Well, 
as  God  sees  all  things  so  clearly,  so  I  would  to  God  we  would  behold  somewhat. 
Let  us  open  our  eyes  and  view  in  this  crystal  glass  our  own  works.  2.  Lastly,  this 
glassy  sea  is  not  only  as  crystal  for  the  transparent  brightness  that  the  Almighty's 
eye  may  see  aU  things  done  in  it,  but  it  Ues  for  situation  before  His  throne; 
generally  for  the  whole,  and  particularly  for  every  member,  subject  to  His  judg- 
ment and  governance.  His  throne  signifies  that  impartial  government  which  He 
exerciseth  over  the  world  (Psa.  ix.  7,  8).  (T.  Adams.)  Four  beasts  full  of  eyes 
before  and  behind. — The  ideal  of  intelligent  creatureship : — I.  It  stands  in  im- 
mediate  CONTACT  WITH  THE  PRESENCE  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  GOD.      1.  It  is  the  ideal  of 

intelligent  creatureship  to  live  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God.  2.  It  is  the  ideal 
of  intelligent  creatureship  to  serve  in  connection  with  the  celestial  government  of 
all  things.  11.  It  has  numerous  inlets  op  knowledge  which  aid  in  a  vigilant 
CONDUCT  OF  LIFE.  1.  They  have  a  power  to  understand  history :  eyes  behind.  2. 
They  have  a  power  to  comprehend  prophecy :  eyes  before.  3.  They  have  power  to 
interpret  self :  eyes  within.  IH.  It  is  gifted  with  a  combination  of  varied  and 
well-balanced  abilities.  1.  Great  courage.  2.  Enduring  industry.  3.  True 
intelligence.  4.  Sublime  aspiration.  5.  Swift  service.  IV.  It  is  ever  ascribing 
devout  praise  to  the  great  God.  Lessons :  1.  There  are  in  the  unseen  universe 
intelligent  creatures  vastly  superior  to  man.  2.  As  these  creatures  find  the  highest 
joy  in  the  service  of  God,  so  should  man.  3.  Man  should  seek  to  enter  into  the 
vigour  of  an  ideal  creatureship.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Full  of  eyes  within. — 
Spiritual  introspection : — I.  A  few  thoughts  respecting  these  awful  intelligences 
OF  whom  we  read  in  the  text.  Every  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God  has  usually 
been  accompanied  with  the  presence  of  these  living  creatures.  In  the  column  of 
fire  at  the  gate  of  Eden  were  seen  the  mystic  forms  and  evolutions  of  these  won- 
drous beings.  In  after  times,  God  was  addressed  as  dwelling  between  the  cherubim. 
In  the  holiest  of  aU,  there  was  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  the  cherubim  of  glory 
overshadowing  the  mercy  seat.  The  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  seems  associated 
with  them.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  Oriental  court  was  framed  on  the 
principle  that  it  was  the  pattern  of  the  Divine.  The  monarch  was  the  visible 
representative  of  God.  His  laws,  like  those  of  God,  were  immutable.  No  one 
•without  permission  could  see  his  face  and  live;  and  the  highest  princes  of  the 
realm  stood  in  his  presence.  In  the  court  of  our  sovereign  the  most  exalted 
personages — the  highest  in  title,  rank,  and  wealth — minister  to  royalty.  Their  very 
greatness  is  necessary  to  qualify  them  for  service,  and  thus  they  manifest  the  glory 
of  the  monarch.  Those  created  beings  who  stand  before  God  in  an  officisd 
character  are  represented  as  possessing  all  possible  perfections.  They  are  the 
highest  order  of  created  intelligences ;  they  are  the  ministers  of  the  great  King — and 
yet  between  them  and  God  how  great,  how  inconceivable  the  distance  1  The  im- 
propriety of  terming  these  living  creatures  "beasts"  has  been  admitted  by  every 
writer — the  term  is  utterly  at  variance  with  their  character  and  perfections.     They 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it.' 

are  evidently  ofl&cial  personages.  All  their  acts  are  ofl&cial.  That  these  living 
creatures  possess  the  highest  capacities  may  be  presumed  from  their  dignified 
station.  Their  penetrating  and  comprehensive  knowledge  is  intimated  by  their 
being  "  full  of  eyes,  before  and  behind."  They  see  the  past  as  well  as  the  present ; 
they  can  look  all  ways  and  see  all  things.  They  have,  in  its  perfection,  the  faculty 
of  introspection,  for  they  have  "  eyes  within."  This  singular  statement  is  but  the 
symbol  of  their  knowledge  of  themselves,  as  well  as  of  outward  things.  II.  A  few 
SUGGESTIONS  BELATiVE  TO  THE  FACULTY  OF  INTKOSPECTION.  Man  is  related  to  the  out- 
ward and  to  the  spiritual  world — to  the  things  that  are  seen  and  to  the  things  that 
are  unseen  —to  the  things  that  are  temporal  and  to  the  things  that  are  eternal.  He 
has  an  outward  and  an  inward  life — the  sense  of  sight  and  the  faculty  of  intro- 
spection. Man  is  "fearfully  and  wonderfully  made";  he  has  the  faculty  of 
introspection,  but  through  disuse  it  becomes  dimmed,  or  paralysed,  and  dead. 
Christ  comes  that  men  may  see:  "He  opens  blind  eyes."  The  regenerated  man 
is  the  spiritual  man,  with  the  full  use  of  spiritual  powers,  with  the  faculty  of 
spiritual  discernment.  But  more  particularly — 1.  Man  does  not  recognise  his  own 
spiritual  nature.  He  does  not  know  how  awful  and  mysterious  that  nature  is.  His 
outward  life  overshadows  his  inner  life.  His  body  is  the  prison-house  of  his  soul. 
The  spiritual  man  has  "  eyes  within."  He  communes  with  his  own  heart ;  he 
listens  to  the  utterances  of  his  spirit ;  he  is  familiar  with  the  sorrows  and  joys  of 
his  soul.  We  may  well  pray,  each  for  himself.  Open  Thou  my  eyes  that  I  may 
see  myself.  2.  Man  does  not  study  the  phenomena  of  his  own  mind.  He  thinks, 
but  he  thinks  about  his  calling,  about  his  trade ;  his  thoughts  are  like  his  tools,  his 
implements.  He  does  not  employ  the  powers  of  his  mind  on  spiritual  realities,  or 
make  his  thoughts  the  chariot  in  which  he  can  ascend  to  God.  If  we  had  eyes 
within  we  should  see  that  there  is  nothing  more  wonderful  than  thought.  We' 
should  see  "  that  as  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  he " ;  that  if  he  thinks 
worldly  thoughts,  he  is  worldly ;  that  if  he  thinks  sensual  thoughts,  he  is  sensual ; 
that  if  he  thinks  spiritual  thoughts,  he  is  spiritual ;  that  thoughts  are  of  moment 
and  of  the  utmost  importance.  3.  Men  do  not  know  their  own  hearts.  "  The 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked ;  who  can  know  it  ?  " 
There  is  only  one  Being  who  knows  it.  If  our  eyes  were  opened,  we  should  cry  out, 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God."  4.  Men  do  not  form  a  correct  estimate  of 
their  own  capabilities.  "  Man,"  says  Pascal,  "  is  the  scorn  and  the  glory  of  the 
universe."  You  have  a  nature  that  can  only  find  its  completeness  in  God,  and 
therefore  you  can  only  find  your  satisfaction  in  Him.  You  have  capabilities  that 
you  do  not  conceive  of,  for  joy  or  for  misery.  You  can  become  a  partaker  of  a 
Divine  nature,  or  you  can  sink  into  the  most  fearful  degradation  and  infamy.  {H. 
J.  Bevis.)  The  seeing  eye  : — Full  of  eyes  they  are,  these  living  creatures,  not  only 
before  and  behind,  but  within  and  without.  Within  every  living  creature  perceives 
itself,  scrutinises  its  own  inner  mysteries,  and  knows  its  own  instincts  and  feelings 
and  passions  and  ambition  and  hope  and  purpose.  All  these  it  has  eyes  to  see  in 
their  manifold  combinations  even  as  it  moves  on  and  acts.  And  eyes  without,  not 
absorbed  in  introspection,  but  rather,  and  at  the  same  moment  at  which  it  searches 
the  deep  things  of  the  spirit,  and  by  the  same  act  it  has  eyes  without,  eyes  that  see 
so  far  away  into  the  heart  of  things,  eyes  that  gaze  upon  all  the  amazing  scenery 
of  the  world  about  it,  eyes  that  look  upon  the  face  of  the  eternal  God.  Full  of 
eyes  1  What  a  surprising  characteristic  of  nature  for  us  1  Our  modern  feeling 
about  nature,  derived  from  unphilosophic  popularised  science  of  the  day,  pro- 
nounced that  nature  is  eyeless,  that  it  works  in  the  dark,  that  its  laws  are  blind  to 
its  issues  and  action.  Nature  crushes  and  ruins  the  distinction  between  good  and 
bad  and  right  and  wrong,  and  knows  not  what  it  does.  Kivers  run  blindly  down  in 
their  grooved  channels ;  the  seas  beat  blindly  against  blind  rocks  ;  the  winds  moan 
in  blindness  round  the  blind  walls  of  the  hills.  The  whole  earth  is  blind.  The 
heavens  are  vacant  of  any  vision ;  they  tell  us  we  have  put  out  their  eyes.  And 
this  has  happened,  we  know,  because  we  have  dropped  God  and  His  Christ  out  of 
their  own  creation.  We  have  tried  to  look  at  it  as  if  they  were  not  there.  We  are 
compelled,  in  order  to  accomplish  certain  analytical  issues  essential  to  scientific 
investigation,  to  omit  the  spiritual  factors  of  the  universe  from  our  immediate 
calculations.  But  then  this  abstraction  is  confessedly  only  for  a  purpose  that  is 
partial  and  incomplete  in  itself,  and  the  danger  lies  in  this,  that  when  once  this 
partial  purpose  of  science  is  satisfied  we  forget  to  restore  what  our  abstraction  had 
eliminated.  And  then  we  look  up  and  out  and  are  appalled — for  lo,  God  has 
vanished  out  of  the  natural  scene !    It  is  all  empty  of  His  presence,  of  His  will  I 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  295 

It  is  purposeless,  it  is  mechanical,  it  is  blind — so  we  cry  in  our  dismay  !  How  could 
God  be  expected  to  appear  in  the  shape  of  a  material  phenomenon,  and  yet  only  so 
could  our  scientific  methods  of  research  come  upon  Him.  So  it  is  that  the  world  is 
blind,  is  godless  to  this  pseudo-science.  Look  at  nature  with  the  eyes  of  a  spirit, 
according  to  the  rules  and  methods  of  spiritual  vision  ;  bring  into  play  the  organs 
that  belong  to  a  spiritual  world,  and  lo !  it  is  no  longer  sightless  and  meaningless 
and  dark ;  it  has  become  full  of  eyes  within  and  without.  In  every  portion  of  it 
there  is  a  light,  a  purpose,  a  hope.  The  soul  of  man  becomes  conscious  of  a  spirit 
that  is  abroad  and  about  him  on  every  side,  and  which  fills  his  earthly  house  with 
the  presence  of  Him  he  knows  and  who  knows  him.  On  all  sides  of  him  in  this 
natural  life  here  on  earth  he  dimly  perceives  by  the  inspiration  of  a  fellow  feeling 
the  living  creatures  full  of  eyes  within  and  without,  who  unite  with  him  in  uttering 
the  one  phrase,  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty !  Full  of  eyes  within  and 
without.  Our  common  humanity — that  too  should  become  full  of  eyes.  Every 
faculty,  every  capacity  in  us  which  before  had  passed  under  Christ's  sway 
while  it  was  of  the  earth  earthy  was  always  blundering  into  the  dark,  should 
discover  that  the  quickening  power  of  the  Spirit  has  brought  out  one  great 
boon — the  gift  of  eyes — the  capacity  to  see.  That  is  the  triumph  of  grace 
— that  it  enables  this  natural  gift  of  man,  his  reason,  to  see  where  before 
he  could  not  see.  Grace  gives  it  eyes,  and  reason  henceforward  can  join  in  the 
hymn  of  adoration.  It  looks  within  and  it  looks  without,  and  everywhere  it  now 
recognises  the  triple  law  of  the  spiritual  life,  the  triple  evidence  of  the  threefold 
God  I  And  thus  made  full  of  eyes  to  see,  it,  too,  sings  its  song.  Holy,  holy,  holy ! 
And  not  reason  only,  but  conscience  gains  eyes ;  the  natural  conscience  lifted  and 
transfigured  perceives  what  it  had  never  seen  hitherto.  It  sees,  for  instance,  the 
higher  possibihty  of  purity  to  which  it  had  been  wholly  dark ;  it  sees  that  purity 
holds  the  secret  of  true  growth,  for  man  and  for  woman  all  alike  and  both  equally, 
which  was  never  suggested  to  it  until  Christ  opened  its  eyes.  It  detects  the  powers 
inherent  in  humiliation,  in  self-sacrifice,  and  in  brotherly  service.  Therefore, 
where  before  it  expected  only  weakness,  it  now  perceives  strength ;  the  glories  that 
lay  concealed  in  virtues  that  it  deemed  passive  and  petty  and  effeminate  are  now 
disclosed  to  it.  The  darkness  should  always  be  turning  into  light  as  the  fulness  of 
grace  spreads  throughout  the  dim  surface  of  human  life,  and  touches  it  all  with 
glory.  Full  of  eyes !  A  question  appropriate  to  Trinity  Sunday  for  each  one  of 
ns  is,  Do  we  use  our  human  capacities  with  better  precision  than  we  did  ?  Do  we 
use  them  over  the  larger  surface  of  life  ?  Do  we  see  more  than  we  used  to  of  God's 
counsels  for  us  here,  of  man's  obligations,  of  our  own  possibilities  and  calls  and 
duties  ?  Grace  should  be  for  ever  raising  our  ordinary  capacities  to  a  higher  power, 
enriching  their  insight,  fertilising  their  judgment.  Is  it  so?  Ask  yourselves.  Your 
imagination,  for  instance,  is  it  more  full  of  eyes  than  before  ?  Does  your  imagi- 
nation bring  the  sorrow  of  the  world  before  you  as  if  it  were  your  own  case,  as  a 
bitter  sorrow,  as  a  personal  disgrace,  for  which  you  abhor  yourself  in  dust  and 
ashes  ?  And  your  sympathies,  are  they  more  alert,  quicker  than  once  they  were  ? 
Ah,  the  sins  I  They,  too,  stand  out,  now  that  you  have  eyes  to  see  them,  with  a 
worse  ugliness  and  a  more  rooted,  stubborn  repugnance.  You  had  not  thought 
yourself  so  bad,  so  base,  so  selfish,  but  now  the  light  is  thrown  on  you.  You  have 
eyes  to  see  all  the  black  wrong.  {Canon  Scott  Holland.)  They  rest  not  day 
and  night,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy. — Labour  and  rest : — God  has  aflixed  certain 
peculiarities  to  our  present  state  of  being.  It  can  be  shown  that  there  are 
portions  even  of  the  visible  creation  in  which  there  can  be  no  succession  of  day 
and  night  such  as  there  is  on  earth — regions  far  removed  in  space  from  us,  where 
clusters  of  suns  must  of  necessity  make  perpetual  sunshine.  And  we  know  from 
Scripture  that  the  peculiar  relation  between  rest  and  labour  which  is  characteristic 
of  earth,  at  all  events  as  it  is,  is  local,  or  temporary,  or  both;  and  that  in 
another  state  of  things  the  words  of  our  text  take  the  place  of  it,  and  "  they 
rest  not  day  and  night."  I.  In  Eden  there  was  best  without  labour.  Eden  in 
its  innocence  gave  no  trouble  to  its  inhabitants.  They  trimmed  its  roses,  and  trod 
its  velvet  lawns,  and  ate  its  fruits,  and  drank  its  transparent  rivers,  and  enjoyed  the 
tranquillity  of  unbroken  rest.  And  this  is  the  reason  why,  though  man  now  cannot 
be  really  happy  without  employment,  he  naturally  turns  in  imagination  to  such  a 
state  as  one  of  perfect  enjoyment.  It  was  his  primary  condition  before  sin  entered  into 
the  world.  JI.  We  turn  to  labour  and  rest — the  relation  which  exists  on  earth 
AS  it  is.  That  in  this  state  of  things  there  should  be  labour  is  expressly  declared 
after  the  fall.    <'  In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt  thou  eat  bread."    That  there  must 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

be  rest  is  expressly  taught :  "  Man  goeth  forth  to  his  work  and  to  his  labour  until 
the  evening."  Aid  we  know,  in  practice,  that  within  certain  limits  there  may  be 
a  change  in  the  relation  subsisting  between  the  two,  but  that  if  these  limits  are 
exceeded  either  way,  the  result  is  ruin  to  man's  moral  and  physical  constitution. 
It  degrades  him  to  be  without  labour  ;  it  destroys  him  to  be  without  rest.  There  is 
but  one  who  has  lived  in  this  ruined  world  without  sin.  Christ,  as  man,  is  the 
model  of  what  man  ought  to  be  in  a  world  which  is  as  it  ought  not  to  be.  In 
Christ's  example  we  see  what  ought  to  be  man's  state  in  the  present  world,  as  it 
respects  labour  and  rest :  that  the  two  should  interchange — that  because  it  is 
paradise  no  longer  there  must  be  toil,  and  because  it  is  still  earth  there  must  be 
rest — rest  for  bodily  refreshment,  rest  for  the  friendly  intercourse  of  one  with 
another,  rest  for  communion  with  Him  whose  presence  alone  can  give  the  soul  of 
man  true  rest.  III.  There  is  another  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  relation  between 
labour  and  rest — labouk  without  best.  And  this  is  only  to  be  found  in  hell.  Satan 
himself  is  always  represented  as  a  being  of  restless  activity:  "going  about," 
"  walking  up  and  down."  There  is  a  faint  reflection  of  hell  in  the  bosom  of  each 
unconverted  man ;  and  of  such  we  read  (Isa.  Ivii.  20).  And  let  me  say  that  whatever 
makes  earth  approximate  to  a  state  of  restlessness,  so  far  makes  it  approach  to  a 
resemblance  to  the  place  of  everlasting  misery.  IV.  We  come  to  the  last  and  best 
relation  between  rest  and  labour,  that  which  exists  in  heaven,  where  they 
"  rest  not  day  and  night,"  because  they  rest  in  labour.  In  heaven  employ- 
ment is  unceasing — for  those  who  are  there  are  freed  from  the  weariness 
of  the  flesh.  Free  from  all  infirmity,  they  rest  not  day  and  night.  And 
employment  is  unceasing  in  heaven — for  the  employments  of  heaven  are 
restoring  instead  of  exhausting.  They  have  life  in  them.  {S.  Garratt,  B.A.) 
True  worship  a  foretaste  of  heaven: — Now,  what  are  the  characteristic  features, 
so  to  caU  them,  of  the  perfect  worship  of  heaven,  which  are  touched  on  in  the  text  ? 
1.  It  will  be  a  continuous  service.  There  will  be  no  break  or  intermission  on  the 
part  of  those  who  join  in  it.  The  now  that  is  there  is  always.  2.  It  will  be  united 
worship — all  join  and  all  join  aUke.  3.  The  character  of  the  worship  will  be  one 
and  the  same.  4.  The  worship  will  be  "  before  the  throne,"  i.e.,  in  the  con- 
scious immediate  presence  of  Almighty  God,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  with 
all  the  surroundings  of  visible  glory.  5.  The  worship  will  be  all-absorbing  in 
contemplation  of  the  Divine  glory  and  perfections.  No  thought  of  personal  doings 
or  deservings  can  find  place  there.  There  is  only  the  acknowledgment  that  all  are 
His  gifts — all  has  come  from  Him — and  there  is  the  humble  tendering  back  of 
everything.  "  The  crowns  are  cast  before  the  throne  "  in  adoring  thankfulness  to 
Him  who  is  the  Giver  of  them  all.  Worship,  as  distinct  from  prayer  and  praise 
and  thanksgiving,  is  the  conscious  lifting  up  of  the  soul  to  God  in  contemplation  of 
Him,  in  His  Being  and  acts,  whether  towards  ourselves  in  particular,  or  towards 
our  whole  race,  or  in  all  His  works,  according  to  our  knowledge  of  them.  We 
cannot  really  worship  without  knowledge — we  cannot  worship  a  blank ;  we  must 
have  knowledge  of  Him  to  whom  we  pay  homage ;  and  that  knowledge  must  be 
received  into  ourselves  from  without.  Thus  worship  is  both  a  taking  in  and  a 
giving  out:  taking  in,  i.e.,  receiving,  and  following  out,  and  expanding,  and  setting 
forth  before  ourselves,  who  that  great  Being  is  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  whose 
works  encompass  us,  and  to  whom  we  desire  to  draw  near,  to  know  better  and  to 
hold  communion  with  ;  and  then  giving  back,  as  it  were,  this  knowledge  at  which 
we  have  arrived,  in  acts  of  adoration  and  praise,  expressed  in  different  ways 
according  to  the  subject  matter  as  regards  Almighty  God,  in  which  we  may  be 
engaged.  The  two  must  go  hand  in  hand :  you  cannot  rightly  worship  except  you 
have  acquaintance  with  Him  whom  you  worship,  and  you  cannot  have  this 
acquaintance  without  worship.  You  cannot  come  at  a  right  knowledge  of  Almighty 
God,  much  less  of  Almighty  God  as  revealed  under  the  Christian  dispensation, 
except  the  knowledge  acquired  and  the  spirit  in  which  that  knowledge  is  dwelt  on 
and  followed  up,  be  with  a  mind  of  adoration  and  worship.  And  the  two  (the 
knowledge  and  the  worship)  grow  and  advance  together.  Increased  knowledge  of 
God  carries  us  on  in  worship,  and  fuller  worship  leads  up  to  fuller  knowledge. 
What  is  set  before  us  in  the  text  is  the  type  of  the  perfect  worship  of  heaven,  and  it 
is  toward  this  that  our  life  on  earth  should  lead.  For  man's  eternal  joy  will  be  in 
praising  God.  The  power  of  fully  appreciating  the  love  of  God  towards  us  will 
prompt  the  unceasing  praise,  and  in  that  unceasing  praise  will  be  the  joy  of 
heaven.  The  Divine  love,  which  receives  the  praises  of  that  innumerable  blessed 
company,  will  ever  fresh  inspire  their  song,   will  pour  into  it  new  depth  and 


CHAP.  ly.]  REVELATION.  297 

richness,  and  will  receive  it  into  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  life.  There  is  no  inter- 
mission, there  is  no  end  ;  for  God's  glory  cannot  be  known  in  its  eternity  except  by 
the  gift  of  an  eternal  power  of  contemplation  and  of  union  with  Him.  People  talk 
a  great  deal  about  places  of  worship  and  forms  of  worship.  But  do  they  consider 
what  worship  means?  They  think  perhaps  of  edification  by  sermons,  or  of 
instruction  out  of  God's  Holy  Scriptures,  or  of  joining  in  prayers  and  hymns,  or 
of  the  good  they  may  feel,  or  of  the  things  they  need  to  ask,  but  these  are  not 
worship.  In  all  these  we  look  for  something  for  ourselves,  something  to  get.  But 
worship  does  not  mean  getting  anything,  but  it  means  giving  something.  And 
what  ?  Money,  costly  offerings,  such  things  as  come  by  birth,  high  station,  or 
intellect  ?  Not  so ;  not  so,  in  the  truest  sense  of  giving.  For  these  things  are  not 
our  own.  It  is  of  them  that  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  said,  "  Of  Thine  own. 
have  we  given  Thee."  Wherein,  then,  consists  that  offering  which  we  may  more 
truly  call  our  own  than  all  such  things  without,  though  in  a  sense,  and  for  a  time 
at  least,  they  do  belong  to  us  ?  Something  there  is,  more  nearly  and  more  truly 
our  own,  which  we  are  to  give.  That  more  costly  offering,  that  in  which  God  has 
delight,  is  ourselves.  We  make  an  offering  of  our  mind,  when  we  withdraw  our 
thoughts  from  the  business  of  the  world,  from  those  things  which  engross  our 
thoughts  and  make  any  lengthened  devotion  wearisome  and  distasteful ;  when  we 
calmly  and  resolutely  set  ourselves  to  mediate  on  God  and  things  of  God ;  when 
we  try  to  shut  out  the  distractions  of  things,  and  to  fix  our  thoughts  upon  God, 
and  upon  God  only,  for  the  time.  Again,  we  make  an  offering  of  our  heart,  which 
is  the  seat  of  the  affections,  in  earnestness  of  devotion,  calling  up  before  us  His 
goodness.  His  love.  His  bounties  towards  us,  as  well  in  respect  of  His  gifts  in  this 
life  as  still  more  for  all  His  gracious  and  abundant  promises  for  the  life  to  come. 
Again,  as  God  made  the  mind.  He  requires  an  offering  of  that ;  and  as  He  made 
the  heart,  He  demands  an  offering  of  that  also ;  so,  too,  as  He  made  the  body,  He 
requires  that  the  body  shall  bear  part  in  worshipping  Hun.  This  we  do  by  outward 
acts  of  worship,  bowing,  kneeling,  singing,  and  joining  in  the  services  of  His  house. 
Thus  the  whole  man,  body  and  soul,  may  take  part  in  worship  ;  after  this  manner 
here  below  preparing  for  the  perfect  worship  of  heaven.  And  He  who  invites  us 
thus  to  worship  here  will  be  with  us,  and  make  that  worship  approach  little  by 
little  towards  the  perfect  worship  of  heaven.  {R.  F.  Wilson.)  Celestial  worship  : 
— I.  The  worship  of  heaven  will  engage  the  activities  of  all  celestial  creature- 
ship.  1.  Universal.  2.  Ceaseless.  3.  Perfect.  H.  The  worship  of  heaven  will 
be  inspired  by  clear  views  of  the  Divine  character.  1.  Holy.  2.  Omnipotent. 
3.  Eternal.  HI.  The  worship  of  heaven  is  rendered  with  the  greatest  humility 
OF  soul.  1.  This  humility  is  inspired  by  a  true  sense  of  the  Divine  majesty.  2. 
This  humility  is  awakened  by  a  due  estimate  of  the  unworthiness  of  self.  3.  This 
humihty  is  manifested  by  the  external  attitudes  of  worship.  The  crown  of  an 
adoring  soul  gains  its  worth  and  brightness  by  being  cast  before  the  throne  of  God. 
IV.  The  worship  op  heaven  is  celebrative  of  the  creativb  pleasure  of  God. 
1.  Celestial  worship  ascribes  the  plan  of  creation  to  the  creative  power  of  God.  2. 
Celestial  worship  recognises  the  creative  power  of  God  as  calling  for  the  highest 
worship  of  intelUgent  creatures.  They  ascribe  to  God — 1.  Glory.  2.  Honour.  3. 
Power.  Lessons :  1.  It  is  the  privilege  and  duty  of  all  intelligent  creatures  to 
worship  God.  2.  In  praise  we  should  seek  to  have  clear  views  of  the  Divine  character. 
3.  We  should  endeavour  to  approach  God  with  a  becoming  sense  of  unworthiness. 
[J.  S.  Exell,  M.A .)  Earnest  devotion : — In  the  apostle's  vision  of  heaven,  he  is  struck 
with  the  glowing  devotion  of  the  spirits  before  the  throne.  It  is  pure,  fervent,  and  ex- 
alted ;  it  is  subject  to  no  changes  of  rising  and  falling  emotions ;  it  is  always  as  great 
as  the  perfections  of  the  Infinite  require,  and  as  the  nature  of  the  hearts  from  which  it 
proceeds  permits  it  to  be.  Do  you  ask,  "  How  can  it  be  sustained  at  such  a  height, 
when  all  human  devotion  is  so  easily  brought  down — how  can  their  minds  be  kept 
fixed  on  the  object  of  their  adoration  when  human  thoughts  so  readily  wander 
away  ?  "  The  explanation  is  found  in  the  words,  "  They  rest  not  day  and  night " ; 
their  hearts  are  always  engaged  in  the  service ;  the  night  suspends  it  not,  for  there 
is  no  night  there.  It  is  because  they  are  thus  devoted — in  a  word,  it  is  because 
they  rest  not — that  their  devotion  maintains  itself  so  fervent,  and  towers  so  high. 
This,  then,  illustrates  the  great  truth  which  ought  to  be  impressed  on  every  heart ; 
rehgious  improvement,  the  chief  object  of  existence,  requires  the  steady  devotion  of 
all  our  powers  to  secure  it.  In  proportion  as  man  rests  from  that  labour  does  he 
surrender  the  hope  and  power  of  ever  securing  that  prize.  Consider  the  effect  of 
inaction  upon  the  physical  nature.     The  frame  which  is  regularly  exercised,  if  not 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

urged  beyond  its  strength,  grows  in  firmness  and  energy,  and  expands  in  full  and 
fair  proportion.  But  let  the  frame  be  given  over  to  rest,  let  the  man  have  no 
steady  employment  that  requires  interest  and  exertion,  and  it  is  not  long  before 
disease  begins  to  spread  through  the  system.  Consider  the  effect  of  inaction  upon 
the  mind  of  man.  There  is  a  strong  analogy  between  the  wants  of  the  body  and 
the  mind ;  exertion  is  indispensable  to  the  health  of  each ;  and  though  one  who 
lives  without  exercising  either  may  not  yet  perceive  the  injury  he  is  doing  to 
himself,  it  is  not  less  certain  that  the  day  of  recompense  and  sorrow  must  come. 
Disease  is  as  sure  to  follow  the  inactive  mind  as  the  inactive  body.  Its  effects  are 
not  open  to  the  eye,  or  rather  they  are  not  noticed  by  careless  observers,  though 
they  may  br;  seen  in  the  incapacity  for  serious  reflection,  in  the  depraved  intellectual 
taste  which  can  relish  only  miscellaneous  novelty  or  intoxicating  fiction.  When 
the  body  dies,  its  pains  and  sorrows  are  over ;  not  so,  not  so  with  the  mind, 
which  dieth  not ;  when  coldness  wraps  the  suffering  clay,  the  mind  still  lives  and 
must  live  for  ever.  Consider  the  effect  of  inaction  on  the  spiritual  nature  of  man. 
It  is  common  to  meet  with  those  who  neither  look  forward  to  eternity  nor  up  to 
God ;  and  the  consequence  is,  not  only  that  their  devotion,  if  they  ever  had  any, 
dies,  but  also  that  they  lose  the  power  of  devotion.  They  lose  all  power  of  spiritual 
discernment,  so  that  the  great  realities  of  another  world  have  no  presence  nor  life 
to  the  soul.  This  is  the  darkest  and  most  fearful  thought  that  can  be  presented  to 
the  human  mind — the  death  and  ruin  of  the  soul.  There  is  a  time  when  "ye 
cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."  The  same  is  true  of  love  to  men,  that  other 
great  duty  which  God  so  intimately  associated  with  devotion.  This  feeling  can  be 
strengthened  into  a  principle  by  the  common  sympathy  of  life — that  sympathy 
which  is  never  so  strong  and  sure  as  when  sanctified  by  religious  feeling.  But  if 
our  benevolent  impulses  are  not  followed,  we  lose  not  only  the  opportunity  of  the 
moment,  but  we  lose  the  power  of  exertion.  They  are  like  the  wayfarer  in  the  polar 
regions ;  after  suffering  awhile  with  the  cold,  he  feels  a  sleep  stealing  over  him ;  it 
comes  without  pain,  it  gives  no  warning  of  danger ;  unable  to  resist  the  persuasive 
influence,  he  sinks  into  slumber,  from  which  he  never  wakes  in  this  world  again. 
It  is  in  the  same  way  that  hearts  are  frozen ;  they  feel  no  danger,  they  suspect  not 
that  the  sleep  which  is  stealing  over  them  is  the  sleep  of  death.  Having  thus 
endeavoured  to  show  what  law  we  are  under,  let  us  take  a  more  practical  view  of 
the  subject.  Love  to  God  and  love  to  man  are  the  great  elements  of  that  character 
which  we  are  sent  into  this  world  to  form,  and  it  is  practising  on  these  principles 
which  gives  them  power  and  increases  their  power  within  us.  It  is  because  the 
seraphs  rest  not  day  and  night  that  their  hearts  become  living  flames  in  the  service 
of  their  God.  We  are  to  remember,  then,  that  God  has  so  arranged  the  present  life 
that  all  things  favour  the  growth  of  love  to  man  in  those  who  really  determine  to 
possess  it,  while  all  things  seem  to  hinder  it  in  those  who  hold  it  in  slight  regard. 
Whenever  an  opportunity  of  benevolence  is  offered — whenever  God's  providence 
makes  an  appeal,  as  it  often  does,  to  our  kind  feeling — we  should  feel  that  to 
resist  it  or  reject  it  is  wrong.  It  is  so  much  done  to  injure  and  destroy  the 
principles  and  affections  which  form  the  only  treasures  of  heaven ;  they  are  all  the 
■wealth  we  can  carry  from  this  world  into  another,  and  without  them  we  shall  be 
poor  indeed.  So,  if  we  have  the  least  desire  to  possess  the  spirit  of  devotion,  we 
shall  take  advantage  of  every  time  and  every  service  that  can  awaken  the  spirit  of 
devotion.  {W.  B.  0.  Pedbody,  D.D.)  The  celebration  of  the  Trinity  : — In  the 
understanding  of  this  place,  what,  or  who  these  four  creatures  are,  there  is 
difficulty.  And  so  we  shall  well  do  if  we  interpret  these  four  creatures  to  be  first 
and  principally  the  four  evangelists,  and  then  enlarge  it  to  all  the  ministers  of 
the  gospel.  So,  then,  the  action  being  an  open  and  a  continual  profession  of 
the  whole  Christian  rehgion,  in  the  celebration  of  the  Trinity,  which  is  the 
distinctive  character  of  the  Christian,  the  persons  that  do  this  are  all  they  that 
constitute  the  hierarchy  and  order  of  the  Church.  And  before  we  come  to  their 
qualification  in  the  text,  first,  as  they  are  said  to  have  six  wings,  and  then  as  they 
are  said  to  be  full  of  eyes,  we  look  upon  them  as  they  are  formed  and  designed 
to  us  in  the  verse  immediately  before  the  text,  where  the  first  of  these  foun 
•creatures  hath  the  face  of  a  lion,  the  second  of  a  calf,  or  an  ox,  the  third  of  a 
man,  the  fourth  of  an  eagle.  Now,  says  St.  Ambrose,  these  four  creatures  are  the 
preachers  of  the  gospel;  that  we  had  established  afore,  but  then  we  add  with 
St.  Ambrose,  all  these  four  creatures  make  up  but  one  creature;  all  their  qualities 
.concur  to  the  qualification  of  a  minister;  every  minister  of  God  is  to  have  all' 
Ihat  all  four  had — the  courage  of  a  lion,  the  laboriousness  of  an  ox,  the  perspicuity: 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  299 

and  clear  sight  of  the  eagle,  and  the  humanity,  the  discourse,  the  reason,  the 
affability,  the  appliableness  of  a  man.  All  must  have  all,  or  else  all  is  disordered — 
zeal,  labour,  knowledge,  gentleness.  Now  besides  these  general  qualifications,  laid 
down  as  the  foundation  of  the  text,  in  the  verse  before  it,  in  the  text  itself  these 
four  creatures  have  also  wings  added  unto  them ;  wings,  first  for  their  own  behoof 
and  benefit,  and  then,  wings  for  the  benefit  and  behoof  of  others.  They  have 
wings  to  raise  themselves  from  the  earth,  that  they  do  not  entangle  themselves  in 
the  business  of  this  world;  but  still  to  keep  themselves  upon  the  wing  in  a 
heavenly  conversation,  ever  remembering  that  they  have  another  element  than  sea 
or  land,  as  men  whom  Christ  Jesus  hath  set  apart,  and  in  some  measure  made 
mediators  between  Him  and  other  men  as  His  instruments  of  their  salvation.  And 
then  as  for  themselves,  so  have  they  wings  for  others  too,  that  they  may  be  always 
ready  to  succour  all  in  all  their  spiritual  necessities.  And  then,  their  wings  are 
numbered  in  our  text :  they  have  six  wings.  For  by  the  consent  of  most  expositors, 
those  whom  St.  John  presents  in  the  figure  of  these  four  creatures  here,  and  those 
whom  the  prophet  Isaiah  calls  seraphim,  are  the  same  persons.  The  Holy  Ghost 
sometimes  presents  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  as  seraphim  in  glory,  that  they 
might  be  known  to  be  the  ministers  and  dispensers  of  the  mysteries  and  secrets  of 
God,  and  to  come  from  His  council.  His  cabinet.  And  then  on  the  other  side,  that 
you  might  know  that  the  dispensation  of  these  mysteries  of  your  salvation  is  by 
the  hand  and  means  of  men,  taken  from  amongst  yourselves,  and  that  therefore 
you  are  not  to  look  for  revelations,  nor  ecstasies,  nor  visions,  nor  transportations, 
but  to  rest  in  God's  ordinary  means,  He  brings  those  persons  down  again  from  that 
glorious  representation  as  the  seraphim  to  creatures  of  an  inferior,  of  an  earthly 
nature.  These  winged  persons,  then  have  eyes  as  well  as  wings ;  they  fly,  but 
they  know  whither  they  fly.  God  gives  them  wings,  that  is,  means  to  do  their 
office ;  but  eyes  too,  that  is,  discretion  and  religious  wisdom  how  to  do  it.  And  this 
is  that  which  they  seem  to  need  most,  for  their  wings  are  limited,  but  their  eyes 
are  not ;  six  wings,  but  full  of  eyes,  says  our  text.  But  then,  especially,  says  our 
text,  they  were  full  of  eyes  within.  All  my  wings  shall  do  me  no  good,  all  mine 
eyes  before  and  behind  shall  do  me  no  good,  if  I  have  no  prospect  inward,  no  eyes 
within,  no  care  of  my  particular  and  personal  safety.  If  the  Lord  open  thy  lips, 
let  it  be  to  show  forth  His  praise.  That  they  speak,  declare  the  glory  of  God. 
For  this  is  that  ingenuity,  that  alacrity,  which  constitutes  our  first  branch.  And 
then  the  second  is  the  assiduity,  the  constancy,  the  incessantness,  "  They  rest  not 
day  nor  night."  But  have  the  saints  of  God  no  vacation  ?  Do  they  never  cease  ? 
Nay,  as  the  word  imports,  they  have  no  rest.  God  Himself  rested  not  till  the 
seventh  day;  be  thou  content  to  stay  for  thy  sabbath  till  thou  mayst  have  an 
-eternal  one.  If  we  understand  this  of  rest  merely,  of  bodily  rest,  the  saints  of  God 
are  least  likely  to  have  it  in  this  life;  for  this  life  is  a  business,  a  warfare,  a 
voyage,  and  a  tempestuous  voyage.  If  we  understand  this  rest  to  be  cessation, 
intermission,  the  saints  of  heaven  have  none  of  that  in  this  service.  It  is  a  labour 
that  never  wearies,  to  serve  God  there.  To  conclude  all,  this  eternity  of  our  God  is 
expressed  here  in  a  phrase  which  designs  and  presents  the  last  judgment,  that  is, 
**  Which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  And,  therefore,  let  us  reverently  embrace 
such  provisions,  and  such  assistances  as  the  Church  of  God  hath  ordained,  for 
retaining  and  celebrating  the  Trinity,  in  this  particular  contemplation,  as  they  are 
to  come  to  judgment.  And  let  us  at  least  provide  so  far,  to  stand  upright  in  that 
judgment,  as  not  to  deny,  nor  to  dispute  the  power,  or  the  persons  of  those  judges. 
{John  Bonnet  D.D,) 

Vers.  9-11.  The  four  and  twenty  elders  fall  down  .  .  .  and  cast  their  crowns  before 
the  throne. — Royal  homage  : — I.  The  saints  in  heaven  are  all  crowned.  How  is 
this  ?  1.  They  are  all  kings,  Dei  gratia.  There  is  not  a  king  in  heaven  that  has 
his  crown  on  any  other  terms  than  this,  "  by  the  sovereign  grace  of  God."  2,  But, 
though  it  may  seem  astonishing,  they  are  all  kings  by  hereditary  descent.  They 
have  been  born  again,  and  it  is  in  their  new  nature  that  they  are  before  the  throne 
of  God.  3.  They  are  also  kings  by  marriage  alliance.  There  is  many  a  crowned 
head  that  would  not  have  been  so  by  descent,  but  has  come  to  be  so  by  being  given 
in  wedlock  to  a  royal  consort.  4.  They  are  kings  by  right  of  conquest  and  of 
victory.  A  crown  should  signify,  and  did  signify  in  the  olden  times,  battling  and 
contending.  They  are  kings,  then,  because  they  have  fought  with  sin  and  with 
temptation.  Yea,  the  brightest  of  them  have  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  fiercest 
persecutions.    5.  Then  the  crowned  heads  in  heaven  have  their  crowns,  and  their  i 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

crowns  befit  them  well,  because  of  the  nobility  of  their  character.  They  are 
sanctified,  delivered  from  every  taint  of  corruption,  and  now  they  are  like  their 
Lord  Himself  in  holiness  of  character.  Well  should  they  be  crowned  whose 
character  has  thus  been  made  glorious  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  within 
them  !  6.  And,  once  more,  they  have  another  right  to  their  crowns,  because  those 
crowns  represent  real  possessions.  All  things  are  theirs — the  gift  of  God — and 
God  is  theirs  and  Christ  is  theirs.  They  are  clothed  with  honour  and  majesty — 
not  outwardly  only  but  inwardly — and  they  have  all  the  concomitants  that  should 
go  with  royal  dignity.  II.  They  all  cast  thedr  crowns  before  the  throne. 
1.  Solemn  reverence.  They  see  more  of  God  than  we  do,  therefore  are  they  more 
fiUed  with  awe  and  thrilled  with  admiration.  Our  reverence  will  always  make  us 
feel  in  the  lowliest  state  of  self-abasement  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  !  2.  Moreover, 
they  are  no  doubt  actuated  by  sincere  humility.  Keverence  to  God  always  brings 
a  humble  opinion  of  one's  own  self.  3.  Doubtless,  also,  they  do  this  for  another 
reason,  namely,  because  of  their  profound  gratitude.  They  bless  God  that  they 
are  where  they  are,  and  what  they  are.  4.  Above  all,  they  are  actuated  by  intense 
affection.  They  love  their  Lord,  and  loving  their  Lord  they  do  anything  to  adore 
Him.  They  are  glad  to  fling  their  richest  goods,  their  choicest  trophy,  their  most 
cherished  treasure,  at  His  feet :  they  love  Him  so.  HI.  Practical  lessons.  1.  By 
this  text  we  can  know  whether  we  are  on  the  way  to  heaven  or  not ;  because  no 
man  goes  to  heaven  to  learn  for  the  first  time  heavenly  things.  2.  The  next  lesson 
is  a  lesson  of  unanimity.  Our  text  says  that  all  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne. 
There  are  no  divided  opinions  in  heaven,  no  sects  and  parties,  no  schisms  there. 
3.  Once  again,  these  redeemed  ones  in  heaven  teach  us  the  true  way  of  happiness. 
They  set  before  us  what  perfect  bliss  is.  There  is  no  happiness  beneath  the  clouds; 
like  the  happiness  of  unselfishness.  Strip  yourself,  and  you  clothe  yourself.  Throw 
money  away,  and  you  grow  rich — I  mean  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Happiness,  again, 
consists  in  adoration,  for  these  blessed  spirits  find  it  to  be  their  happiness  to  adore 
God.  The  happiest  days  you  ever  spent  are  those  in  which  you  worshipped  God 
most.  But  then  they  were  not  merely  happy  because  they  were  self-denying  and 
adoring,  but  because  they  were  practical.  They  took  off  their  crowns  and  laid  them 
before  the  throne.  And  our  joy  on  earth  must  lie  in  practically  carrying  out  our 
principles.  Cast  your  ability  to  do  and  to  suffer,  as  well  as  the  crown  of  your  labour 
and  patience,  at  the  foot  of  your  God  ;  serve  Him  with  all  your  heart  and  wisdom 
and  strength,  and  thus,  your  self-denial  and  adoration  being  mixed  therewith,  you 
shall  realise  on  earth  as  much  as  possible  a  foretaste  of  what  the  joy  of  heaven 
may  be.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  feelings  of  saints  in  heaven : — I.  The 
IMPORT  OF  THE  ACTION.  It  is  nccessary  to  recollect  that  all  the  rewards  which 
await  the  righteous  in  heaven  are  often  summed  up  in  the  comprehensive  expression 
of  a  kingdom.  Casting  these  crowns  at  the  foot  of  the  throne  was,  therefore,  the 
same  as  casting  their  kingdom,  with  all  its  dignity,  glory,  and  honour,  at  the  feet 
of  God  and  the  Lamb.  1.  It  was  an  acknowledgment  of  what  God  is,  and  of  what 
He  deserves  from  His  creatures.  2.  It  implied  a  more  particular  acknowledgment 
that  to  Him  all  the  glory  of  their  salvation  belonged.  II.  The  feelings  which 
PROMPTED  IT,  AND  OF  WHICH  IT  WAS  AN  EXPRESSION.  1.  It  was  prompted  by,  it 
was  an  expression  of,  perfect  humility.  2.  It  expressed,  and  was  prompted  by 
perfect  love  to  God  and  the  Redeemer.  3.  It  was  prompted  by,  and  expressed 
perfect  gratitude.  4.  It  expresses  the  most  profound  reverence.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
The  crown : — If  we  except  the  ever-blessed  Cross,  there  is  no  such  symbol  as  the 
crown.  It  speaks  of  honour  and  exaltation,  and  of  the  care  which  attends  them. 
The  crown  denotes  power,  dominion,  victory,  and  possession  :  it  indicates,  not  less 
evidently,  anxiety,  responsibility,  uneasiness,  and  toils  of  office.  Beyond  all  these, 
it  gives  the  idea  of  completeness  ;  of  such  completeness  as  belongs  to  any  creature, 
any  estate,  or  any  condition.  That  which  perfects  and  finishes  a  joy  or  a  sorrow 
is  called  its  crown  ;  the  crown  of  happiness,  the  crown  of  misery,  are  set  upon  them 
by  some  event  after  which  they  cannot  be  enhanced.  The  Lord  Protector  Cromwell 
was  wont  to  speak  of  a  certain  decisive  battle  as  his  "  crowning  mercy  "  ;  and  the 
first  of  living  poets  says  that  "  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  happier 
things."  So  full  of  meaning  is  the  word  that  there  seems  no  end  to  what  it  can 
express.  Those  four-and-twenty  are  examples  of  such  as  enter  into  the  rest  of  God ; 
who  have  obtained  the  crown  of  righteousness,  because  they  were  counted  worthy 
of  it,  and  give  proof  of  their  merit  in  the  perfection  of  their  self-renunciation. 
"What  may  be  done  by  way  of  experiment  to  become  true,  sincere,  and  simple-hearted 
followers  of  the  servants  of  God  ?    Material  for  practice  abounds.    God  hath  made 


CHAP.  IV.]  REVELATION.  301 

us  kings  and  priests  unto  Himself :  and  even  before  this,  in  his  natural  estate,  man 
is  the  head  and  lord  of  all  the  works  of  our  Father's  hand.  We  wear  as  men  the 
crown  of  dominion  over  inferior  orders  of  animals  ;  as  redeemed  men,  we  wear  the 
crown  of  a  royal  estate  of  sons  of  God  by  adoption  and  inheritors  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  Here  are  the  crown  of  nature  and  the  crown  of  grace  both  associated 
with  our  life  in  this  world.  These,  moreover,  denote  privilege,  power,  and  duty ; 
and  first  a  man  should  ask  himself  whether  he  be  doing  his  duty  in  that  state  unto 
which  it  has  pleased  Almighty  God  to  call  him  :  for  if  not,  the  sign  of  his  native 
dignity  and  superadded  honour,  even  already,  ere  life  be  spent,  is  tarnishing  around 
his  temples,  and  looking  as  though  presently  it  might  crack  asunder  and  fall  into 
the  dust.  But  this  is  merely  the  beginning ;  these  things  are  common  to  us  all. 
Over  and  above  what  pertains  to  our  state  as  men,  and  what  is  generally  necessary 
to  our  salvation,  comes  that  which  stamps  the  individual  as  distinct  from  his 
fellows.  There  be  as  many  crowns  as  heads  to  wear  them.  God,  who  sees  aU,  sees 
something  in  each  life  which  makes  that  life's  crown.  It  may  be  a  crown  of 
happiness,  or  a  hard  ring  of  sorrow  ;  a  crown  of  mercy  and  blessing  in  basket  and 
store,  in  goods  and  lands,  in  home  and  household,  or  a  crown  of  poverty,  affliction, 
and  grief.  Whatsoever  it  be,  each  life  has  its  crown,  to  distinguish  it  from  all  the 
rest.  These  we  must  wear,  each  in  the  order  of  his  lot :  and,  knowing  that  ye  all 
have  them,  let  me  ask  you  whether  you  are  offering,  each  his  own  crown,  of  joy, 
or  pain,  or  care,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  God  ?  Some  of  you  have  the  lot  of  toil : 
your  crown  is  an  iron  band  clasped  around  the  head  by  the  fingers  of  necessity : 
are  you,  in  spirit,  casting  that  before  the  throne,  and  offering  your  work  and  daily 
tasks  to  God  ?  Some  of  you  have  been  born  to  wealth,  or  have  acquired  it :  your 
crowns  are  precious,  and  worth  much  money  ;  are  you,  in  spirit,  offering  them  to 
God,  and  saying  as  you  do  mercy  and  give  alms,  Thine,  0  Lord,  are  these,  and  of  i 
I  Thine  own  do  we  offer  to  Thee?  Some  of  you  are  very  happy,  in  domestic  relations, ' 
in  social  position,  as  life  runs  on  smoothly  and  successfully ;  your  crowns  are  crowns 
of  mercies ;  are  you  daily  offering  them  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  acknowledging 
their  Author  and  pouring  out  the  tribute  of  your  thanks  ?  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.) 
Rightful  homage : — England  was  perhaps  never  more  humiliated  than  when  John 
took  off  his  crown  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  Pandulph,  the  Pope's  legate,  and 
then  received  it  from  him  as  from  the  Pope.  It  was  mean  in  John  so  to  abase 
himself,  especially  after  he  had  boasted  that  "  no  Italian  priest  shall  tithe  or  toll 
in  our  dominion."  It  would  have  been  less  disgraceful  in  him  to  have  hurled  his 
crown  among  the  reeds  beside  the  Thames,  than  to  have  put  it  in  the  hands  of 
Pandulph.  But  the  royal  people  in  heaven  are  right  in  doing  homage  for  their 
crowns  before  the  throne  of  God.  By  that  act  they  confess  their  indebtedness 
to  God  for  their  crowns.  [J.  Marrat.)  Man  in  heaven  : — I.  Man  in  heaven 
HAS  BEACHED  THE  HIGHEST  DIGNITY.  He  has  "  cTowns."  1.  Havc  faith  in  the 
improvability  of  our  nature.  2.  Let  us  be  consoled  under  the  departure  by  death  of 
the  good.  3.  Let  us  not  judge  of  providence  without  taking  into  account  the  future 
as  well  as  the  present.  II.  Man  in  heaven  ascbibes  the  dignity  he  has  beached 
TO  Jesus  Christ.  "  They  cast  their  crowns,"  &o.  1.  A  conviction  that  they  owed 
all  their  honours  to  Christ.  2.  A  readiness  to  acknowledge  their  obligation.  The 
greater  our  nature  the  more  ready  to  acknowledge  our  obligation.  3.  The  sur- 
passing glories  of  Christ.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  all  ascribe  their  all 
to  Him.  Napoleon  the  First,  after  he  had  conquered  empires,  and  planted  his  foot 
upon  the  neck  of  kingdoms,  determined  to  be  crowned  Emperor.  To  give  pageantry 
and  lustre  to  the  occasion,  he  compelled  the  Pope  of  Home  to  be  present.  In  the 
act  of  coronation,  the  emperor  refused  to  receive  the  crown  from  the  Pope;  hia 
proud  spirit  told  him  he  had  won  it  himself :  he  placed  it  upon  his  own  brow,  thus 
declaring  to  the  spectators  and  the  civilised  world  the  fact  that  he  was  indebted  to 
himself  only  for  imperial  power.  There  is  nothing  of  this  spirit  in  heaven ;  they 
all  cast  their  crowns  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  say,  "  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  the 
power  and  the  glory."  {Homilist.)  Glory  to  the  glorious  One  : — Jesus,  Messiah, 
the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  the  King  on  the  throne.  Creator  of  the  universe.  Head  of 
all  things,  is  He  who  is  worthy  to  receive  the  glory !  And  why  ?  I.  Because  of 
His  person.  As  having  in  Himself  all  the  perfections  of  the  Creator  and  of  the 
creature ;  as  very  God  and  very  man ;  the  Word  made  flesh — He  is  "  worthy  to 
receive  glory."  Godhead  and  manhood,  united  in  one  wondrous  person,  make  Him 
infinitely  glorious.  II.  Because  of  His  wobk.  The  excellency  of  His  propitiation 
is  infinite.  It  is — 1.  Excellent  in  itself.  2.  In  its  revelation  of  Divine  wisdom.  3. 
In  its  manifestation  of  Divine  love.   4.  In  its  reconciliation  of  grace  with  righteous- 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

ness,  5.  In  its  everlasting  results.  Because  of  such  a  work  it  is  said,  •'  Thou  art 
worthy  to  receive  glory."  III.  Because  of  His  life  on  eakth.  His  whole  earthly 
life  was  marvellous.  There  has  been  nothing  like  it,  neither  shall  be.  It  was 
absolute  perfection  in  every  part :  the  perfection  of  a  human  life.     IV.  Because  op 

THE  REDEMPTION  OF  HiS  ChURCH.      V.    BECAUSE  OF  WHAT   He  IS  NOW  IN  HEAVEN.      He 

has  triumphed  over  His  enemies ;  He  has  abolished  death ;  He  has  emptied  the 
grave ;  He  has  risen  ;  He  has  ascended  on  high ;  He  ever  lives  to  intercede ;  He  is 
the  head  of  principalities  and  powers ;  He  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of 
the  Majesty  in  the  heavens.  VI.  Because  of  what  He  is  to  be  and  to  do  when 
He  comes  again,  1.  Let  us  appreciate  His  excellency.  2.  Let  us  thoroughly  trust 
and  love  Him.  3.  Let  us  make  use  of  His  fulness.  4.  Let  us  bow  before  Him. 
5.  Let  us  sing  the  song  of  praise.  (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  God  glorified  in  heaven  for 
His  works  of  creation  and  providence : — I.  The  heavenly  Church  acknowledge 
that  God  created  all  things.  H.  That  all  things  are  and  were  created  for. 
God's  pleasure  or  will.  III.  That  all  intelligent  beings  are  bound  to  gloritt 
God  for  His  works  of  creation  and  providence.  1.  These  works  should  lead  us 
to  the  knowledge  and  contemplation  of  their  great  and  glorious  Author.  2.  We 
should  glorify  God  in  His  works,  by  improving  them  to  awaken  in  our  souls  pious 
affections  to  Him.  3.  The  works  of  God  should  invite  us  to  Him  in  the  humble 
exercises  of  devotion.  4.  We  are  to  glorify  God  for  our  own  existence.  5.  If 
creation  deserves  our  praise,  redemption  deserves  it  still  more,  for  this  is  our  hope. 
{J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Give  God  the  glory  : — After  the  battle  of  Agincourt  it  is  said 
of  Henry  V.  that,  desiring  to  acknowledge  the  Divine  interposition,  he  ordered 
the  chaplain  to  read  a  Psalm  of  David,  and,  when  he  came  to  these  words,  *'  Not 
unto  us— not  unto  us,  0  Lord!  but  unto  Thy  name  give  glory  and  praise,"  the  king 
dismounted,  his  officers  dismounted — the  cavalry  all  dismounted,  great  hosts  of 
officers  and  men  fell  on  their  faces  in  reverence  to  their  Great  Deliverer.  When 
we  contemplate  what  great  victories  we  have  attained  over  sin,  through  Christ,  how 
fitting  to  fall  before  God  in  thanksgiving  and  praise,  crying,  "Not  unto  us,  but 
unto  Thy  name  be  the  praise."  {A.  J.  Gordon,  D.D.)  For  Thy  pleasure  they 
are  and  were  created. — Creation  the  consequence  of  love : — I.  Remember  what  is 
INVOLVED  IN  the  NOTION  OF  "  CREATION."  It  is  not  the  bringing  order  out  of  disorder, 
beauty  out  of  shapelessness  and  confusion.  To  create  is  to  make  out  of  nothing. 
But  the  truth  that  God  created  out  of  nothing,  whilst  it  exalts  immeasurably  our 
conception  of  His  Majesty,  makes  the  question  yet  more  urgent :  "  Why  did  He 
create  ?  "  We  reply,  that  it  seems  to  follow  from  the  very  nature  of  God,  that  He 
should  create.  God  we  believe  to  be  all  Good,  the  Fountain  of  Love,  yea.  Love 
itself.  Must  not  a  Being  thus  gracious,  and  thus  in  Himself  an  inexhaustible 
source  of  happiness,  desire  to  communicate  of  His  fulness  unto  others  ?  Must  not 
He,  who  is  both  wise  and  beneficent,  desire  to  dispense  wisdom  ?  Must  not  He 
who  has  all  power,  if  He  be  liberal,  seek  to  give  power?  Throned  in  the  light 
inaccessible,  alone,  and  all-sufficient.  He  dwells  in  the  plenitude  of  His  own  glory, 
lacking  nothing,  dependent  upon  none — a  universe  to  Himself,  to  Himself  all  in  aU^ 
Myriads  of  angels  growing  up  around  Him  would  add  nought  to  His  happiness. 
And  not  therefore  for  any  selfish  ends  (as  we  term  them)  did  God  become  a  Creator. 
And  yet  was  it  for  Himself  ?  Yea,  for  Himself,  we  read  throughout  Scripture,  God 
made  the  worlds.  •'  Of  Him  are  all  things,  and  for  Him  are  all  things,"  writes  the 
apostle.  Even  so.  God's  nature  urged  Him,  nay,  if  we  may  dare  so  speak,  com- 
pelled Him  to  create.  Abounding  in  love.  His  love  would  not  let  Him  dwell  alone. 
The  air  and  the  water,  the  very  dust  of  the  ground  teem,  you  know,  with  living 
things.  Life  meets  us  everywhere.  We  can  detect  no  end  answered  by  millions  of 
creatures  which  swarm  around  us.  It  may  be  they  do  answer  no  end.  But  the 
love  of  God  constrains  Him  to  create,  ay,  if  it  be  but  to  give  to  the  tiny  animalculee 
in  the  drop  of  water  a  moment's  taste  of  the  pleasure  of  existence.  And  thus  we 
seem  to  apprehend,  in  a  measure  at  any  rate,  why  God  is  to  be  rejoiced  in  as  a 
Creator ;  ay,  why  the  heavenly  inhabitants  should  praise  Him  as  having  created  all 
things  for  His  pleasure.  Creation  is  the  most  overwhelming  demonstration  that 
"  God  is  Love  "  ;  creation  is  the  "  Ocean  of  Divine  love,"  overflowing  its  banks,  and 
pouring  itself  forth  beyond  all  bounds.  U.  Has  the  act  of  creation  been,  on  the 
WHOLE,  productive  OF  MORE  HAPPINESS  OB  MISERY  ?  What  if,  whcrc  God's  love  is 
manifested,  God's  justice  must  also  be  revealed ;  is  this  a  reason  why  His  love 
should  be  restrained  ?  Nay  ;  we  still  find  in  that  love  the  cause  of  the  authorship 
of  our  being ;  we  recognise  in  that  love  the  source  of  creation,  though  love  could 
not  have  free  course  without  giving  scope  for  vengeance  also ;  and  we  marvel  not 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION. 


that  the  eternal  dwellers  should  unweariedly  say,  "  Worthy  art  Thou  to  reoeive 
glory,"  &c.     (Bp.  Woodford.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vebs.  1-4.  A  book  .  .  .  sealed  with  seven  seals. — The  sealed  hook : — I.  The 
SEALED  BOOK.  1.  The  Divine  throne.  2.  The  Possessor  of  the  throne.  There  is 
no  name  given,  but  there  is  eternal  glory  in  this  nameless  majesty.  3.  The  right 
hand  of  Him  who  sat  upon  the  throne.  (1)  The  right  hand  is  the  symbol  of 
wisdom.  God's  hand  and  His  council  are  synonymous  expressions  (Isa.  xiv.  27  ;i 
Acts  iv.  28),  (2)  The  right  hand  is  the  symbol  of  power.  All  that  infinite  wisdom, 
hath  contrived,  omnipotent  power  will  certainly  perform.  (3)  The  right  hand  isi 
also  the  symbol  of  Divine  operation.  In  all  the  means  and  instruments  employed! 
He  is  still  supreme.  4.  The  wonderful  book.  5.  The  writing  of  the  book,  (l). 
The  writing  implies  the  immutability  of  His  counsels  and  all  His  precious  promises. 
(2)  The  writing  implies  the  manifestation  of  His  counsels — the  design  of  God,  that 
His  will  should  be  revealed,  or  made  known  to  the  world.  (3)  The  writing 
implies  their  value  and  importance.  They  are  worthy  to  be  held  in  everlasting 
remembrance  as  a  ground  of  hope  and  consolation  to  the  Church.  6.  The  form 
ef  the  writing — •'  It  was  written  within  and  on  the  backside."  The  allusion 
implies  the  number  and  variety  of  the  counsels,  works,  and  dealings  of  God.  It 
also  implies  the  fulness  of  the  writing.  7.  The  sealing  of  the  book.  (1)  The 
sealing  is  expressive  of  Divine  authority.  This  book  proceeds  from  the 
throne,  from  God's  right  hand;  it  comes  in  His  name,  it  is  clothed  with  His 
prerogative,  invested  with  His  glory,  and  enforced  by  His  omnipotence.  (2)  The 
sealing  of  the  book  is  expressive  of  darkness.  While  a  writing  is  sealed,  the 
meaning  is  unknown.  (3)  The  sealing  of  the  book  implies  distance — the  distance 
of  time  between  the  giving  and  fulfilling  of  Divine  prediction.  (4)  The  sealing  of 
the  book  implies  Divine  certainty.  What  is  written  in  the  king's  name,  and  sealed 
with  his  ring,  may  no  man  reverse.  8.  The  number  of  the  seals — "  It  was 
sealed  with  seven  seals."  This  implies  the  holiness,  depth,  fulness,  and  perfec- 
tion of  the  counsels  and  covenant  promises  contained  in  the  book  of  God's  right 
hand.  H.  The  heavenly  proclamation.  1.  The  agent  employed.  He  is  called 
"  an  angel."    2.  His  glorious  power  and  excellence.     This  was  "  a  strong  angel." 

3.  The  wonderful   proclamation — "The  angel  proclaimed  with  a  loud  voice." 

4.  The  great  subject  of  the  proclamation — "Who  is  worthy  to  open  the  book, 
and  to  loose  the  seals  thereof?"  III.  The  unavailing  appeal.  1.  The  field  of 
inquiry  is  vast  and  boundless.  2.  The  universal  appeal.  3.  The  subject  of 
inquiry  is  expressed  again,  and  more  fuUy  and  gloriously  declared  to  the  world. 
The  work  to  be  performed  is  great  and  marvellous,  and  variously  expressed  in 
the  Book  of  Revelation.  The  qualifications  for  the  work  are  also  great  and 
marvellous.  IV.  The  sorrow  of  the  apostle — *'  And  I  wept."  1.  If  the  book  can- 
not be  opened,  how  could  the  apostle  refrain  his  voice  from  weeping  and  his  eyes 
from  tears  ?  The  darkness  that  rested  on  the  Church's  future  history  filled 
his  heart  with  sorrow  and  deep  foreboding  fear.  2.  The  greatness  of  his  sorrow 
— "  And  I  wept  much."  There  is  a  sacredness  in  sorrow,  that  fills  the  heart 
with  awe.  Yea,  there  is  a  majesty  in  overwhelming  woe  that  commands  the 
sympathy  and  homage  of  the  heart.  3.  The  apostle  repeats  the  reason  of  his 
sorrow ;  for  the  mind  of  the  afflicted  loves  to  linger  on  the  cause  of  the 
affliction  and  the  greatness  of  his  grief :  and  he  wonders  that  any  one  should 
feel  such  indifference  to  his  melancholy  tale,  and  take  so  little  interest  in 
what  is  so  sadly  interesting  to  him.  {Jas.  Young.)  The  government  of  God : — 
I.  It  is  conducted  according  to  a  vast  preconcerted  plan.  The  Almighty  never 
acts  from  impulse  or  caprice,  but  ever  from  plan  or  law ;  and  this  plan  is  truly 
vast.  "  It  is  written  within  and  on  the  backside."  All  that  shall  happen  through 
the  vast  futurities  of  individuals,  families,  nations,  worlds,  is  mapped  out 
on  the  pages  of  this  wonderful  book.  Predestination  is  no  special  doctrine  of  the 
Bible ;  it  is  written  on  every  part  of  nature ;  it  includes  as  truly  the  motions  of  an 
atom  as  the  revolutions  of  a  world — the  growth  of  a  plant  as  the  conversion  of  a 
Boul.    True  philosophy,  as  well  as  Christianity,  resolves  everything  but  sin  into  the 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ▼. 

predestination  of  Infinite  Love.  II.  This  vast  preconcekted  plan  is  sealed  in 
MYSTERY.  1.  It  transcends  all  finite  intelligence.  2.  It  is  frequently  the  source  of 
great  mental  distress.  3.  It  is  an  inestimable  means  of  spiritual  discipline  :  it 
sobers,  humbles,  stimulates.  III.  That  the  mystery  op  this  plan  is  to  be 
EXPOUNDED  BY  Christ.  He  discloscs  the  eternal  purposes  in  various  ways.  (1)  In 
His  creative  acts.  Stars,  suns,  and  systems  are  but  the  palpable  forms  or 
diagrams  of  Infinite  ideas.  (2)  In  His  redemptive  operations.  (3)  In  His  judicial 
conduct.  •'  The  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto 
the  Son."  In  the  last  day  what  new  disclosures  will  be  made !  {Homilist.) 
The  sealed  book. : — I.  The  apostolic  vision.  II.  The  apostolic  proclamation. 
ITT.  The  weeping  apostle.  This  gives  humanness  and  pathos  to  the  scene.  We 
too,  like  John,  have  shed  tears  as  we  wrestled  to  solve  some  dark,  difficult  problem 
in  the  government  of  our  righteous  but  most  merciful  God.  FV.  The  consoling 
elder.  V.  The  victorious  lion.  {Jas.  Nelson.)  The  sealed  hook  of  the  future: — 
I.  How  beneficent  is  the  fact  of  our  general  ignorance  op  the  future  !  It 
is  this  ignorance  of  the  future  which  alone  makes  it  possible  for  hfe  to  be  a 
school  of  goodness,  a  training-ground  for  faith,  hope,  and  a  host  of  other  qualities 
which  are  among  the  noblest  that  adorn  the  human  soul.  Could  we  see  in 
the  aggregate  the  sorrows  which  await  us,  the  mere  sight  would  crush  us.  Did  we 
foresee  the  happiness  which  the  "  Hand  that  was  pierced  "  is  keeping  for  us,  the 
present,  with  its  limitations,  and  pains,  and  duties,  would  become  intolerable  to 
us.  If  we  could  foresee  the  certain  victory  or  certain  defeat  of  each  battle  we  fight 
for  justice,  truth,  and  right,  where  would  be  our  courage,  our  faith,  our  patience? 
But  God  has  purposely  hidden  in  His  own  wise  and  loving  counsel  such  things  as 
whether  our  lives  are  to  be  long  or  short ;  whom  we  shall  marry,  or  whether  we 
shall  be  married  at  all ;  whether  we  shall  succeed  or  fail  in  examinations,  or  in 
business ;  whether  we  shall  have  health  or  sickness.  And  He  has  hidden  these 
things  in  order  that  we  may  feel  our  dependence  upon  Him,  and  confide  ourselves 
to  His  keeping ;  that  we  may  give  ourselves  to  the  doing  of  His  will,  and  leave  to 
Him  to  choose  the  inheritance  of  friends  and  circumstances  which  the  future  may 
have  in  store  for  us.  II.  While  ignorance  op  the  future  is  generally  bene- 
ficent, occasions  may  arise  when  a  knowledge  of  the  future  beyond  what  can 
be  gained  by  experience  and  foresight  is  op  the  highest  advantage.  This 
supposition  is  bound  up  in  our  belief  in  a  supernatural  revelation,  such  as  the  Bible 
professes  to  give.  Such  a  revelation  must  deal,  among  other  things,  with  the  facts 
of  the  unseen  world  of  which  experience  can  give  us  no  authentic  information,  and 
also  with  events  of  the  future  of  this  world's  history  beyond  the  power  of  the  wisest 
merely  human  foresight  to  predict.  A  revelation  of  this  kind  would  plainly  not  be 
given  unless  it  were  needed,  but  serious  doubt  as  to  the  need  seems  hardly  possible. 
While  ignorance  of  the  future  on  our  part  is  needful,  it  is  no  less  needful  to  our 
welfare  that  Some  One  should  know  our  future ;  and,  also,  not  less  needful  to  our 
comfort  that  we  should  be  assured  of  this  knowledge  on  His  part.  The  growing 
child  is  still  dependent  on  the  knowledge  of  its  future  needs  which  leads  parents  to 
train  and  educate  it  with  a  view  to  its  well-being  and  happiness.  But  the  best 
knowledge  and  truest  foresight  of  parents  will  not  enable  them  to  predict  with 
certainty  the  future  events  of  the  child's  life.  This  third  and  highest  kind  of 
evidence  brings  into  full  view  the  question  that  is  of  infinite  and  eternal  import- 
ance for  every  individual :  How  do  I  stand  related  at  this  moment  to  this  living 
and  reigning  Saviour  ?  Only  one  relationship  can  be  right  and  safe,  that  of  humble 
submission,  of  trustful  loyalty,  of  reverent  affection.  HI.  What  effect  ought  our 
knowledge  of  Christ's  complete  mastery  over  the  future  to  have  upon  oub 
FEELING  AND  ACTION?  Should  Dot  this  glorious  truth  infuse  into  our 
feeling  a  deep  peace?  Should  it  not  inspire  us  with  quiet  confidence  and 
a  lion -like  courage — a  mighcy  hope  and  an  invincible  patience?  {Arthur 
James,  B.A,)  The  book,  the  Lamb,  and  the  song  : — I.  "  A  book,  written 
WITHIN  AND  ON  THE  BACK  WITH  SEVEN  SEALS."  1.  It  is  the  book  of  redemption. 
Its  central  thought  is  the  Cross,  which  is  the  wisdom  of  God  and  the 
power  of  God.  2.  This  book  is  complete  ;  it  is  '•  written  within  and  on  the  back," 
both  sides  of  the  parchment  covered.  God's  plan  of  redemption  is  round  and  full. 
Its  last  word  is  "  Finis,"  and  there  is  room  for  no  other.  3.  The  book  was  "  close 
sealed  with  seven  seals."  In  the  ages  before  Christ  the  great  problem  was  how  God 
could  be  just  and  yet  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly.  Three  sentiments  were 
struggling  in  all  human  breasts  :  the  conviction  of  sin,  the  intuitive  apprehension 
of  death,  and  the  trembling  hope  that  God,  in  some  wise,  would  deliver.    The 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  305 

solution  of  the  difficulty  was  hid  within  this  volume  of  the  Divine  decrees — hid 
by  the  Father,  to  be  revealed  in  fulness  of  time  unto  us.  II.  A  Lamb  as  it  had 
BEEN  slain.  And  this  Lamb  took  the  book  out  of  the  right  hand  of  God  and 
opened  it.  The  opening  of  this  book  of  the  Divine  decrees  concerning  the  redemp- 
tion of  man  is  like  daybreak  after  an  Egyptian  night.  As  to  this  Lamb  observe — 
1.  He  bore  in  His  person  the  tokens  of  death.  Our  Lord  Jesus  wears  in  glory  the 
honourable  scars  of  His  service  on  earth.  Why  did  the  Lord  Jesus  die  ?  That  so, 
in  our  behalf,  He  might  triumph  over  death;  That  so  He  might  prevail  to  open  the 
book  of  life  and  immortality.  2.  The  place  where  the  Lamb  stood  is  significant :  it 
was  "  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four  living  creatures,  and  in  the  midst 
of  the  elders."  Where  else  should  He  stand  who  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  the  only  One  between  God  and  men. 
John  Bunyan  was  at  one  time  sorely  troubled  to  know  how  the  Lord  Jesus  could  be 
both  man  and  God.  "  At  last  that  in  Rev.  v.  6  came  into  my  mind  :  'And,  lo,  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  elders  stood  a  Lamb.' — 'In  the  midst  of  the 
throne,'  thought  I^there  is  the  Godhead ;  '  in  the  midst  of  the  elders  ' — there  is 
the  manhood ;  but,  oh,  methought  this  did  glister !  It  was  a  goodly  touch,  and 
gave  me  sweet  satisfaction."  3.  He  had  seven  horns.  The  horn  is  the  emblem  of 
power.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  The  Mighty  to  Save.  4.  He  had  seven  eyes,  which 
are  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  Spirit  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth.  We  are  now 
living  under  the  dispensation  of  this  Spirit,  who  goeth  to  and  fro  everywhere  like 
multitudinous  eyes  to  see  into  all  hearts  and  perceive  aU  secret  imaginations,  ever 
watchful  for  truth  and  righteousness,  to  the  end  that  all  souls  and  all  nations 
presently  may  be  brought  under  the  peaceful  sway  of  the  Lamb.  The  horns  of 
Divine  power  and  the  eyes  of  Divine  wisdom  are  grandly  and  perpetually  co- 
working  towards  this  consummation  so  devoutly  to  be  wished.  HI.  Oh,  then  what 
A  SONG,  when  heaven  and  earth  shall  join  in  ascribing  praises  to  Him  that  was  dead, 
but  is  alive  again,  and  liveth  for  evermore,  and  hath  the  keys  of  death  and  hell ! 
1.  It  will  be  a  new  song.  The  fresh  mercies  of  God  call,  even  here,  for  perpetual 
renewals  of  thanksgiving.  Stale  praises  are  in  no  wise  better  than  stale  manna. 
But  how  will  it  be  in  the  kingdom  ?  The  songs  yonder  must  keep  pace  with  the 
perpetually  new  unveilings  of  Divine  love.  2.  And  it  will  be  a  universal  song, 
joined  in  by  "  the  redeemed  tenantry  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  angels  of  the  sky, 
and  grateful  inmates  of  the  ocean  and  the  air."  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  writing 
on  the  book  of  life : — The  book  of  futurity  is  what  was  sealed  with  seven  seals. 
It  is  a  dark  and  mysterious  one  for  us  also.  The  future  is  closed  to  us,  and  must 
remain  so.  How  foolish  the  wish  to  raise  this  thick  veil.  Every  joy,  being  fore- 
seen, would  lose  its  attraction  ;  every  pain  and  loss  would  become  an  insufferable 
torture.  Through  God's  grace  the  future  is  hid  from  us  ;  and  they  are  foolish  who 
pretend  to  proclaim  it.  ^d  yet  the  seals  are  broken.  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  has  come  to  open  the  book  and  break  its  seals.  Fate  is  no  longer  cruel 
darkness  to  us  Christians.  Whatever  darkness  may  lie  before  our  feet,  at  every 
step  which  we  take  into  the  future  the  guiding  stars  shine  above  us,  and  at  our 
side  stands  the  faithful  guide.  And  how  do  these  holy  superscriptions  of  our  life 
run  ?  1.  We  read  first  the  words,  Walk  before  God.  In  everything  that  thou  doest, 
ask  what  is  good,  what  is  true  before  God.  How  does  He  speak  to  thee  by  His 
voice,  conscience  ?  You  bear  in  yourselves  the  dominion  over  all  that  approaches 
from  without,  whether  with  allurements  or  threats.  You  bear  in  yourselves  the 
measure  of  things.  2.  Perceive,  then,  this  the  second  inscription  and  precept  of 
life.  It  is  :  "All  things  are  yours !  "  The  Divine  and  exalted  right  of  man  over 
all  creatures  is  here  proclaimed  to  us.  And  this  includes  his  freedom  and  his 
dominion — the  freedom  of  his  soul  from  the  outer  world,  and  the  dominion  of  his 
spirit  over  it.  Is  it  not,  then,  you  who  turn  misfortune  into  prosperity,  and  acquire 
strength  in  trial,  and  in  exercising  patience  learn  courage  and  self -conquest,  the 
highest  work  of  man  ?  Is  it  not  you  who  ennoble  good  fortune,  and  place  it  in  the 
service  of  the  Spirit,  and  use  it  in  order  to  lead  yourselves  farther,  and  to  lessen  the 
want  round  about  you,  and  to  fashion  everything  that  is  near  you  into  a  life  worthy 
of  man  ?  3.  Now  you  perceive,  in  fine,  the  third  superscription  of  the  book  of  life  : 
•'  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love !  "  It  puts  forth,  perhaps,  many  and  beautiful 
flowers,  and  the  powerful  stem  raises  itself  and  extends  its  wide  shadowing  branches 
over  the  extent  of  the  earth ;  but  the  ripe  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  and  that  alone. 
We  feel,  everything  else  is  only  falling  flowers,  only  brilliant  appearance;  love  alone 
remains.  We  feel  it  is  cold,  and  solitary,  and  joyless  in  the  world  without  love. 
And  our  liberty  and  moral  power  also  against  the  world  and  fate,  how  can  we 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

preserve  them  if  we  stand  not  firmly  bound  together  in  the  fellowship  of  the 
brethren? — one  extending  the  hand  to  the  other  whenever  he  sinks  down,  one 
comforting  the  other  in  word  and  deed  when  a  heavy  blow  falls  upon  his  head. 
{Dr.  Schwarz.)  The  glorified  Christ : — I.  The  solution  or  the  mysteries  op 
God.  God,  like  the  painter,  poet,  builder,  works  by  plan.  Is  the  conflict  of  life 
purposeless  ?  Evidences  of  plan  and  purpose — in  nature.  Everywhere  there  are 
proofs  of  an  intelligent  mind  and  Divine  purpose.  This  truth  is  stamped  on  our 
hves  from  first  to  last.  We  are  limited,  dependent,  controlled  everywhere.  Life 
itself  is  not  ours  to  determine,  nor  its  particular  form  and  circumstances.  Even 
where  we  have  a  choice,  the  circumstances  between  which  we  choose  are  not  in 
our  power.  The  duration  of  life  is  determined  apart  from  our  choice.  If  thought 
is  ours,  the  power  to  think  is  given.  Again,  the  great  variety  there  is  among  men, 
modified,  too,  by  so  many  circumstances  of  birth,  education,  &c.,  variety  in 
regard  to  temperament,  position,  success,  anticipation.  And  so  in  regard  to  the 
inner  life  and  the  life  and  course  of  the  Church.  Wise  builders  always  work  by  plan. 
The  wisest  are  most  like  God.  11.  The  object  of  worship.  {R.  V.  Pryce,  M.A.) 
The  unsealing  of  the  plan  of  universal  destiny : — I.  There  is  in  the  Divine  mind  a 
PLAN  OF  universal  DESTINY.  1.  Destiny  is  planned.  2.  Destiny  is  comprehensive. 
The  scroll  was  full  of  writing.  3.  Destiny  is  effective.  The  book  was  in  the  right 
hand  of  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne.  It  was  not  carelessly  thrown  on  the  ground. 
n.  The  plan  of  universal  destiny  is  concealed.  1.  It  is  concealed  by  the 
mystery  in  which  it  is  inherently  involved.  2.  It  is  concealed  by  the  intellectual 
inability  of  man.  in.  The  plan  of  universal  destiny  sometimes  awakens 
MENTAL  anguish  ON  THE  PART  OF  MAN.  1.  Men  oftcH  experience  mental  anguish 
as  they  contemplate  the  mystery  of  destiny.  Fears  of — (1)  Disappointment. 
(2)  Misapprehension.  (3)  Sympathy.  2.  There  is  much  to  console  the  mental 
anguish  which  the  thought  of  destiny  may  awaken.    IV.  The  plan  of  univer8AI» 

DESTINY    is    REVEALED    BY    ChRIST   IN    HiS    MEDIATORIAL    RELATIONSHIP    TO    MANKIND. 

1.  Destiny  is  unsealed  by  strength.  2.  Destiny  is  revealed  by  humiliation. 
3.  Destiny  is  revealed  by  sacrifice.  Lessons :  (1)  That  all  the  events  of  the 
future  are  arranged  according  to  a  wise  and  comprehensive  plan.  (2)  That  in 
contemplation  of  the  futiire,  all  mental  distress  which  may  arise  should  be 
consoled  by  the  revelation  which  Christ  has  made.  (3)  That  Christ  is  above  all 
created  intelligence  in  His  mediatorial  relationship  to  the  future.  (J".  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  song  of  the  book : — 1. 1  notice  first,  that  under  any  really  feasible  interpretation, 

THE    JUDICIAL    ELEMENT     MUST,   DIRECTLY    OR     INDIRECTLY,    BE     INCLUDED.      Different 

minds  have  discerned  in  this  symbol  *'  the  Book  of  the  Secret  Decrees  of  God," 
"  the  Book  of  Destiny,"  "the  Book  of  the  Inheritance,"  "the  Book  of  Universal 
History,"  "  the  Book  of  the  Future,"  or  "  the  Book  of  Providence."  But  every 
one  of  these  interpretations — different  but  not  contradictory — carries  a  reference  to 
judgment  in  its  right  hand.  Whatever  more  may  be  "  written  within  and  on  the 
back  side,"  the  handwriting  of  Christ  against  His  enemies  is  undoubtedly  there. 
Its  very  position,  it  has  been  well  shown,  is  an  indication  of  its  judicial  character. 
It  lies  "  in  the  right  hand  of  Him  who  sat  upon  the  throne  "  ;  in  that  hand  "  which 
teaches  terrible  things,"  and  is  "  full  of  righteousness,"  and  at  which  Christ  is  set 
**  until  His  enemies  are  made  His  footstool."  As  each  seal  is  opened,  ministers 
of  Divine  retribution  are  seen  going  forth.  Effects  Hke  these  could  only  follow 
the  opening  of  a  Book  of  Judgment.     II.  I  observe  next,  that  everything  in 

THE   VISION,    IN   WHICH   THIS   SYMBOL   OCCURS,  SEEMS   TO   SPEAK   TO     US   OF   THE    DOMAIN 

OF  Providence.  Those  prelusions  of  the  consummation  of  all  things,  of  which 
Providence  is  so  fuU,  salute  us  here.  It  is  the  "  Lamb,"  the  redemptive  heart  of 
Providence ;  the  "  Lion,"  the  avenging  arm  of  Providence  ;  the  "  root  of  David," 
the  kingly  power  in  Providence,  who  prevails  to  open  the  book.  He  is  the  Lord 
niighty  to  save  or  destroy.  And  finally,  His  power  to  deal  with  this  great  mystery 
of  time,  the  oppression  of  the  righteous  by  the  wicked,  is  represented  as  a  joy  to 
all  who  are  embraced  in  the  great  scheme  of  Providence.  It  should  be  borne  in 
mind  that  this  worship,  like  the  vision  in  which  it  occurs,  was  revealed  as  con- 
solation for  John.  He  was  in  tears  because  no  man  could  unseal  the  book.  It  is  a 
most  suggestive  fact,  that  the  first  word  of  the  consolation  comes  from  one  of  the 
representatives  of  the  redeemed.  It  was  one  of  the  elders  who  said  to  the  exile, 
**  Weep  not  1 "  To  that  elder  and  his  companions  the  seals  on  the  book  had  caused 
no  anxiety.  The  secret  of  the  Lord  was  in  their  hearts.  They  knew  that  there 
was  one  eye  from  which  the  things  written  in  that  book  were  never  hid.  In  the 
light  which  breaks  upon  him  now,  the  tears  of  the  captive-prophet  have  disappeared. 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  307 

The  mystery  which  lay  upon  his  soul  is  unloosed.     The  book  is  in  the  hands  of  his 
Lord.     "  What  no  man  in  heaven,  nor  in  earth,  nor  under  the  earth  "  could  do, 
has  been  done  by  Christ.     He  has  prevailed  "  to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the 
seven  seals."     The  joy  of  the  seer  seems  to  palpitate  up  into  the  throngs  of  heaven. 
And  if  we  would  know  the  character  of  that  book,  we  must  open  our  minds  to  the 
thoughts  which  find  expression  in  this  song.     1.  The  song  is  first  of  all  a  song  of 
thanks  :  "  Thou  hast  redeemed  us."     There  was  such  power  in  His  sympathy,  that 
it  penetrated,  and  used  for  redemption  purposes,  every  peculiarity  of  nature,  and 
race,  and  sphere.     There  was  such  power  in  His  grace,  that  it  broke  down,  in  their 
hearts,  the  might  of  indifference,  and  enmity,  and  lust,  and  sin.     2.  Again,  the 
song  of  the  elders  is  more  than  personal  thanksgiving.    It  is  a  prophecy  of  conso- 
lation as  well.     It  is  sung  for  John  and  the  suffering  Church.     3.  Besides  being 
personal  thanksgiving  and  prophecy,  the  song  of  the  redeemed  is  worship  of  the 
Bedeemer.    And  it  is  the  judicial  aspect  of  His  work  they  praise.     The  object  of 
this  worship  is  seated  on  the  throne  of  the  universe.     The  song  is  often  quoted  as 
if  it  were  an  acknowledgment  of  His  worth  as  a  sacrifice  :  "  Thou  art  worthy  .  .  . 
for  Thou  wast  slain."    But  it  is  more,  by  being  less,  than  this.     "  Thou  art  worthy 
to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof,  for  Thou  wast  slain."     The  fact 
that  He  was  slain  is  celebrated  here,  only  because  it  imparts  the  right  to  open  the 
book.     The  singers  take  their  stand  on  the  fact  that  He  is  judge,  because  He  is 
first  of  all  sacrifice.     He  is  worthy  to  unloose  the  seals  of  judgment,  because  He  is 
the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.     We  are  accustomed  to  connect 
the  death  of  Christ  with  the  outflowings  of  His  mercy ;  the  connection  here  is 
between  that  death  and  the  outflowings  of  His  justice.     In  the  depths  of  this  song 
I  find  the  great  faith,  that  there  is  a  Judge  in  the  earth  who  judgeth  righteously, 
and  Christ  the  crucified  is  He.     (A.  Macleod,  D.D.)         The  sealed  book: — But 
these  prelusive  judgments  are  little  known.     The  book  is  sealed  with  seals.    We  do 
not  see  its  contents,  or  we  do  not  see  them  as  what  they  are.     The  retributions  it 
reveals  are  not  known  as  retributions.     Our  knowledge  at  the  best  is  limited,  our 
insight  dim  and  poor,  and  the  "  thoughts  "  of  the  Judge  "  are  very  deep."     1.  The 
habit  of  expecting  from  the  future  what  is  already  by  our  side  is  one  cause  of  our 
blindness  to  the  retributions  of  the  present.     We  underrate  the  present,  and  are 
surprised  when  it  brings  a  judgment  to  our  door.     Every  age,  I  might  say  every 
day,  is  a  judgment-day.      "Every  morning  doth  He  bring  judgment  to  hght." 
Even  while  I  write  these  words  the  term  of  probation  for  some  life,  or  scheme,  or 
institution,  or  nation,  is  coming  to  a  close.     Over  a  thousand  spheres  of  action,  the 
judgment  hour  is  striking.   2.  Our  subjection  to  sense,  and  the  consequent  tendency 
to  judge  according  to  appearance,  is  another  cause  of  the  dimness  which  seems  to 
lie  on  the  world  of  retribution.     "  Appearance  "  is  no  mark  of  well-being  in  the 
sphere  of  Providence.    3.  A  third  cause  of  our  blindness  to  such  events  is  the 
foregone  conclusion  that  retribution  is  only  present  when  the  last  results  of  sin 
have  been  reached.    Judgment  manifests  itself  in  the  partial  as  well  as  in  the 
complete  developments  of  evil.    4.  A  fourth  cause  which  seals  up  the  prelusive 
judgments  from  our  view  is  the  mistaken  conceptions  of  retribution  which  we 
entertain.    We  are  wrong  in  our  notions  of  its  nature  and  manifestations.    Even 
when  retributions  are  present  and  palpable  to  the  senses,  we  will  not  believe  them 
to  be  outbreakings  of  the  Divine  wrath  on  sin.     We  suffer  ourselves  to  be  blinded 
by  phrases  which  hide  out  the  truth.     We  say — we  think  we  have  explained  them 
when  we  say — they  are  the  accidents  of  circumstances,  or  the  natural  fruits  of  evil. 
We  do  not  see  that  there  can  be  no   such   accidents.     We  do  not  sufficiently 
remember  that  the  natural  fruits  of  evil  are  themselves  a  doom.     We  insist  on 
extraneous  and  formal  dooms.     Eetributions  must  come  forth  clad  in  miraculous 
and  visible  garments.     It  must  be  a  handwriting  on  the  wall,  a  portent  in  the 
heavens,  a  sounding  of  trumpets  in  the  sky.     But  this  is  merely  the  aberration  of 
our  ignorance.    Retribution  can  only  on  rare  occasions  be  clothed  in  formalities 
like   these.     Its   manifestations,  for  the  most   part,    and  of   necessity,   are  not 
miraculous,  but  natural.    It  is  at  work  when  we,  who  are  in  its  presence,  see  only 
decay,   or  disease,  or  accident,      {ibid.)  God's   library : — Four  volumes  are 

mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  as  belonging  to  God's  celestial  library.  1.  The 
"book  of  the  living"  (Psa.  Ixix.  28),  in  which  are  enumerated  all  items  of 
personal  human  history,  as  God  has  decreed  them  (Psa.  cxxxix.  16).  2.  The 
"book  of  the  law"  (Gal  iii.  10),  in  which  are  included  all  God's  demands 
for  obedience  and  duty.  3.  The  "book  of  remembrance"  (Mai.  iii.  16),  in  which 
are  noted  all  the  incidents  of  each  behever's  continued  experience  (Psa.  Ivi.  8). 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v.' 

4.  The  "book  of  life"  (Phil.  iv.  3),  in  which  are  recorded  all  the  names  of  those 
redeemed  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  no  others  (Eev.  xx.  15).  Of  these  perhaps 
the  likeliest  to  be  the  one  John  now  saw  in  God's  right  hand  was  the  first,  containing 
the  secret  decrees  of  Divine  providence  concerning  human  life  and  the  destiny  of 
nations.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  book  and  the  song : — I.  The  book  op 
MYSTERY.  1.  It  is  instructive  to  inquire  where  the  seer  saw  the  book.  2.  It  is  also 
instructive  to  notice  the  fulness  of  Divine  counsels  contained  in  the  book.  3.  The 
carefulness  with  which  its  contents  are  secured.  11.  A  startling  challenge  and 
THE  PROFOUND  SUSPENSE.  1.  By  whom  made.  2.  The  nature  of  the  challenge. 
3.  The  profound  suspense.  (1)  What  a  stern  rebuke  to  all  the  daring  speculations 
of  unaided  reason  concerning  the  future  purposes  of  Godl  (2)  How  painful  the 
thought  of  the  unbroken  seals  to  the  apocalyptic  seerl  UI.  The  consoling 
ANNOUNCEMENT.  1.  The  character  of  the  announcement.  2.  The  ground  of  the 
consolation.  IV.  A  marvellous  scene.  1.  A  symbolic  representation  of  our  Lord 
in  heaven.  (1)  "  In  the  midst  of  the  throne,"  &c.  Christ  is  the  central  figure  of  all 
the  heavenly  hosts.  (2)  "A  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,"  &c.  Christ's  death  is  the 
ground  of  all  heavenly  glory.  2.  A  symbolic  representation  of  the  investiture  of 
Christ  with  full  control  of  all  the  purposes  of  the  Father.  (1)  These  purposes  are 
symbolised  in  the  book.  (2)  The  investiture  is  symbolised  in  Christ  becoming 
possessor  of  the  book.  3.  A  symbolic  representation  of  the  joy  which  will  fill  all 
heaven  and  earth  and  sea  when  Christ  is  thus  honoured.  (1)  The  song  now  sung 
was  a  "  new  song."  (2)  The  inspiration  of  the  song  was  the  worthiness  of  Christ  to 
take  the  book  and  to  open  its  seals.  (3)  The  theme  of  the  song — redemption  through 
Christ's  blood;  the  exaltation  of  the  saved  to  the  positions  of  kings  and  priests, 
blessed  hope  of  reigning  over  the  earth.  Learn — 1.  That  all  the  events  of  the 
future,  as  well  as  those  of  the  past,  are  under  the  supreme  control  of  our  Lord  asi 
Eedeemer.  2.  That  to  Christ  we  owe  every  ray  of  light  that  this  book  sheds  on  the 
future.  3.  That  while  terrible  judgments  are  announced  in  the  book  against  the 
wicked,  the  issue  will  be  most  glorious  for  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  the  result  of 
Christ's  administration  wiU  be  the  triumph  of  holiness.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
The  plan  of  the  Divine  government : — 1.  The  plan  of  the  Divine  government  is 
settled  and  adjusted  with  as  much  certainty  and  precision  as  if  it  had  been  put  upon 
record,  or  written  in  a  book.  2.  The  work  of  Messiah  is  a  great  and  glorious  under- 
taking. 3.  There  is  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil  in  the  temper  and  conduct  of  the 
best  of  men.  John  wept  when  he  had  no  proper  occasion  for  sorrow.  In  so  far  as 
his  grief  sprung  from  inattention  to  Christ  it  was  criminal;  but  in  so  far  as  it 
manifested  his  public  spirit,  and  sprung  from  a  fear  lest  the  Church  might  be  desti- 
tute of  any  branch  of  knowledge  that  might  be  advantageous  for  her,  it  was  truly 
generous  and  patriotic,  and  therefore  much  to  be  commended.  4.  There  is  a 
constitutional  fitness  in  the  person  of  Christ  for  the  work  of  mediation.  He  is  both 
the  root  and  the  offspring  of  David ;  He  is  a  daysman  who  can  lay  His  hand  upon 
both,  and  make  up  the  breach  between  them ;  and  as  there  is  no  other  medium  of 
friendly  intercourse  with  God,  it  nearly  concerns  us  to  be  savingly  acquainted  with 
Him,  as  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  {R.  Gulbertson.)  Tears  are  effectual 
orators  : — Luther  got  much  of  his  insight  into  God's  matters  by  this  means.  It  is 
said  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney  that  when  he  met  with  anything  that  he  well  understood 
not,  he  would  break  out  into  tears.  {J.  Trapp.)  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  .  .  .  hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book. — Christ  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  : — 1.  Whereas  John  is  comforted  by  one  of  the  elders,  we  see  that  the  Lord 
never  leaves  His  own  comfortless.  2.  Where  He  says,  "  Behold  the  Lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,"  &c.,  we  are  taught  for  all  solid  comfort  to  look  up  to  Christ  the  fountain 
thereof ;  and  as  Samson  got  honey  out  of  his  slain  lion,  so  shall  we  the  sweetness  of 
comfort  from  Him.  3.  The  elder  speaks  of  Him  in  His  titles  out  of  Moses  and 
Isaiah ;  and  so  do  all  faithful  teachers  speak  of  Him  according  to  the  Scriptures. 
4.  Christ  is  said  to  be  not  only  a  Lamb  for  meekness,  innocence,  and  patient 
suffering,  but  also  a  Lion  for  power  and  prevailing  against  all  His  foes  and  ours, 
which  is  both  a  comfort  to  His  own  and  terror  to  His  enemies.  5.  Also  where  He  is 
said  to  be  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  so  to  be  man  of  our  nature  and  come  of  men ;  it 
is  likewise  greatly  to  our  comfort  that  He  has  so  dignified  our  nature  in  His  person, 
wherein  now  it  is  glorified,  passing  by  the  angels.  6.  Where  He  is  called  "  the  Boot 
of  David,"  who  was  also  a  Branch  or  the  Son  of  David,  we  see  as  He  was  man ;  so 
likewise  God,  and  the  root  or  stock  which  bears  up  all  the  faithful  and  can  never 
fail.  7.  He  is  said  to  have  prevailed  to  open  the  book,  &c. — to  wit,  with  the  Father — 
AS  our  Mediator  and  Advocate,  which  is  to  our  great  comfort,  that  whatever  (for  the 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  309 

good  of  His  Church)  He  seeks  of  the  Father,  He  prevails  therein ;  yea,  whatever  we 
shall  seek  in  His  name,  it  shall  be  granted  us.  8.  He  prevails  to  open  the  book 
and  the  seven  seals  thereof.  It  is  He,  then,  only  who  is  "  The  Word,"  as  the  Wisdom 
of  the  Father  to  decree,  so  the  Word  to  declare,  and  the  Power  to  effectuate,  that 
Great  Prophet  of  His  Church  who  came  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father  to  reveal  the 
Lord's  counsel,  and  His  goodwill  to  men :  hear  Him.  {Wm.  Guild,  D.I).)  The 
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  : — I.  Jesus  is  called  a  lion  because  of  the  unpakalleled 
COURAGE  WHICH  BELONGS  TO  HiM.  The  work  which  He  undertook  to  execute  was  one 
of  incomparable  magnitude.  Had  it  been  proposed  to  the  mightiest  archangel  that 
stands  before  God's  throne,  he  would  have  shrunk  in  timidity  from  the  task.  For 
what  was  it  ?  It  was  to  reconcile  things  apparently  incongruous,  and  to  perform 
things  apparently  impossible.  It  was  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  justice,  and  yet,  at 
the  same  time,  yield  abundant  scope  for  the  exercise  of  mercy.  It  was  to  secure 
pardon  to  a  condemned  race,  and  yet  maintain  inviolate  the  honour  of  the  law 
which  had  sentenced  them  to  condemnation.  And,  in  addition  to  all  this,  it  was  to 
combat  single-handed  the  powers  and  principalities  of  hell.  Who  among  the  sons 
of  the  mighty  could  have  presumed  that  he  was  equal  to  such  a  work  ?  And  yet, 
behold,  in  the  fulness  of  time.  One  born  of  a  woman  undertakes  this  mighty  office. 
The  difficulties  and  dangers  of  the  work  were  not  hidden  from  Him.  Yet  did  not 
the  prospect,  awful  as  it  was,  deter  Him  from  engaging  in  the  service.  Nor,  when 
the  very  worst  was  immediately  in  view,  did  it  shake  the  intrepidity  of  His  purpose. 
Of  His  courage,  even  as  of  His  love,  it  may  be  said  that  it  was  "  stronger  than  death." 
II.  Courage,  however,  as  we  all  know,  may  reside  in  a  bosom  to  which  the  power 
OF  accomplishing  what  it  undertakes  is  denied.  There  may  be  the  will  to  do  and 
the  soul  to  dare  what  the  hand  is  incompetent  to  execute.  But  it  was  not  thus  with 
the  blessed  Jesus,  who  undertook  the  bold  work  of  saving  lost  men.  His  strength 
was  equal  to  His  courage,  and  He  had  power  to  execute  all  that  His  boldness  pur- 
posed. Being  God  as  well  as  man,  no  burden  was  too  heavy  for  Him,  no  trial  too 
severe.  III.  The  idea  suggested  by  the  metaphor  under  consideration  may  well 
animate  you  to  steadfastness  in  the  work  of  the  lord.  Like  your  Divine  Master, 
you  too  shall  have  powerful  opposition  to  encounter,  and  formidable  enemies  to 
contend  against.  But  the  example  which  He  has  set  may  well  arouse  you  to 
activity.      {J.  L.  Adamson.)  The    all-conqnering    Christ : — It  is  needless  to 

say  to  the  Biblical  student  that  this  imagery  has  its  base  on  Gen.  xlix.  8-10. 
I.  The  victorious  leadership  and  power  of  Judah.  Of  Judah,  the  old  man 
says  that  he  shall  be  chief  amongst  his  brethren.  "  Thou  art  he  whom  thy 
brethren  shall  praise ;  .  .  .  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down  before  thee." 
He  is  to  be  a  victorious  power.  "Thy  hand  shall  be  in  the  neck  of  thine 
enemies  .  .  .  from  the  prey  thou  art  gone  up."  His  is  to  be  a  legislative  and 
regal  power.  "  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from 
between  his  feet."  He  is  to  be  the  true  centre  of  government,  the  rallying 
point  of  the  world's  hopes ;  "  to  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  Let  us 
trace  the  history  to  see  the  facts  that  fulfil  the  prophecy.  Two  hundred  years  after 
the  old  man's  dying  words  were  spoken,  we  find  the  children  of  Israel  going  up  out 
of  Egypt,  and  God  gives  directions  about  the  order  of  their  encampment.  "  On  the 
east  side  .  .  .  shall  they  of  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  Judah  pitch  "  (Numb.  ii.  3). 
Why  is  Judah  assigned  the  principal  place  in  the  front  of  the  tabernacle  ?  Why  is 
he  here  the  chief  tribe?  Why  should  not  Keuben,  the  first-born,  be  appointed 
here  ?  There  is  no  explanation  to  be  given  except  that  for  his  sin  he  had  been  dis- 
placed, "  and  the  genealogy  is  not  to  be  reckoned  after  the  birthright,"  and  "  Judah 
was  made  the  chief  ruler  "  (1  Chron.  v.  1,  2).  Again,  in  Numb.  vii.  12,  when  the 
offerings  were  to  be  made,  Nahshon  ...  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  was  assigned  the 
dignity  of  offering  first.  When  the  tribes  had  passed  into  Canaan  the  remnants  of 
the  people  were  to  be  overcome,  and  Israel  requires  of  the  Lord  who  shall  be  put  in 
the  forefront  of  the  fray,  who  should  lead  to  battle.  "  Who  shall  go  up  for  us 
against  the  Canaanites  first,  to  fighi  against  them  ?  And  the  Lord  said,  Judah 
shall  go  up  :  behold,  I  have  delivered  the  lands  into  his  hand  "  (Judges  i.  2,  3). 
Still  later  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  revolt  (Judges  xx.  18)  and  the  people  "  went  to  the 
house  of  God  "  and  "  asked  counsel  of  God.  Which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  the 
battle  against  the  children  of  Benjamin  ?  And  the  Lord  said,  Judah  shall  go  up 
first."  II.  But  this  all-conquering  and  all-controlling  power  of  Judah  but  symbolised 
the  real  royalty  and  supreme  sway  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  hence  we  go  on  to  the 
New  Testament — tha  family  record  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  the  book  of  the  generation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  David."    The  old  promise  of  Jacob  in  Genesis  was  that 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

this  regal  might,  this  conquering  splendour,  should  abide  with  Judah  till  the  Peace- 
bringer,  the  Shiloh,  should  come  (Gen.  xlix.  10).  {J.  T.  Gracey,  D.D.)  The 
book  of  the  Divine  purposes  opened,  not  altered : — The  Lamb  is  said  here  to 
prevail  to  open  the  book.  We  often  suppose  that  He  prevailed  by  His  sacrifice 
to  alter  the  Divine  purposes.  We  often  say  that  the  Divine  will,  or  justice, 
or  purity,  demanded  something  of  man  which  he  could  not  render.  That  he 
was  doomed  to  destruction  for  that  failure;  that  the  Lamb  interposed  to  avert 
this  sentence;  that  He  paid  the  creature's  debt;  that  so  He  satisfied  the  mind 
of  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne;  that  many  threads  are  woven  into  this  theory 
which  are  drawn  from  the  practical  faith  of  men,  from  their  experience  of  their 
own  wants,  from  the  lessons  they  have  learnt  in  Scripture,  I  gladly  own.  But 
that  that  practical  faith  has  suffered,  and  does  suffer  crueUy,  from  the  speculations 
which  have  been  mixed  with  it ;  that  the  hearts  of  men  crave  for  a  satisfaction 
which  this  scheme  of  divinity  does  not  afford  them ;  that  if  they  would  listen  to  the 
teaching  of  Scripture  they  would  find  that  satisfaction,  I  must  maintain  also.  How 
naturally  men  conscious  of  evil  wish  to  change  the  purpose  of  a  Power  which  they 
think  is  ready  to  punish  this  evil ;  how  eagerly  they  seek  for  mediators  who  they 
suppose  may  effect  this  change ;  how  they  may  arrive  at  last  at  the  conception 
of  a  Kehama  who  by  prayers  and  sacrifice  can  bend  the  wiU  of  the  gods  whoUy 
to  his  wiU,  the  mythology  of  aU  nations  proves  abundantly.  Christian  theology 
scatters  such  dark  imaginations  by  revealing  the  Highest  Euler  as  the  All-Good, 
Him  who  sits  on  the  t^one  as  a  Being  like  a  jasper  or  a  sardine  stone  to  look 
upon ;  by  revealing  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  as  the  perfect  sharer  of  His 
counsels;  the  perfect  fulfiller  of  His  will;  the  perfect  revealer  of  His  designs  to 
mankind;  the  perfect  Redeemer  of  the  world  from  the  dominion  of  false,  hate- 
ful, cruel  gods  which  they  had  imagined,  and  which  upheld  aU  falsehood,  hatred, 
cruelty  in  the  rulers ;  the  perfect  atoner  of  man  with  the  Father  of  Light, 
in  whom  is  no  variableness  nor  the  shadow  of  turning.     {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  A  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain. — The  Lamb  and  the  book : — I.  Gon 
HAS  A  PLAN  FOR  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  His  Church.  1.  The  plan  is  on  a  large  scale. 
It  fiUs  a  "  book."  Eedemption  is  God's  greatest  effort.  2.  God  is  resolved  to  work 
out  the  plan.  •'  Eight  hand  " — symbol  of  executive  energy.  3.  The  plan  is  an 
infinitely  difi&cult  one.  "  Sealed  with  seven  seals."  How  to  reconcile  man  to  God, 
the  great  mystery  of  the  universe.  4.  The  plan  is  essential  to  the  happiness  of 
humanity.    John  *'  wept "  when  no  one  could  open  the  book.     II.  Christ  is  the 

ADMINISTRATOR    OF    God'S    PLAN    FOR  THE   CONSTRUCTION   OF    HiS    ChURCH.      1.   He    iS 

qualified  by  appointment.  "  My  servant."  2.  He  is  qualified  by  character. 
"Lamb."  3.  He  is  qualified  by  suffering.  "Slain."  4.  He  is  qualified'  by 
perfection  of  ability.    "  Seven  horns,"  &c.    Perfection  of  knowledge  and  power. 

in.   The   ADMINISTRATION  BY   ChRIST  OF   God'S  PLAN  FOR   THE   CONSTRUCTION  OF  HiS 

Church  is  productive  of  universal  joy.  1.  The  joy  of  the  Church  (vers.  8-10).  2. 
The  joy  of  the  angels  (vers.  11,  12).  3.  The  joy  of  the  creation  (ver.  13).  4.  The 
joy  of  God.  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,"  &c.  {B.  D.  Johns.)  The  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne : — I.  The  -  blessed  object  which  John  beheld  in  heaven. 
1.  The  title  given  Him  is  most  endearing.  (1)  A  favourite  one  with  the  inspired 
writers  (Isa.  liii.  7 ;  John  i.  29 ;  1  Pet.  i.  19,  &c.).  St.  John  uses  the  expression 
nearly  thirty  times,  and  always  in  most  important  connections.  (2)  An  appropriate 
and  expressive  title.  2.  The  position  He  occupies  is  pre-eminently  striking.  (1) 
Conspicuous.  (2)  Dignified.  And  if  such  be  His  position  in  heaven,  should  He  be 
placed  in  the  background  upon  earth  ?  3.  The  attributes  symbolically  ascribed  to 
Him  are  highly  imposing.  These  are  power  and  wisdom.  H.  The  special  act 
which  He  is  represented  as  performing.  HI.  The  feelings  of  jot  and  adoration 
WITH  which  the  circumstance  referred  to  was  regarded.  1.  By  the  redeemed.  2. 
By  the  angelic  hosts.  3.  By  the  whole  intelligent  creation.  {Expository  Outlines.) 
The  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  : — I.  The  Lamb  in  the  midst  op  the  throne. 
The  designation  of  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  theEoot  of  David,  appealed  to  one 
class  of  associations  in  the  apostle's  mind  ;  the  appearance  of  a  lamb  as  it  had  been 
slain,  to  another.  The  design  was  to  combine  the  two,  as  better  calculated  than 
each  one  singly  to  convey  the  full  impression  of  the  person  who  had  prevailed  to 
open  the  sealed  book.  A  lamb  was  selected  by  God  from  the  period  of  the  Fall  as 
best  calculated,  by  its  natural  meekness  and  innocence,  to  typify  the  real  propitiation 
for  sin  which  He  had  provided  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  As  such  He  was 
foretold  by  Isaiah,  "He  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter."    As  such  He 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  311 

is  pointed  out  by  John  the  Baptist,  "  Behold,  the  Lamb  of  God ! "  and  as  such  He  ia 
described  by  Peter,   "  Ye  were  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as 
of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot."     The  Book  of  Revelation  records 
the  triumphs  of  the  Lamb.     The  Old  Testament  had  given  the  history  of  the 
preparation  for  His  coming;  the  New  had  tracked  His  sorrowful  course  on  the 
earth ;  all  that  was  now  needed  was  to  trace  the  effects  of  the  death  of  Christ  upon 
future  ages  of  the  world,  and  throw  out  some  intimations  of  its  blissful  and  inter- 
minable reward.     "  A  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne," 
suggests  that  certain  indications  remain  in  the  glorified  person  of  the  Redeemer  in 
the  midst  of  its  purity  and  splendour,  of  its  oblation  on  the  Cross.     Were  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  the  foimdation  of  the  glory  that  should  follow  ?     Is  His  exalta- 
tion in  proportion  to  His  humiliation  ?     Then  must  the  glory  of  His  person  be  in 
proportion  to  its  shame,  and  the  radiance  of  His  scars  pre-eminently  bright.    This 
becomes  the  everlasting  memorial  to  the  redeemed  of  their  title  to  those  realms,  and 
of  the  ever-living  intercession  within  the  veil.    Justice  requires  the  detention  of  this 
memento  of  their  chartered  bliss.     II.  The  acceptance  of  the  challenge  by  the 
Lamb  to  open  the  sealed  book.     As  the  rising  sun  chases  from  a  whole  hemisphere 
the  gloom  and  silence  of  night,  burnishes  the  billows,  gems  the  crystal  caves,  tinges 
the  forests,  gilds  the  waving  corn,  enamels  the  flowers,  fringes  the  clouds,  empurples 
the  sky,  fills  cities  with  life,  homes  with  mirth,  and  groves  with  songs;  so  the 
appearance  of  the  Lamb  on  the  throne  turns  the  stillness  of  creation  into  life,  the 
gloom  into  day,  the  silence  into  songs.     The  joy  that  spread  through  the  whole 
creation  when  the  Lamb  took  the  sealed  book  intimates  that  all  creation   was 
interested  in  its  contents.     The  book  in  the  hand  of  Christ  insured  its  fulfilment. 
((?.  Rogers.)       Christ  in  heaven  : — 1.  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  present 
and  former  condition  of  the  Saviour.    2.  The  exaltation  of  Christ  has  made  no 
change  upon  the  spirit  and  disposition  by  which  He  is  actuated.     3.  Jesus  Christ  is 
invested  with  a  threefold  ofl&ce.     He  is  here  symbolised  by  a  Lamb,  which  naturally 
reminds  us  of  His  sacrificial  work  and  of  His  priestly  character ;  but,  as  this  Lamb 
had  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes.  He  must  be  a  king  and  a  prophet  as  well  as  a 
priest.   4.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Divine  person.    5.  Saints  are  under  peculiar  obligations 
to  praise  and  honour  God.    6.  See  the  true  and  direct  way  for  relief  to  the  burdened 
mind.    Is  the  soul  afflicted  with  a  deep  sense  of  gmlt  ?    Look  to  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.     (R.  Culbertson.)        The  appearance  of  the 
Mediator  in  heaven : — I.  That  the  mediator  appears  as  the  centre  of  heavenly 
society.     1.  The  position  is  indicative  of  the  pre-eminence  of  Christ.     While  on 
earth  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  in  heaven  He  is  the  centre  of  enjoyment 
and  worship.     2.   This  position  is  indicative  of  the  attraction  of  Christ.     We 
are  assured  that  Christ  is  not  merely  the  centre  of  the  society  of  heaven  because  of 
His  royal  dignity,  but  also  because  of  the  beauty  of  His  character,  the  glory  of  Hia 
redemptive  work,  the  wealth  of  His  mercy,  the  depth  of  His  condescension,  and  the 
wondrous  achievements  of  His  grace  in  bringing  so  many  to  the  promised  kingdom. 
3.    This  position  is  indicative  of  the  supreme  life  and  activity  of  Christ.      The 
Redeemer  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  company  of  heaven ;  thus . 
indicating  His  rising  up  from  the  grave,  His  entrance  upon  a  life  which  should 
never  again  yield  to  death,  and  His  readiness  for  the  redemptive  work  of  the  future, 
n.  That  the  mediator  appears  with  the  tokens  of  redemptive  suffering.        "  A 
Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain  "  (ver.  6).      1.   This  figure  indicates  the  gentle  spirit  of 
Christ.     He  deals  tenderly  with  wounded  spirits,  now  that  He  is  in  heaven,  even  as 
He  did  when  on  earth.     2.  This  figure  indicates  the  painful  sufferings  of  Christ. 
Here  then  is  great  encouragement  for  all  penitent  sinners,  in  that  humanity 
is  represented  in  heaven,  and  in  that  Christ  can  never  forget  the  humiliation 
He  endured  to  bring  them  to  God.     III.  That  the  mediator  appears  as  executino 
THE  most  important  WORK.      1.   He  accomplished  a  work  vastly  important  to 
mankind.     Surely  nothing  could  be  of  greater  importance  than  that  man  should 
have  light  cast  upon  destiny.     2.  He  accomplished  a  work  which  none  other  being 
could  achieve.     All  created  intelligences  had  been  chaUenged  to  open  the  book  which 
they  saw  in  the  Divine  hand,  but  were  not  equal  to  the  task.      (J.    S.    Exell, 
M.A.)         Christ  the  expounder  of  the  mystery  : —  I.    Christ,  as  the  expounder  op 

THE  mystery  op  THE  DiVINE  GOVERNMENT,  OCCUPIES  A  CENTRAL  POSITION,  AND  ASSUMES 

THE  MOST  EXTRAORDINARY  ASPECTS.  1.  The  position  He  occupies.  He  is  in  the 
"  midst  of  the  throne  "  ;  He  is  in  the  very  centre  of  the  intelligent  creation.  He 
attracts  all — He  enlightens  all — He  governs  all — He  blesses  all  with  new  life  and 
beauty.     2.  The  aspect  He  assumes.     In  His  person  are  combined  the  marks 


312  •  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

of  suffering  humanity  and  the  attributes  of  perfect  Divinity.    11.  Christ,  as  the 

EXPOUNDER  OF  THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE   DiVINE  GOVERNMENT,  AWAKENS,  IN  ALL  CLASSES  OF 

HOLY  MIND,  INEFFABLE  DELIGHT.  1.  Here  is  humility:  they  "fell  down  before 
the  Lamb."  The  profoundest  reverence  mingled  with  their  joy.  2,  Here  is 
harmony:  here  are  "harps"— emblems  of  music.  3.  Here  is  acceptableness : 
"  golden  vials  full  of  odours."  Its  breathing  ecstacies  ascend  as  fragrant  incense  to 
God.  4.  Here  is  prayerfulness :  "  the  prayers  of  saints."  Death  terminates  the 
saint's  need  of  prayer  for  certain  objects,  such  as  forgiveness,  deliverance  from  error, 
and  victory  over  foes,  but  not  the  spirit  of  prayer — the  spirit  of  felt  dependence 
upon  God.  ni,  Christ,  as  the  expounder  of  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, IS  deemed  worthy  of  the  office,  because  of  His  redemptive  achievement. 
1.  He  has  redeemed.  The  redemption  of  man  consists  in  a  deliverance  from 
the  power  and  penalty  of  sin.  2.  He  has  redeemed  by  sacrifice.  What  was 
the  sacrifice  ?  A  few  self-denying  efforts  ? — a  world  ?  No  ;  His  life.  "  By  Thy 
blood" ;  by  the  sacrifice  of  Thy  life — Thyself.  3.  He  has  redeemed,  by  sacrifice,  all 
classes.  "  Out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation."  The  atone- 
ment is  designed  to  redeem  the  world,  and  some  of  all  its  multitudinous  sections 
have  been  thus  redeemed,  and  millions  more  are  to  follow  yet.  4.  He  has  redeemed 
all  classes,  by  sacrifice,  to  the  highest  honours.  They  are  priests,  in  relation  to  their 
Maker,  offering  up  the  sacrifice  of  a  devout  and  grateful  soul;  they  are  kings, 
in  relation  to  their  race,  wielding  a  governing  influence  over  their  thoughts  and 
hearts.  A  true  Christian  is  a  moral  sovereign.  (Homilist.)  The  Lamb  in  glory : — 
I.  Jesus  in  heaven  appears  in  His  sacrificial  character ;  and  I  would  have  you  note 
that  THIS  character  is  enhanced  by  other  conspicuous  points.  Its  glory  is  not 
diminished,  but  enhanced,  by  all  the  rest  of  our  Lord's  character :  the  attributes, 
achievements,  and  ofl&ces  of  our  Lord  all  concentrate  their  glory  in  His  sacrificial 
character,  and  all  unite  in  making  it  a  theme  for  loving  wonder.  1.  We  read  that 
He  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda ;  by  which  is  signified  the  dignity  of  His  ofl&ce, 
as  King,  and  the  majesty  of  His  person,  as  Lord.  The  lion  is  at  home  in  fight,  and 
"  the  Lord  is  a  man  of  war."  Like  a  lion.  He  is  courageous.  Though  He  be  like 
a  lamb  for  tenderness,  yet  not  in  timidity.  2.  Further,  it  is  clear  that  He  is  a 
champion:  "  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda  hath  prevailed."  What  was  asked  for 
was  worthiness,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  holiness,  but  in  the  sense  of  valour.  One 
is  reminded  of  a  legend  of  the  Crusades.  A  goodly  castle  and  estate  awaited 
the  coming  of  the  lawful  heir :  he,  and  he  only,  could  sound  the  horn  which  hung 
at  the  castle  gate ;  but  he  who  could  make  it  yield  a  blast  would  be  one  who  had 
slain  a  heap  of  Paynim  in  the  fight,  and  had  come  home  victorious  from  many 
a  bloody  fray.  So  here,  no  man  in  earth  or  heaven  had  valour  and  renown  enough 
to  be  worthy  to  take  the  mystic  roll  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Eternal.  Our  champion 
■was  worthy.  3.  In  this  wonderful  vision  we  see  Jesus  as  the  familiar  of  God.  To  Him 
there  is  no  danger  in  a  close  approach  to  the  infinite  glory,  for  that  glory  is  His  own. 
4.  We  observe,  in  addition  to  all  this,  that  He  is  the  prophet  of  God.  "  He  who 
unveils  the  eternal  will  of  the  Highest  is  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the 
Bin  of  the  world."  5.  Our  Lord  always  was,  and  is  now,  acknowledged  to  be  Lord 
and  God.  Yet,  in  the  glory  of  His  Deity,  He  disdains  not  to  appear  as  the  Lamb 
that  has  been  slain.  This  still  is  His  chosen  character.  Write,  then,  the  passion 
of  your  Lord  upon  the  tablets  of  your  hearts,  and  let  none  erase  the  treasured 
memory.  Think  of  Him  mainly  and  chiefly  as  the  sacrifice  for  sin.  II.  In 
the  second  place,  note  that,  in  this  character,  Jesus  is  the  centre  of  all.  "  In 
the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  of  the  four  living  creatures,  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  The  Lamb  is  the  centre  of 
the  wonderful  circle  which  makes  up  the  fellowship  of  heaven.  1.  From  Him,  as  a 
standpoint,  all  things  are  seen  in  their  places.  Looking  up  at  the  planets  from  this 
earth,  which  is  one  of  them,  it  is  difficult  to  comprehend  their  motions — progressive, 
retrograde,  or  standing  still ;  but  the  angel  in  the  sun  sees  all  the  planets  marching 
in  due  course,  and  circling  about  the  centre  of  their  system.  Standing  where  you 
please  upon  this  earth,  and  within  human  range  of  opinion,  you  cannot  see  all  things 
aright,  nor  understand  them  till  you  come  to  Jesus,  and  then  you  see  all  things  from 
the  centre.  The  man  who  knows  the  incarnate  God,  slain  for  human  sins,  stands 
in  the  centre  of  truth.  2.  The  Lamb's  being  in  the  midst  signifies,  also,  that 
in  Him  they  all  meet  in  one.  Christ  is  the  summing  up  of  all  existence.  Seek  you 
Godhead  ?  There  it  is.  Seek  you  manhood  ?  There  it  is.  Wish  you  the  spiritual  ? 
There  it  is  in  His  human  soul.  Desire  you  the  material  ?  There  it  is  in  His  human 
body.     Our  Lord  hath,  as  it  were,  gathered  up  the  ends  of  all  things,  and  hath 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  313 

bound  them  into  one.  3.  Being  in  the  centre,  to  Him  they  all  look.  As  the  Father's 
eyes  are  always  on  Jesus,  so  are  the  eyes  of  the  living  creatures  and  the  four-and- 
twenty  elders  which  represent  the  Church  in  its  Divine  life  and  the  Church  in  its 
human  life.  All  who  have  been  washed  in  His  blood  perpetually  contemplate  His 
beauties.  4.  All  seem  to  rally  round  Him  as  a  guard  around  a  king.  AU  things 
ordained  of  the  Father  work  towards  Christ,  as  their  centre ;  and  so  stand  aU  the 
redeemed,  and  all  the  angels  waiting  about  the  Lord,  as  swelling  His  glory  and 
manifesting  His  praise.  HI,  Thirdly,  our  Lord  is  seen  in  heaven  as  the  Lamb  slain, 
and  IN  THIS  CHAKACTEB  He  EXHIBITS  PECULIAR  MARKS.  Nouc  of  those  marks  derogate 
from  His  glory  as  the  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  but  they  tend  to  instruct  us  therein.  1.  Note 
jwell  the  words  :  "  Stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  "  Stood,"  here  is  the  pos- 
Iture  of  life ;  "  as  it  had  been  slain,"  here  is  the  memorial  of  death.  Our  view 
of  Jesus  should  be  two-fold ;  we  should  see  His  death  and  His  life :  we  shall  never 
receive  a  whole  Christ  in  any  other  way.  2.  Note,  next,  another  singular  combina- 
tion in  the  Lamb.  He  is  called  "  a  little  lamb  "  ;  for  the  diminutive  is  used  in  the 
Greek  ;  but  yet  how  great  He  is !  In  Jesus,  as  a  Lamb,  we  see  great  tenderness  and 
exceeding  familiarity  with  His  people.  He  is  not  the  object  of  dread.  A  lamb  is  the 
most  approachable  of  beings.  Yet  there  is  about  the  little  Lamb  an  exceeding 
majesty.  The  elders  no  sooner  saw  Him  than  they  fell  down  before  Him.  3.  He 
hath  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes.  His  power  is  equal  to  His  vigilance  ;  and  these 
are  equal  to  all  the  emergencies  brought  about  by  the  opening  of  the  seven  seals  of 
the  Book  of  Providence.  IV.  Jesus  appears  eternally  as  a  Lamb,  and  m  this 
CHARACTER  He  IS  UNIVERSALLY  ADORED.  1.  Before  He  Opened  one  of  the  seals 
this  worship  commenced.  We  trust  Him  where  we  cannot  trace  Him.  Before  He 
begins  His  work  as  the  revealing  Mediator,  the  Church  adores  Him  for  His  work  as 
a  sacrifice.  Jesus  our  Lord  is  worshipped  not  so  much  for  what  benefits  He  will 
confer  as  for  Himself.  2.  That  adoration  begins  with  the  Church  of  God. 
The  Church  of  God,  in  all  its  phases,  adores  the  Lamb.  If  you  view  the  Church  of 
God  as  a  Divine  creation,  the  embodiment  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  then  the  living 
creatures  fall  down  before  the  Lamb.  No  God-begotten  life  is  too  high  to  refuse 
obeisance  to  the  Lamb  of  God.  3.  The  Lamb  is  not  only  worshipped  by  the 
Church,  He  is  worshipped  by  angels.  What  a  wonderful  gathering  together 
of  certain  legions  of  the  Lord's  hosts  we  have  before  us  in  this  chapter  1  4.  Nay,  it 
is  not  merely  the  Church  and  angelhood ;  but  all  creation,  east,  west,  north,  south, 
highest,  lowest,  all  adore  Him.  All  life,  all  space,  all  time,  immensity,  eternity ; 
all  these  become  one  mouth  for  song,  and  all  the  song  is,  "  Wortiiy  is  the 
Lamb."  5.  Now,  then,  if  this  be  so,  shall  we  ever  allow  anybody  in  our 
presence  to  lower  the  dignity  of  Christ,  our  sacrifice  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  : — I.  The  scene  in  heaven.  1.  A  redemption 
scene.  There  is  not  one  person  or  one  object  in  the  heavenly  mansions  but  stands 
closely  connected  with  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love.  2.  A  rejoicing,  blissful 
scene.  Let  us  mark  here  not  merely  the  fact  that  it  is  a  scene  of  triumphant 
song,  but  especially  the  object  that  causes  the  gladness,  and  the  difference  in  the 
mode  of  expressing  it.  We  have  here  four  different  songs.  First,  the  song  of  the 
living  creatures ;  secondly,  the  song  of  the  elders ;  thirdly,  the  song  of  the  angels ; 
fourthly,  the  song  of  all  creation.  But  the  one  grand  question  is,  who  is  the  object 
of  praise  ?  Clearly,  in  all  cases,  the  Lamb  on  the  throne ;  all  eyes  are  turned  to 
Him ;  all  hearts  fixed  on  Him.  He  is  the  life,  the  soul,  the  all  in  all  of  these 
songs.  Heaven  is  full  of  triumph.  The  universe  is  glad  in  its  exalted  and  crowned 
Saviour.  3.  A  communion  scene.  Observe  how  clearly  this  is  set  forth  in  the 
terms  of  the  text.  The  Lamb  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne ;  but  the  elders,  the 
living  creatures,  the  angels,  are  all  holding  fellowship  with  the  Lamb,  and  with  one 
another.  He  is  the  object  of  all  their  love,  the  centre  of  aU  attraction,  the  source 
of  all  their  light,  and  life  and  joy.  The  Eternal  Three  are  holding  their  blessed 
communion  of  love,  into  the  depths  of  which  no  creature  may  penetrate.  But  the 
four  living  creatures,  the  elders,  the  angels,  are  holding  intercourse  with  that  Lamb, 
and  with  one  another.  All  are  linked  to  the  throne  by  love.  Now  remember  that 
God's  family  are  partly  on  earth,  and  partly  in  heaven ;  some  at  home  with  their 
Father,  others  still  pilgrims  and  sojourners  in  a  foreign  land.  But  Jehovah  has  no 
greater  love  for  the  saints  now  in  glory  than  for  you.  Jesus  is  not  more  certainly 
in  the  midst  of  the  Church  in  triumph  than  in  the  midst  of  her  in  tribulation. 
There  is  not  a  more  certain  fellowship  with  Him  around  the  throne  than  in  this  vale 
of  tears.  There  is  positively  no  other  opening  up  of  the  wells  of  salvation  to  the 
glorified  saints  than  to  as.    The  grand  thing  is,  the  Lamb  is  the  same,  the  life  and 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r, 

love  are  the  same.  Yes,  and  all  the  more  you  can  feel  your  own  poverty,  necessity 
and  sinfulness,  the  more  will  you  exalt  the  Lamb  as  your  all ;  and  then  the  sense 
of  your  necessity,  and  the  sight  of  His  riches  and  glory  endearing  Him  to  your 
soul,  will  bring  Him  near  to  your  heart.  U.  The  connection  between  these 
rnrNGS  and  certain  other  things  here  specified  of  the  Lamb  on  the  throne,  as 
THE  foundation  OF  THEM.  1.  The  most  prominent  is  the  death  of  the  Lamb.  He 
appears  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain.  It  is  in  His  death  that  all  the  virtue  is  found 
which  produces  the  results  to  which  we  have  directed  your  minds.  The  death  of 
that  Lamb  is  death  to  all  our  fears ;  for  we  see  how  He  that  spared  not  His  own 
Son  will  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things.  That  death  of  the  Lamb  is  also 
the  death  of  a  guilty  conscience ;  for  while  reposing  on  this  Lamb  of  God,  the  effect 
of  His  righteousness  is  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever.  His  death  is  even  the 
death  of  death  itself  ;  for  as  we  fix  our  faith  on  the  throne,  we  hear  Him  say,  ♦'  I 
am  He  that  liveth,"  &c.  2.  The  attitude  of  the  Lamb.  He  stands  in  the  midst  of 
the  throne.  This  is  manifestly  His  attitude  as  the  intercessor  of  His  people.  He 
has  entered  in  once  for  all  into  the  holiest  of  all,  there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of 
God  for  us.  A  soldier  of  old,  who  was  accused  of  being  a  traitor  to  his  country, 
came  into  the  presence  of  his  sovereign,  showed  the  scars  on  his  breast,  the 
memorials  of  his  courage  while  fighting  in  the  thickest  of  the  battle,  and  was 
there  received  with  applause  in  the  face  of  all  his  accusers.  3.  The  freshness  of 
the  Lamb  slain  is  a  wonderful  sight.  The  Lamb  appears  standing,  bleeding  still, 
as  if  the  sword  of  justice  had  been  just  then  drawn  from  the  wounds  it  inflicted, 
and  the  blood  were  stiU  streaming  from  the  victim.  It  is  not  like  the  blood  of 
bulls  and  of  goats,  that  could  grow  cold,  and  hard,  and  unfit  for  sacrifice ;  but 
through  eternal  ages  the  Father  sees  that  blood,  and  saints  behold  it,  in  all  the 
power  of  a  recent  death.  By  faith  the  sinner  ever  sees  it  too,  and  has  no  fear 
it  shall  ever  lose  its  efficacy  with  God.  HI.  The  connection  of  both  these 
former  heads  of  discourse  with  the  special  work  of  communion  to-day.  1.  Now 
you  see  prominently  here  that  we  are  alike  showing  forth  the  cross  and  crown-rights 
of  our  glorious  Immanuel.  I  have  little  fear  that  you  forget  His  death  on  a  day 
like  this ;  but  I  am  certain  that  we  do  often  overlook  His  exaltation.  And  now  we 
put  ourselves  afresh  under  His  sway,  and  vow  submission  to  His  law  as  a  rule 
of  life  and  holiness.  2.  There  is  an  inseparable  connection  between  this  and  all 
the  consolations  of  the  believer.  The  Lamb  has  not  only  the  seven  crowns  or  seven 
horns,  but  He  has  also  the  seven  eyes,  or  seven  spirits  of  God.  Christ  has  all 
authority  and  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and  He  has  aU  the  spiritual  graces  to 
bestow.  The  power  would  be  useless  without  the  spiritual  influences  to  shed  forth, 
and  these  again  would  be  in  vain  without  the  rightful  authority  to  bestow  them.  But 
Christ  has  both.  3.  Another  thing  is  the  hope  of  the  Church  in  the  second  coming  of 
the  Lord.  {John  Walker.)  The  slain  Lamb,  beheld  in  heaven  by  the  redeemed : — I. 
There  will  be  a  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  heavenly  world. 
1.  The  manifestation  of  the  Saviour's  person.  (1)  In  His  exalted  human  nature. 
(2)  In  connection  with  His  divinity.  2.  The  manifestation  of  the  Saviour's  offices. 
We  speak  here  of  a  manifestation  to  the  minds  of  the  redeemed.  (1)  In  this 
manner,  for  instance,  they  will  be  led  to  know  and  meditate  upon  His  priesthood  ;  a 
capacity  in  which  He  gave  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  us.  And  the  redeemed,  gazing 
opon  Him  thus,  will  dwell  with  enlarged  comprehension  upon  the  wonders  of  His 
dying  love,  in  its  source,  in  its  process,  and  in  its  results.  (2)  In  this  manner, 
again,  they  will  also  know  and  meditate  upon  His  royalty  ;  a  capacity  in  which  He 
undertook  the  government  of  all  beings  and  of  all  worlds,  that  their  redemption 
and  the  purposes  of  the  Godhead  might  be  completed  and  performed.  3.  In  the 
heavenly  world  the  manifestation  of  the  Saviour's  person  and  offices  will  be 
unchanging  and  eternal.  Yes,  there  will  be  no  shrouding  of  Him,  there  will  be 
no  withdrawal  of  Him,  there  will  be  no  separation  from  Him.  He  is  the  Boot 
of  the  tree;  and  that  Boot  will  never  dry  or  fail  to  circulate  its  fertilising  in- 
fluences. He  is  the  Shechinah  of  the  temple ;  and  that  Shechinah  will  never  be 
obscured  or  extinguished.  He  is  the  Sun  of  the  firmament :  and  that  Sun  wiU 
never  be  clouded,  or  decline,  or  set,  or  cease  from  pouring  out  the  beams  of  its 
*'  high,  eternal  noon."    II.  The  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the 

HEAVENLY   world   WILL   PRODUCE    ANIMATING    AND  DELIGHTFUL   INFLUENCES  ON  ALL  TO 

WHOM  IT  IS  REVEALED.  1.  From  the  manifestation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  there  will  be 
Becured  purity.  The  character  of  the  Lord  Jesus  HimseK  is  that  of  unsullied 
purity;  and  it  is  impossible  but  that  there  should  be  an  assimilating  influence 
exercised  upon  aU  those  who  are  brought  spiritually  to  commune  with  Him,  Surely 


CHAP.T.]  REVELATION.  315 

those  who  have  been  redeemed  by  His  precious  blood  from  our  apostate  race,  will 
find,  in  their  contemplation  of  Him,  reasons  for  incessant  and  invariable  conformity 
to  His  likeness.    Besides  this,  we  must  remember  the  nature  of  those  employments, 
in  which  He  will  engage  them  while  they  shall  dwell  before  Him.     And  so  it  is, 
according  to  the  conclusion  of  inspiration,  that  "  we  shall  be  like  Him  "  because 
we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is  "  ;  and  we  shall  be  like  Him  for  ever,  because  we  shall 
see  Him  for  ever.     2.  This  manifestation  will  also  be  found  to  secure  pleasure. 
3.  The  manifestation  of  the  Saviour's  presence  in  the  heavenly  world  also,  we  find, 
secures  nraise.     (1)  It  is  the  praise  of  worship.     (2)  It  is  the  praise  of  gratitude. 
{J.  Parsons.)        The  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  : — I.  The  vision  is  set  before 
us  to  remind  us  of  the  method  of  atonement  ;  it  is  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  as  of 
a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot.     Amid  all  the  error  abounding  in  this 
world  there  are  few  so  infatuated  as  to  maintain  that  they  have  not  committed  sin. 
How  is  this  sin  to  be  forgiven  ?     By  our  repentance  and  reformation,  may  possibly 
be  the  reply.    But  till  there  is  a  work  of  grace  upon  the  heart  there  can  be  no 
genuine  repentance,  no  godly  reformation.     There  may  be  feelings  of  remorse  and 
regret ;  but  these  are  not  penitence.    But  granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that 
man  could  of   himself  wring  out  a  true  repentance,  still  it  can   be  shown  that 
there  is  nothing  in  that  repentance  to  make  atonement  for  past  sin.    In  no  case  can 
it  make  any  amends  to  the  insulted  justice  of  God.     Perhaps  you  now  say  that  you 
trust  in  the  mercy  of  God.     You  trust,  you  say,  in  the  mercy  of  God ;  but  how 
is  this  mercy  to  be  exercised  ?     Mercy  is  not  the  sole  perfection  of  God.     Holiness 
and  justice — these  are  as  essential  to  His  nature  as  benevolence.     How,  then,  can 
God  be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly?    Human  reason  can  give  no 
intelligent,  no  satisfactory  answer  to  this  question.     The  mind  feels  that  it  has 
nothing  to  rest  on ;  no  truth  on  which  the  understanding  can  settle  and  the  heart 
repose,  till  such  time  as  it  sees  "  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,  in  the  very  midst  of 
the  throne  of  God."     II.  The  vision  is  set  before  us  to  remind  us  of  the  character 
OF  Jesus,  of  His  meekness  and  gentleness,  so  fitted  to  win  the  human  heart.     The 
question  under  the  last  head  was,  How  is  God  to  be  reconciled  to  man?     The 
question  under  this  head  is.  How  is  man  to  be  reconciled  to  God  ?     How  is  his 
confidence  to  be  won  and  his  heart  engaged  ?     1.  I  remark  that  in  order  to  the 
gaining  of  the  feelings  of  the  heart  it  is  needful  that  the  conscience  be  pacified. 
A  troubled  conscience  always  leads  the  mind  to  avoid,   as  if  instinctively,  the 
remembrance  of  the  party  offended.     There  cannot  be  true  and  filial  love  in  a  mind 
in  which  conscience  has  not  been  appeased,  nor  can  there  be  any  of  those  allied 
graces,  such  as  faith  and  confidence,  hope  and  joy,  which  ought  to  fill  and  animate 
the  soul.    Not  only  so,  but  in  order  to  gain  the  heart  there  must  be  a  free,  a  full, 
and  an  instant  forgiveness.    It  must  be  free ;  for  it  cannot  be  purchased  or  earned 
by  us.     It  must  be  full ;  for  if  anything  were  left  unforgiven  the  conscience  would 
still  reproach.     Observe  how  all  this  is  secured  in  the  very  view  here  presented 
to  our  faith.     The  Lamb,  the  image  of  gentleness,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne, 
shows  that  God  is  pacified,  and  the  blood  that  flows  from  it  proves  that  this  has 
been  done  in  strict  accordance  with  justice.     The  conscience,  the  law  in  the  heart, 
is  satisfied,  for  God  Himself,  the  law-giver,  is  satisfied.     The  believer,  as  he  looks 
to  the  object  set  up,  can  say,  "It  is  God  that  justifieth ;  who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth  ?  "    2.  But  secondly,  in  order  to  gain  the  heart  there  must  be  a  lovely  object 
presented  to  it.    Such  an  object  is  presented  in  Jesus,  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain. 
The  character  of  our  Lord,  set  forth  as  an  object  on  which  the  faith  and  affection 
of  mankind  may  rest,  has  in  itself  everything  that  is  grand  and  attractive.    Just 
as  there  is  a  beauty  in  shape  and  colour  that  pleases  the  eye,  and  a  sweetness  of 
sound  that  dehghts  the  ear,  so  there  is  a  moral  loveliness  that  should  draw  towards 
it  the  affections  of  the  soul.    But  here,  in  the  character  of  God  set  forth  in  the  face 
of  His  Son,  we  have  all  kinds  of  beauty  meeting  and  harmoniously  blending. 
In  the  Mediator  the  Divine  and  human  natures  are  united  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  one  does  not  destroy  or  overpower  the  other,  but  each  retains  its  own  properties, 
while  the  whole  is  a  unity.    The  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  without  being 
shorn  of  a  single  ray,  is  seen  in  Christ  under  a  milder  lustre.     Coldness  and 
indifference  are  dispelled  when  we  think  that  in  drawing  near  to  Jesus  it  is  man 
coming  to  man.     Unbelief  vanishes  when  we  realise  that  we  have  a  brother's  heart 
beating  for  us  on  the  throne  of  glory.     While  our  hearts  are  naturally  drawn  by 
sentiments  and  sympathies  towards  every  brother  man,   there  are  certain  men 
or  classes  of  men  towards  whom  we   are  attracted  with  greater  force  ;  as,  for 
instance,  towards  all  whose  sensibilities  are  quick  and  whose  feehngs  are  tender. 


816  TnE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

And  if  the  persons  have  themselves  been  in  trouble,  if  their  heart  has  been  melted 
and  softened  by  fiery  trial,  our  hearts  go  towards  them  in  yet  fuller  assurance. 
Disposed  at  all  times  to  love  such,  we  are  especially  drawn  towards  them  when  we 
ourselves  are  in  trouble.  It  is  by  this  attracting  power  that  believers  are  drawn  so 
closely  to  their  Saviour.  The  brotherliness  of  His  human  nature,  as  well  as  the  holy 
love  of  His  Divine  nature,  are  brought  out  before  us  in  almost  every  incident  of  His 
life.  The  forsaken  lift  up  their  head  and  are  comforted  in  communion  with  Him 
who  was  Himself  forsaken.  Every  one  acquainted  with  man's  nature  knows  that 
if  his  heart  is  gained  it  must  be  gained  by  love.  It  must  be  by  presenting  a  loving 
object.  Such  is  the  loving  object  set  before  us— a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain, 
ni.  The  vision  is  set  before  us  to  remind  us  that  Jestjs  is  the  grand  source 
OF  JOY  TO  THE  SAINTS  IN  HEAVEN.  As  it  was  the  view  of  Christ  crucified  that  first 
gained  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  so  it  is  a  view  of  the  same  object  seen  in  the  visions 
of  faith  that  continues  to  keep  and  fix  his  regards.  The  faith  that  saves  does  not 
consist  of  a  single  glance ;  •'  looking  unto  Jesus  "  is  the  habitual  attitude  of  the 
believer's  soul.  Led  to  love  the  Lamb  of  God  when  on  earth,  trained  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  and  by  aU  the  dispensations  of  God  to  love  Him  more  and  more,  he  finds 
when  he  has  crossed  the  dark  vaUey  of  the  shadow  of  death  that  the  first  object 
that  meets  his  eye,  and  the  most  conspicuous,  is  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain.  But 
we  cannot  utter  that  which  is  unutterable,  or  describe  that  which  is  indescribable  ; 
and  so  we  cannot  picture  or  so  much  as  conceive  of  that  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory  which  the  believer  feels  on  his  first  entering  into  the  presence  of  his  Saviour, 
and  which  he  is  to  enjoy  for  ever.  True,  there  wUl  be  enjoyments  not  flowing  so 
directly,  though  still  proceeding  indirectly  from  Him.  There  will  be  joys  springing 
from  the  holy  affections  of  confidence  and  love,  which  Christ  by  His  Spirit  plants 
in  the  breasts  of  His  people.  These  graces,  flowing,  overflowing,  and  ever  increasing, 
will  be*  a  source  of  great  and  ever-deepening  happiness  throughout  eternity.  Again, 
there  will  be  joys  springing  from  the  glorious  society  of  heaven,  from  the  company 
of  saints  and  angels.  The  question  has  often  been  asked.  Where  is  heaven  ?  "We 
may  not  be  able  to  answer  it  geographically,  but  we  can  answer  it  truly.  It  is 
where  Jesus  is.  "  Where  I  am,  there  ye  shall  be  also."  1.  A  man  must  be  bom 
again  before  he  can  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  Oh,  that  I  had  but  lived  in  the 
days  when  Jesus  sojourned  on  the  earth !  is  the  wish  that  will  sometimes  rise  up  in 
our  breasts.  Oh,  that  I  had  but  seen  His  sacred  person !  Oh,  that  I  had  but  heard 
His  gracious  words  1  These  wishes,  if  proceeding  from  a  sincere  and  sanctified 
heart,  may  yet  be  gratified.  He  who  was  dead  is  alive,  and  behold  He  liveth  for  ever- 
more. As  He  was  on  earth,  so  is  He  now  in  heaven.  {J.  McCosh.)  The 
lion — the  lamb : — He  looked  for  a  lion ;  he  saw  a  lamb ;  the  Greek  says  "  little 
lamb  " — lamb,  emblem  of  meekness  ;  little  lamb,  emblem  of  apparent  meekness ; 
slain,  emblem  of  sacrifice.  And  yet  this  lamb  had  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes ;  the 
horns,  emblem  of  power ;  seven  horns,  emblem  of  perfect  power ;  eyes,  emblem  of 
wisdom ;  seven  eyes,  emblem  of  perfect  wisdom.  We  continually  make  this  mis- 
take ;  we  think  that  it  is  might  that  rules ;  we  look  for  a  lion.  We  think  that  the 
power  in  government  is  to  be  found  in  congresses,  presidents,  kings,  armies,  and 
have  not  yet  learned  that  the  power  is  in  homes  and  wives  and  mothers.  The 
disciples,  when  Christ  came,  were  looking  for  a  lion.  They  believed  that  the 
Messiah  would  appear  suddenly,  and  the  hosts  of  heaven  would  gather  about  Him 
and  the  hosts  of  paganism  would  gather  against  Him,  and  in  one  terrible  last  battle 
He  would  conquer  and  ride  victorious  over  a  bloody  field.  But  when  the  angel 
told  the  watching  shepherds  the  Messiah  was  come,  the  angel  also  said  to  them, 
"  This  is  the  sign  of  Hii=:  Messiahship— that  He  is  but  a  babe,  and  a  babe  cradled  in 
a  manger."  "  Because  Thou  hast  died,  and  hast  purchased  us  unto  God,  Thou  art 
worthy  to  receive  power  and  riches  and  wisdom  and  might  and  glory  and  honour 
and  blessings."  Power  belongs  to  love.  The  most  potent  of  all  earth's  potencies 
is  love.  Only  love  has  any  right  to  power.  It  is  not  the  lion,  it  is  the  lamb  that 
conquers.  The  eagle  is  dead,  the  lamb  lives  on  for  ever.  To  the  "  lamb  "  belongs 
the  world's  wealth.  It  is  not  the  greedy,  ravening  lions  that  acquire  wealth,  it  is 
the  lamb.  Only  the  lamb  is  worthy  to  receive  riches.  They  do  not  belong  to  shrewd 
selfishness,  but  to  large-minded  love.  No  man  has  a  right  to  wealth  save  he  who 
holds  it  as  a  trust  and  administers  it  in  love.  It  is  only  love  that  is  worthy  to  be 
rich ;  nay,  it  is  only  love  that  really  has  riches  ;  for  we  have  not  what  we  hold  in 
our  hand,  but  what  ministers  to  life.  It  is  love  serving  and  sacrificing  itseK  for 
others  that  alone  is  worthy  to  be  rich,  that  alone  is  truly  rich.  It  is  love  only  that 
is  wisdom.    The  cynic  and  Uie  misanthrope  pride  themselves  on  their  knowledge 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  317 

of  human  nature.  They  know  just  as  much  of  it  as  a  man  might  know  of  the  cold 
earth  who  did  not  know  there  were  any  seeds  beneath  the  surface.  It  is  love  only  that 
is  wise ;  for  love  sees  the  possibility  in  human  nature  which  eyes  blinded  by  cynicism 
fail  to  see.  It  is  love  which  sees  a  future  statesman  in  a  rail-splitter.  It  is  love 
which  sees  the  emancipator  of  Europe  in  the  monk.  Love  looks  beneath  the 
surface  and  sees  the  Divine  in  humanity.  Wisdom  belongs  to  love.  It  was  the 
Lamb  that  saw  in  the  publican  Matthew  the  great  biographer  :  the  Lamb  that  saw 
in  the  recreant  and  unstable  Simon  the  great  Apostle  Peter.  And  to  the  **  Lamb  " 
belong  the  glory,  and  the  honour,  and  the  blessing — not  to  power,  not  to  wisdom, 
save  as  power  and  wisdom  are  used  by  love  to  make  itself  impart  more.  There  are 
ranks  and  hierarchies  of  glory.  Conscience  is  a  great  glory — conscience  that  sees 
righteousness  and  understands  it ;  and  faith  is  a  great  glory — faith  that  rejoices  in 
the  invisible  and  the  eternal ;  and  hope  is  a  great  glory — hope  that  beckons  on  the 
man  to  a  larger  and  nobler  and  yet  larger  and  nobler  achievement.  But  best  and 
highest  of  all  is  love.  And  so  to  love  will  come  the  song  of  universal  blessing.  To 
the  lamb,  and  the  little  lamb  as  it  had  been  slain.  We  worship  Thee,  0  God,  not 
for  Thy  power,  though  that  power  we  might  fear ;  nor  for  Thy  wisdom,  though 
that  wisdom  we  must  admire ;  we  worship  Thee  for  Thy  love.  {Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.) 
The  lamb  on  the  throne  : — The  first  impression  of  these  words  must  have  been  one 
of  the  most  startling  originality.  To  that  old  world  the  idea  of  a  lamb  on  a  throne 
was  a  contradiction  in  terms.  I  do  not  mean  that  the  ancient  earth  was  a  stranger 
to  gentleness.  To  combine  in  one  nature  the  elements  of  the  lion  and  of  the  lamb 
would  be  as  natural  for  Livy  as  it  was  for  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse.  But  the  old 
Pagan  world,  like  the  pre-Christian  Jewish  world,  could  never  say  of  this  element 
of  gentleness,  "  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory  " ;  the  kingdom, 
the  power,  and  the  glory  were  not  for  it.  The  part  of  man's  nature  reserved  for 
them  was  the  self-asserting  part.  No  nation  that  I  know  had  a  lamb  as  a  symbol 
of  its  greatness.  The  Eoman  would  have  understood  an  eagle  on  the  throne,  for 
his  ideal  was  the  soaring  of  ambition.  The  Jew  would  have  understood  a  lion  on 
the  throne,  for  his  Messiah  was  a  physical  conqueror.  But  the  lamb  was  ever  a 
victim,  the  symbol  of  the  vanquished,  the  sign  of  the  dependent  soul.  Its  place 
was  not  the  throne,  but  the  altar ;  it  could  never  be  the  emblem  of  dominion.  It 
suggests  to  us  that  even  in  our  days  we  have  a  strong  view  of  Christ's  exaltation. 
What  is  our  view  of  Christ's  exaltation  ?  It  is  that  He  has  vanquished  His  Cross, 
ceased  to  be  a  servant,  and  become  once  more  a  king.  St.  John  says  it  is  the 
Cross  itself  which  has  been  exalted,  it  is  the  Servant  Himself  who  has  been 
ennobled.  No  one  will  deny  that  at  the  present  hour  Christ  occupies  a  different 
position  in  the  world  from  that  which  He  held  in  the  first  century  of  our  era.  He 
has  passed  from  the  foot  to  the  head  of  the  social  ladder ;  He  has  become  the  name 
that  is  above  every  name.  This  will  be  admitted  by  all  classes — believing  and 
unbelieving.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  transformation  ?  It  is  that  Christianity 
exerts  more  physical  power  over  the  world  in  our  days  than  it  did  in  the  days  of 
St.  John  ?  Assuredly  not.  In  point  of  fact  it  does  not  exert  more  physical  power. 
There  are  laws  in  every  Christian  land  as  to  the  regulation  of  Christian  worship, 
but  no  individual  man  is  compelled  to  worship.  Why  then  is  it  that,  in  some 
sense,  men  of  every  creed  and  of  no  creed  bow  down  before  the  name  of  Jesus  ?  It 
is  because  the  thing  which  the  old  world  disparaged  is  the  thing  which  the  new 
world  prizes.  We  are  living  after  the  resurrection ;  but  let  us  never  forget  that  it  is 
the  resurrection  of  the  Crucified.  The  Christ  who  has  risen  from  the  grave  is  not 
a  Christ  who  has  triumphed  over  suffering ;  it  is  a  Christ  in  whom  suffering  has 
triumphed.  And  let  us  begin  by  asking  what  was  that  kingdom  which  the  seer  of 
Patmos  had  in  his  mind  when  he  claimed  for  Christ  the  throne  of  universal 
dominion.  If  the  empire  to  be  conquered  be  a  physical  one,  it  is  not  a  lamb  that 
wiU  do  it.  No  man  who  looked  for  a  physical  conquest  could  for  a  moment  have 
conceived  the  simUe  of  a  world  held  in  restraint  by  the  power  of  a  sacrificial  life. 
But  suppose  now  we  test  the  logic  of  St.  John's  words  by  another  empire.  For  there 
is  another  empire— a  kingdom  more  unruly  than  the  physical,  more  hard  to  subdue 
and  more  difficult  to  keep  ;  it  is  the  dominion  of  the  human  heart.  The  kingdom 
to  be  conquered,  then,  is  the  heart ;  we  may  consider  this  as  settled.  The  next 
question  is,  How  is  the  conquest  to  be  made  ?  Now,  at  the  time  when  St.  John 
wrote  there  had  already  been  three  attempts  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  the  heart. 
They  may  be  described  under  the  names  Stoicism,  Buddhism,  and  Judaism.  Stoicism 
proposed  to  quell  the  passions  of  the  heart  by  plucking  out  the  heart  altogether  ;  it 
sought  to  get  rid  of  temptation  by  getting  rid  of  feeling.     Buddhism  proposed  to 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y. 

quell  the  passions  of  the  heart  by  teaching  that  the  heart  itself  was  a  delusion,  that 
every  pursuit  of  human  desire  ended  in  the  discovery  that  the  object  was  a  shadow. 
Judaism  proposed  to  quell  the  passions  of  the  heart  by  the  restraining  hand  of  fear ; 
it  proclaimed  the  presence  of  a  lawgiver ;  it  set  up  an  embankment  against  the 
flood ;  it  kept  the  tree  of  life  by  the  cherubim  and  the  flaming  sword.     Now,  to 
these  three  methods  there  is  one  thing  in  common — they  all  achieve  their  end  by 
contracting  the  object  of  their  search.     Their  aim  is  to  conquer  a  certain  tract  of 
country  ;  they  do  conquer  it,  but  they  reduce  it  to  the  ashes  in  the  process.     Can 
any  of  these  systems  be  said  to  possess  the  throne  of  the  heart  ?  It  is  a  conquest  with- 
out a  kingdom,  a  victory  without  a  prize,  a  triumph  that  has  been  only  purchased 
by  the  mutilation  of  what  was  made  to  be  beautiful.    Now,  this  is  not  the  conquest 
which  any  man  desires.    Even  in  the  physical  sphere,  what  a  potentate  seeks  is  an 
extended,  not  a  contracted  possession.     In  the  sphere  of  the  heart  it  is  the  same. 
The  reason  why  we  object  to  lawless  passion  in  the  soul  is  that  it  contracts  the 
soul.  We  do  not  want  to  cure  either  by  plucking,  withering,  or  stunting  the  flower ; 
we  wish  to  expand  it.      We  wish  to  cure  lawless  passion  on  the  homoeopathic 
principle — by  creating  passion  on  the  other  side.     It  is  more  life  and  fuller  that  we 
want.     You  want  a  counter-passion,  an  opposing  attraction,  a  positive  stimulus 
pushing  the  other  way.     The  desire  of  the  flesh  can  only  be  met  by  the  desire  of 
the  spirit — the  thing  called  love.     Now,  remember  that  to  St.  John  light  is  ever  the 
analogue  of  love.     He  applies  the  two  names  as  synonymous  descriptions  of  God. 
And  why  ?    Because  to  his  mind  there  was  an  identity  between  the  process  of  the 
redemption  of  the  flower  by  hght  and  the  redemption  of  the  heart  by  love.     The 
light  conquers  the  flower.    It  conquers,  not  by  contracting,  but  by  expanding  the 
flower.    But  there  is  one  other  thing  which  must  be  added  to  this ;  it  conquers  by 
dying  for  the  flower ;  ere  it  can  bring  out  the  bloom  it  must  itself  be  slain.    For, 
what  is  the  process  by  which  the  flower  is  kindled  ?    It  is  an  act  of  death  on  the 
part  of  the  kindling  substance.    So  far  from  waiting  till  it  grows,  it  must  itself  be  the 
principle  of  its  growth.     It  must  go  down  to  it  in  the  dark  and  in  the  cold,  must 
take  part  in  its  darkness  and  its  coldness.    If  it  reaps  the  glory  of  its  resurrection, 
it  is  because  it  shares  the  ignominy  of  its  grave.     It  sits  upon  the  throne  by  reason 
of  its  sacrifice.     Such  is  the  thought  which  St.  John  sees  in  light  and  transfers  to 
love.    He  sees  Christ  sitting  on  the  throne  of  human  hearts — King,  by  the  most 
infallible  mode  of  conquest,  and  by  a  conquest  that  enhances  the  value  of  the 
possession.      {George  Matheson,  D.D.)         Tlie  atonement : — The  mere  crucifixion 
of  any  slave  has  in  it  that  which  would  excite  compassion ;  but  this  event  has 
no  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  world;  never  was  a  death  like  the  death  of 
Jesus.      1.  As  we  look  at  this  Lamb  of  God,  let  us  mark  the  direful  malignity 
of  sin.      2.  But  we  see  in  the  Lamb  slain,  not  only  the  work  of  sin,  but  the 
work  of  love.      Keview  the  whole  history  of  this  Lamb  of  God,  and  as  we  feel 
that  He  crowned  all  this  love  by  dying  in  our  stead,  that  we  might  have  life, 
let  us  ask  ourselves  what  return  of  love  ought  we  to  make  to  Him  who  loved 
us  even  unto  death  (Rom.  xii.  1).      {Bp.  Stevens.)         Having  seven  horns  and 
seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits. —  Union  with  Christ  by  the  Spirit: — The 
mystical  scene  before  us  is  the  appearance  of  the  Lord,   once  crucified,  once 
sacrificed,  and  now  the  Conqueror,  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary ;  at,  and  then  upon, 
the  heavenly  throne.    It  is  the  ascension,  it  is  the  triumph  of  the  Lord  ascended, 
shown  to  us  in  sign  and  symbol,  from  the  point  of  view  of  heaven.    It  is  a  new 
fact,  a  new  phenomenon,  in  the  holy  region.     The  Lord  of  propitiation,  of  redemp- 
tion, is  seen  here  as  the  immediate  fountain-head  for  earth,  the  sacred  point  ol 
radiation  downward,  of  the  sevenfold  Spirit.     To  the  Spirit,  I  venture  to  believe, 
refer  not  only  the  seven  mystical  eyes  but  the  seven  horns,  the  symbol  of  perfect 
spiritual  power.     I  wish  to  speak  of  our  union  by  the  Holy  Spirit  with  our  exalted 
Lord ;  of  the  life  of  the  true  members  in  their  Head  through  the  Divine  Lifegiver, 
that  Head  being  the  Lamb  that  was  slain.     Now,  the  union  of  Christ  with  His 
people  and  of  them  with  Him  is  a  truth  which  may  be  described,  in  the  light 
of  the  New  Testament,  as  not  only  a  great  truth  of  spiritual  life,  but  the  truth  of 
truths.     It  is   related  to   all   other  kindred   doctrines   as   that  which   combines, 
harmonises,   and  explains  them.     It  appears  as  the  end  where  they  appear  as 
means.    Hither  they  gather  and  converge.    If  any  man  have  not  the   Spirit  of 
Christ,  he  is  none  of  His.     That  word,  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ,"  reminds  us  of  Him 
who  is  the  earthward  eyes,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  effluent  presence  for  His  Church 
below,  of  the  exalted  Lamb.     The  Paraclete  comes,  and  behold  He  mediates  and 
makes  for  the  Christian's  soul  and  self  a  presence  of  the  Lord  which  somehow  is 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  319 

better,  far  better^  for  the  Christian  in  this  his  pilgrimage  and  tabernacle  than  even 
the  joy  and  glory,  if  it  were  granted,  of  His  Saviour's  corporeal  proximity. 
It  is  "  in  the  Spirit "  that  the  saint,  that  is  to  say  the  genuine  Christian  here 
below,  "has  access  "  in  Christ  unto  the  Father.  It  is  those  who  are  "  led  by  the 
Spirit "  who  "  are  "  in  truth  and  deed,  not  in  a  certain  sense,  but  in  reality  and 
nature,  "  the  sons  of  God  "  in  His  Son.  It  is  "  by  the  Spirit "  that  they  "  mortify," 
they  continuously  do  to  death,  "  the  deeds  of  the  body,"  in  the  power  and  name 
of  Christ.  It  is  "  by  the  Spirit "  that  they  "walk"  in  Christ.  It  is  "because  of 
the  Spirit  dwelling  in  them,"  a  truth  full  of  deep  significance  as  to  the  nature  of 
the  body  of  the  resurrection,  that  "  their  mortal  body  shall  be  quickened  "  in  the 
day  when  their  Lord  from  heaven  shall  change  it  into  likeness  to  His  own.  Of 
that  harvest  the  indwelling  Spirit  is  the  first-fruits.  Of  that  inheritance  He  is  the 
earnest.  So  the  sevenfold  One  is  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth,  as  the  eyes,  as  the 
presence,  of  the  exalted  Lamb  of  the  blessed  Sacrifice.  It  is  by  Him,  and  by  Him 
alone,  that  that  presence  is  in  the  Church  and  is  in  the  Christian.  "  Sent  forth 
into  all  the  earth  " :  from  the  presence  of  the  blessed,  from  the  heaven  of  heavens, 
into  all  the  earth ;  from  the  heart  of  God  to  the  heart  of  man ;  from  amidst  the 
Bong  of  the  heavenly  elders  to  you  and  to  me,  to  the  concrete  circumstances  of  our 
life  to-day,  to  the  stones  and  dust  and  thorns  and  pollutions  in  our  path,  to  the 
snares  and  the  illusions,  to  the  crowds  and  to  the  solitude,  of  earth.  Yes,  He  is 
sent  forth  into  the  present,  the  visible,  the  temporal.  He  is  intended.  He  intends 
Himself,  to  be  no  dreamy  abstraction  above  our  heads  and  hearts,  but  to  be  the 
inmost  Friend,  the  living  strength,  the  infinitely  ready  and  versatile  resource  and 
expedient,  of  the  hour  of  your  temptation  and  of  mine.  Over  the  real  "  deeds  of 
our  body,"  He  is  able  to  give  victory.  Our  tremendously  real  "  infirmities,"  He  is 
here  and  now  able  to  subvent,  to  "  help,"  to  transfigure  into  strength,  as  to  us  who 
look  for  Him  He  "  makes  perfect  in  our  weakness  "  the  strength  of  the  Lamb  who 
has  overcome.  He  is  able  so  to  undertake  our  feeble,  our  erring  steps,  that  we  shall 
"  walk  by  the  Spirit,"  and,  in  a  blessed  reality  of  deliverance,  "  not  fulfil  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh,"  yea,  in  all  the  range  of  the  meaning  of  that  phrase.  He  is  able,  and 
indeed  He  is  willing,  here  and  now,  to  take  and  show  to  us  the  things  of  that  Christ 
of  whom  He  is  the  eyes  and  presence  here  below.  He  is  able  to  make  all  the  flying 
days  and  hours  of  inestimable  and  never-returning  time  sacred  to  us,  and  yet  to 
take  out  of  them  all  anxiety ;  to  fiU  the  heart  with  the  things  eternal  and  yet  to 
open  to  it  as  no  other  touch  can  do  all  that  is  truly  rich  and  beautiful  in  the 
things  of  this  life.  He  is  able,  in  a  word,  having  united  us  to  Christ,  to  make  that 
union  **  a  living,  bright  reality,  a  possession  "  that  we  use  as  well  as  have,  in  the 
whole  of  life.  "  All  these  things  worketh  that  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit, 
dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  He  will."  And,  meanwhile.  He  worketh  thus 
as  the  eyes,  as  the  presence,  of  the  Lamb.  All  is  drawn  from,  all  is  related  to, 
Christ,  still  Christ,  Christ  glorified,  Christ  crucified.  Ah,  be  that  in  its  turn 
recorded  and  remembered.  Of  whom  is  this  Holy  One  the  presence  ?  Whose  life, 
and  love,  and  peace,  and  power  does  He  convey  and  mediate  to  the  heart  and  life 
He  has  Himself  regenerated,  breathing  where  He  listeth,  but  so  breathing  that 
"  thou  hearest  the  sound  "  of  the  heavenly  wind  in  the  being  that  He  vivifies  ?  It 
is  not  a  merely  abstract  Christ,  if  I  may  use  the  phrase.  It  is  not  merely  archetypal 
goodness,  righteousness,  truth  and  beauty.  It  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain.  It  is 
the  propitiation.  It  is  the  sinner's  Prince  of  peace.  {H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.) 
The  seven  eyes  of  the  slain  Lamb : — The  eye  seems  a  singular  symbol  for  the  Spirit, 
but  it  may  be  used  as  suggesting  the  swiftest  and  subtlest  way  in  which  the 
influences  of  a  human  spirit  pass  out  into  the  external  universe.  The  teaching  of 
this  emblem,  then,  is :  "  He,  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  and  having 
received  the  promise  of  the  Father,  sheds  forth  this."  The  whole  fulness  of 
spiritual  Divine  power  is  in  the  hand  of  Christ  to  impart  to  the  world.  I.  The 
•♦  SLAIN  Lamb  "  is  the  Lord  and  giver  of  the  Spirit.  He  "  hath  the  seven  spirits 
of  God."  Whatsoever  there  is,  in  Deity,  of  spirit  and  power ;  whatsoever  of  swift 
flashing  energy ;  whatsoever  of  gentleness  and  grace ;  whatsoever  of  holiness  and 
splendour ;  aU  inheres  in  the  Man  Christ  Jesus ;  unto  whom  even  in  His  earthly 
lowliness  and  humiliation,  the  Spirit  was  not  given  by  measure,  but  unto  whom  in 
the  loftiness  of  His  heavenly  life  that  Spirit  is  given  in  yet  more  wondrous  fashion 
than  in  His  huguliation.  But  it  is  not  as  the  recipient,  but  as  the  bestower  of  the 
Spirit,  that  He  comes  before  us  in  tlie  great  words  of  my  text.  AU  that  He  has 
of  God  He  has  that  He  may  give.  Whatsoever  is  His  is  ours ;  we  share  in  His 
fulness  and  we  possess  His  grace.     U.  Look  at  the  representation  here  given  of 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

THE  INFINITE  VARIETY  OF  GIFTS  WHICH  Christ  BESTOWS.     The  number  "  seven,"  of 
course,  at  once  suggests  the  idea  of  perfection  and  completeness.     So  that  the 
thought  emerges  of  the  endless,  boundless  manifoldness  and  wonderful  diversity  of 
the  operations  of  this  great  life-spirit  that  streams  from  Jesus  Christ.   Think  of  the 
number  of  designations  by  which  that  Spirit  is  described  in  the  New  Testament. 
In  regard  to  all  that  belongs  to  intellectual  life,  He  is  "  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  "  and 
of  "  illumination  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,"  He  is  "  the  Spirit  of  truth."    In 
regard  to  all  that  belongs  to  the  spiritual  life,  "  He  is  the  Spirit  of  holiness,"  the 
"  Spirit  of  liberty  "  ;  the  Spirit  of  self-control,  or,  as  rendered  in  our  Bible,  *'  of  a 
sound  mind  "  ;  the  "  Spirit  of  love."    In  regard  to  all  that  belongs  to  the  practical 
life,  "  He  is  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and  of  might " ;  the  "  Spirit  of  power."    In 
regard  to  all  that  belongs  to  the  religious  life,  "He  is  the  Spirit  of  adoption, 
whereby  we  cry,  Abba  !  Father !  "  the  "  Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication  "  ;  the 
"  Spirit  of  life."     So,  over  the  whole  round  of  man's  capacity  and  nature,  all  his 
intellectual,  moral,  practical  and  religious  being,  there  are  gifts  which  fit  each  side 
and  each  part  of  it.     Whatsoever  a  man  needs,  that  he  will  find  in  the  infinite 
variety  of  the  spiritual  help  and  strength  which  the  Lamb  slain  is  ready  to  give. 
It  is  like  the  old  fable  of  the  manna,  which  the  Eabbis  tell  us  tasted  upon  each  lip 
precisely  what  each  man  chose.     So  this  nourishment  from  above  becomes  to  every 
man  what  each  man  requires.    Water  will  take  the  shape  of  any  vessel  into  which 
you  choose  to  pour  it ;  the  Spirit  of  God  assumes  the  form  that  is  imposed  upon  it 
by  our  weaknesses  and  needs.      III.  The  unbroken  continuity  of  the  gifts 
which  the  slain  Lamb  has  to  give.    The  word  "  sent"  might  be  rendered  "  being 
sent,"  expressive  of  a  continual  impartation.     Ah  !  God's  Spirit  is  not  given  once 
in  a  way  and  then  stops.     It  is  given,  not  by  fits  and  starts.     There  are  variations 
in  our  receptiveness ;  there  are  no  variations  in  its  steady  efflux.     Does  the  sun 
shine  at  different  rates  ?    Are  its  beams  cut  off  sometimes,  or  poured  out  with  less 
energy,  or  is  it  only  the  position  of  the  earth  that  makes  the  difference  between  the 
summer  and  the  winter,  the  day  and  the  night,  whilst  the  great  central  orb  is 
raying  out  at  the  same  rate  aU  through  the  murky  darkness,  all  through  the  frosty 
days  ?  And  so  the  gifts  of  Jesus  Christ  pour  out  from  Him  at  a  uniform  continuous 
rate,  with  no  breaks  in  the  golden  beams,  with  no  pauses  in  the  continual  flow. 
IV.  The  universal  diffusion  of  these  gifts.     "  Seven  spirits  of  God  sent  forth 
into  aU  the  earth."    The  words  are  a  quotation  from  a  remarkable  prophecy  in  the 
book  of  Zechariah,  which  speaks  about  the  "  seven  eyes  of  God,"  running  "  to  and 
fro  over  all  the  earth."     There  are  no  limitations  of  these  gifts  to  any  one  race  or 
nation  as  there  were  in  the  old  times,  nor  any  limitations  either  to  a  democracy. 
"  On  My  servants  and  on  My  handmaidens  will  I  pour  out  of  My  Spirit."    In  olden 
days  the  mountain  tops  were  touched  with  the  rays,  and  all  the  lowly  valleys  lay 
deep  in  the  shadow  and  the  darkness.    Now  the  risen  sunshine  pours  down  into  the 
deepest  clefts,  and  no  heart  so  poor,  no  illiterate  so  ignorant  but  that  it  may 
receive  the  full  sunshine  of  that  Spirit.     Every  Christian  man  and  woman  is 
inspired,  not  to  be  a  teacher  of  infallible  truth,  but  inspired  in  the  true  and  deep 
sense  that  in  them  dwells  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.    All  of  us,  weak,  sinful, 
as  we  are,  ignorant  and  bewildered  often,  may  possess  that  Divine  life  to  live 
in  our  hearts.     Only  remember  it  is  the  slain  Lamb  that  gives  the  Spirit.    And 
unless  we  are  looking  to  that  Lamb,  slain  as  our  hope  and  confidence,  we  shall  not 
receive  it.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  sevenfold  offices  of  the  Holy  Spirit: — The 
seven  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are — 1.  First  as  the  Convincer  of  sin.     There 
is  a  certain  consciousness  of  sin  which  may  be  without  the  Holy  Ghost.     There  is 
scarcely  any  man  who  is  not  aware  that  he  has  done  many  wrong  things.    But 
there  are  two  things  in  that  man's  sense  of  sin  which  prevent  its  being  real 
repentance.    He  does  not  view  his  sins  as  grieving  God,  still  less  as  having  crucified 
Christ.    2.  Then  the  Holy  Ghost  will  show  that  man  the  real  and  only  ground  of 
all  pardon.     He  wiU  show  him  that  Christ  has  been  to  this  world  to  this  very  end, 
to  bear  our  sins.    3.  Then  comes  the  great,  blessed  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be 
our  Comforter.    First  He  makes  us  so  to  accept  God's  mercy  that  we  rest  in  our 
forgiveness.    And  when  the  Holy  Ghost  has  given  us  this  first  and  chief  comfort, 
then  He  will  continue  to  be  our  Comforter  every  day  in  aU  our  other  sorrows.   Other 
comforters  generally  try  to  remove  our  sorrow  by  making  us  forget  it,  or  by  putting 
something  in  its  place.     The  Holy  Ghost  does  not  do  that.     He  finds  the  elements 
of  His  comfort  in  the  sorrow.    He  turns  it  into  joy.     4.  Then  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
the  Great  Teacher.    He  teaches  as  none  else  can  ever  teach.     And  for  this  reason 
He  has  the  mind  of  God.    And  when  He  comes  into  our  mind,  He  makes  that 


tJHAP.  v.]  REVELATION.  321 

inind  to  conform  to  the  mind  of  God.  5.  And  He  sanctifies.  That  is  His  great 
aim — to  imbue  us  with  Himself,  to  make  us  like  God.  In  the  Divine  alchemy 
every  metal  turns  to  gold.  A  higher  motive  ;  a  whole  heart ;  a  humble  spirit ;  an 
untiring  love  ;  an  inward  communion  of  all  thoughts — that  changes,  that  purifies, 
that  elevates.  The  old  nature  becomes  gradually  the  new  man,  and  God  Himself 
sees  us  in  Him ;  sees  His  own  image,  and  He  is  satisfied.  6.  From  that  time  we 
carry  within  us  wherever  we  go  an  inward  light,  a  spring  of  joy,  a  voice  which  says 
so  gently  and  yet  so  distinctly,  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it ;  when  ye  turn  to 
the  right  hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left."  7.  And,  finally,  in  all  these  wonder- 
ful and  living  ways,  the  Holy  Ghost  puts  a  seal  upon  us.  He  impresses  us  in  our 
inner  and  outer  life,  with  that  image  of  the  superscription  of  God — that  badge  of 
our  high  calling.     {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Golden  yials  full  of  odours. — Golden  viaU  fuU  of  odours : — I.  The 

PKAYERS   OF    God's   PEOPLE    AEE   AS   SWEET   TO   HiM   AS   INCENSE.       1.    This   is   not   due 

to  any  natural  excellence  or  merit  which  they  possess  in  and  by  themselves.  Christ 
Jesus  possesses  such  an  abundance  of  precious  merit  that  He  puts  fragrance  into 
our  supplications.  I  think  it  is  Ambrose  who  uses  a  very  pretty  figure  concerning 
believers'  prayers.  He  says  we  are  like  little  children  who  run  into  the  garden  to 
gather  flowers  to  please  their  father,  but  we  are  so  ignorant  and  childish  that  we 
pluck  as  many  weeds  as  flowers,  and  some  of  them  very  noxious,  and  we  would 
carry  this  strange  mixture  in  our  hands,  thinking  that  such  base  weeds  would 
be  acceptable  to  him.  The  mother  meets  the  child  at  the  door,  and  she  says  to  it, 
"  Little  one,  thou  knowest  not  what  thou  hast  gathered  ";  she  unbinds  this  mixture 
and  takes  from  it  all  the  weeds  and  leaves  only  the  sweet  flowers,  and  then  she 
takes  other  flowers  sweeter  than  those  which  the  child  has  plucked,  and  inserts 
them  instead  of  the  weeds,  and  then  puts  back  the  perfect  posy  into  the  child's 
hand,  and  it  runs  therewith  to  its  father.  Jesus  Christ  in  more  than  motherly 
tenderness  thus  deals  with  ovir  supplications.  2.  Note  well,  that  true,  acceptable 
intercession  must  be  composed  of  the  prayers  of  saints.  "  Golden  goblets  full 
of  the  prayers  of  saints."  Nothing  is  here  said  of  the  prayers  of  ofl&cials,  hirelings, 
and  functionaries.  And  who  are  the  saints  ?  They  are  men  whom  the  Lord  has 
made  holy  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  whose  nature  He  has  purified.  Then,  in  the 
matter  of  intercession,  one  of  the  most  important  things  is  the  character  of  the 
person.  We  must,  by  the  Spirit's  power,  maintain  the  saintly  character  ;  we  must 
walk  apart  from  worldliness  and  covetousness ;  we  must  put  aside  uncleanness, 
anger,  wrath,  and  every  evil  thing,  or  else  we  shall  not  be  able  to  present  unto  the 
Lord  such  sweet  odours  as  His  soul  delighteth  in.  3.  Note  next,  that  these  prayers 
must  be  compounded  of  precious  graces  ;  for  they  are  compared  to  incense,  and,  as 
you  know,  the  incense  used  in  the  temple  was  made  up  of  divers  sweet  spices, 
compounded  "  according  to  the  work  of  the  apothecary."  In  prayer,  that  which  is 
sweet  to  God  is  not  the  words  used,  though  they  ought  to  be  appropriate;  not 
anything  perceptible  to  the  outward  senses,  but  in  secret  qualities,  comparable  to 
the  essence  and  aroma  of  sweet  spices.  Let  us  bless  God  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
the  believer's  apothecary.  He  helps  each  believer's  infirmities,  and  makes  for  us  a 
mixture  of  all  choice  graces,  so  that  when  we  pray  our  pleadings  are  accepted  as 
sweet  incense.  II.  Blended  prayebs  abe  peculiarly  acceptable  to  God.  "  The 
prayers  of  saints."  The  prayers  of  a  saint  are  sweet,  but  the  prayers  of  saints  are 
sweeter.  United  prayers  possess  the  power  of  harmony.  In  music  there  is  melody 
in  any  one  distinct  note ;  but  we  have  all  recognised  a  peculiar  charm  in  harmony. 
Now,  the  prayers  of  one  saint  are  to  God  melody,  but  the  intercessions  of  many  are 
harmony,  and  to  God  there  is  much  that  is  pleasing  in  the  harmony  of  His  people's 
prayers.  No  two  children  of  God  pray  exactly  alike.  There  is  a  difference  of  tone. 
If  taught  of  God  each  one  will  pray  graciously,  but  there  will  be  in  one  prayer  what 
there  is  not  in  another.  If  all  the  fruits  of  the  garden  be  luscious,  yet  each  one 
has  its  own  special  flavour.  All  the  bells  may  be  of  silver,  and  yet  each  one  will 
have  its  own  tone.  Now,  if  these  varying  tones  are  melted  into  one,  what  masterly 
harmony  they  make  !  Therefore,  the  Lord  promises  great  things  when  two  of  us 
agree  as  touching  anything  concerning  His  kingdom.  III.  And  now,  lastly,  Let 
rs  blend  oub  pbayep.s,  however  faulty  and  feeble  they  may  be,  with  the  general 
supplications  of  the  period.  If  united  prayer  be  sweet  to  God,  oh,  let  us  give  Him 
much  of  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  perfume  of  prayer  : — There  is  an  exquisite 
beauty  in  this  thought  that  true  prayer  is  fragrance  to  God.  The  pleadings  and 
supplications  of  His  people  on  the  earth  rise  from  lowly  homes,  from  sick  rooms, 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

from  darkened  chambers  of  grief  where  loved  ones  kneel  beside  their  dead,  from 
humble  sanctuaries,  from  stately  cathedrals,  and  are  wafted  up  before  God  as  the 
breath  of  flowers  is  wafted  to  us  in  summer  days  sweet  fields  and  fragrant  gardens. 
And  God  "smells  a  sweet  savour."  Prayer  is  perfume  to  Him.  (J.  R.  Miller^ 
D.D.)  They   sung  a   new   song. — The   heavenly   singen   and   their  son^  : — I. 

First,  BEHOLD  THE  woRSHipPEKS ;  for,  remember,  that  we  must  be  like  them  if 
we  are  to  be  with  them.  It  is  a  well-known  rule  that  heaven  must  be  in  ua 
before  we  can  be  in  heaven.  1.  The  first  point  about  the  worshippers  is  this, 
they  are  all  full  of  life.  I  should  not  like  to  dogmatise  upon  the  meaning  of 
the  four  living  creatures ;  but  still  they  do  seem  to  me  to  be  an  emblem  of  the 
Church  in  its  Godward  standing,  quickened  by  the  life  of  God.  At  any  rate,  they 
are  Hving  creatures ;  and  the  elders  themselves  are  living  personages.  Yet  alas, 
that  it  should  be  needful  to  say  so  trite  a  thing ;  but  the  dead  cannot  praise 
God  !  •'  The  living,  the  living,  he  shall  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  day."  Yet  how 
many  dead  people  there  are  ki  this  great  assembly  to-night !  Those  in  heaven 
are  all  full  of  life ;  there  is  no  dead  worshipper  there,  no  dull,  cold  heart  that 
does  not  respond  to  the  praise  by  which  it  is  surrounded  ;  they  are  all  full  of  life. 
2.  And  further  note,  that  they  are  all  of  one  mind.  Whether  they  are  four-and- 
twenty  elders,  or  four  living  creatures,  they  all  move  simultaneously.  With  perfect 
unanimity  they  fall  on  their  faces,  or  touch  their  harps,  or  upUft  their  golden  vials 
full  of  sweet  odours.  I  like  unanimity  in  worship  here.  3.  Note,  next,  that  as  the 
heavenly  worshippers  are  full  of  life,  and  full  of  unity,  so  they  are  all  fuU  of  holy 
reverence.  In  heaven,  they  fall  down  before  the  Lamb;  should  not  we  serve  God 
better  if  we  did  more  of  this  falling  down  to  worship  the  Lamb  ?  4.  Note,  next, 
that  while  they  are  all  full  of  reverence,  they  are  all  in  a  praising  condition : 
"  Having  every  one  of  them  harps."  They  did  not  pass  one  harp  round,  and  take 
turns  in  playing  it ;  nor  was  there  one  who  had  to  sit  still  because  he  had  forgotten 
his  harp  ;  but  they  had,  every  one  of  them,  his  harp.  I  am  afraid  those  words  do 
not  describe  all  God's  people  here  to-night.  Where  is  your  harp  ?  It  is  gone  to  be 
repaired,  is  it  not  ?  Where  is  your  harp?  You  have  left  it  on  the  willow-tree,  byi 
the  waters  of  Babylon,  so  you  have  not  one  here.  5.  They  are  all  ready  for  prayer. 
Are  they  not  crying,  "  0  Lord,  how  long  "  ?  Why  should  they  not  pray,  "  Thy 
kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven "  ?  They  would 
understand  that  prayer  better  than  we  do.  We  know  how  God's  will  is  not  done 
on  earth,  but  they  know  how  it  is  done  in  heaven.  Well,  they,  all  of  them,  had 
"  golden  vials  fuU  of  odours."  Are  we  always  furnished  and  prepared  for  prayer  ? 
n.  Now,  having  thus  spoken  of  the  worshippers,  I  want  you  to  hearken  to  their 
SONGS.  1.  It  is  rather  an  unusual  thing  to  take  a  hymn  and  treat  it  doctrinally  ; 
but,  for  your  instruction,  I  must  take  away  the  poetry  for  a  moment,  and  just  deal 
with  the  doctrines  of  this  heavenly  hymn.  The  first  doctrine  is,  Christ  is  put  in 
the  front,  the  Deity  of  Christ,  as  I  hold.  They  sing,  "  Thou  art  worthy.  Thou  art 
worthy."  Next,  the  doctrine  of  this  hymn  is  that  the  whole  Church  delights  in  the 
mediation  of  Christ.  Notice,  it  was  when  He  had  taken  the  book  that  they  said, 
"  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book."  To  have  Christ  standing  between  God  and 
man  is  the  joy  of  every  believing  heart.  But  now,  notice,  in  the  Church's  song, 
what  is  her  reason  for  believing  that  Christ  is  worthy  to  be  a  Mediator.  She  says, 
"  Thou  art  worthy,  for  Thou  wast  slain."  We  rejoice  in  our  Mediator  because  He 
died.  Well  then,  notice  that  they  sing  of  the  redemption  which  His  death  effected, 
and  they  do  not  sing  of  the  redemption  of  the  world.  No,  not  at  all:  •'  Thou  wast 
slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue, 
and  people,  and  nation."  So  much  about  the  heavenly  hymn  doctrinally.  2.  Now 
about  it  experimentally :  "  Thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  God."  I  have  said  that  you 
cannot  sing  this  song  unless  you  know  something  of  it  now.  Have  you  been 
redeemed  ?  Has  the  embargo  that  was  on  you  through  sin  been  taken  off  you  ? 
Do  you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  For  every  man  who  believeth  in  Jesus  Christ  has 
the  evidence  of  his  eternal  redemption.  That  was  their  experience :  "  Thou  hast 
redeemed  us."  They  felt  free;  they  remembered  when  they  wore  their  fetters,  but 
they  saw  them  all  broken  by  Christ.  Have  you  been  set  free  ?  3.  Thus  have  I 
spoken  of  the  song  doctrinally  and  experimentally :  now  let  me  speak  of  it  expec- 
tantly. There  is  something  to  be  expected :  "  And  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth." 
(C.  H.  Spitrgeon.)  The  singing  legions  of  God  : — Evidently  more  is  made  of  music 
in  heaven  than  we  are  wont  to  make  of  it  here  on  earth,  1.  There  was  first  the 
believers'  song.  Its  theme  was  redemption,  the  salvation  of  the  soul  through  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.     So  its  singers  were  the  ransomed.     (1)  This  song  was  "  new  " 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  323 

necessarily,  for  the  theme  was  absolutely  fresh  in  celestial  history.  There  had  been 
sin  in  heaven,  and  there  had  been  justice  wrought  on  those  who  had  sinned.  Some 
of  the  angels  had  fallen  from  their  high  estate.  No  atonement  was  ever  made  or 
offered  in  their  behalf.  Here  was  therefore  a  subject  never  before  celebrated  in  the 
songs  of  God's  house.  It  was  exclusive  also,  for  only  those  who  knew  what  it 
meant  could  sing  it  with  the  spirit  and  the  understanding.  Emphasis  must  be  laid 
upon  the  expressions  of  personal  acknowledgment.  •'  Thou  hast  redeemed  us  "  ; 
"  Thou  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests."  The  experience  of  each  child 
of  God  is  individual.  Reminiscence  is  a  part  of  his  duty,  and  it  always  leads  to 
gratitude,  and  starts  a  new  song.  (2)  It  was  a  great  song.  For  the  multitude  of 
singers  was  simply  innumerable.  So  the  sound  rose  ♦'  like  mighty  thunderings, 
and  the  voice  of  many  waters."  (3)  It  was  likewise  a  royal  song.  The  redeemed 
do  not  say  "  we  shall  reign,"  but  "  we  are  reigning."  Christians  are  the  regal  and 
the  regnant  race  in  the  worli  now.  2.  Next  came  the  song  of  the  angels.  The 
theme  of  this  was  the  character  and  rank  of  Jesus  Christ.  Observe  the  vast 
numbers  of  the  singers,  and  the  stress  they  put  on  their  strain  with  a  *•  loud  voice  "  : 
"  And  I  beheld,  and  I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels,"  &c.  Observe  the  vast  ascrip- 
tion of  honours  to  Christ :  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb,"  &c. 
This  seems  to  include  everything  that  mind  can  conceive  of  supreme  ownership  and 
control.  They  lay  the  universe  down  at  His  feet.  Observe  the  special  reason  they 
suggest  for  their  surrender.  It  is  as  "  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  "  that  they  exalt 
Him  to  the  eminence.  These  angels  had  no  part  in  the  atonement,  but  they  knew 
just  where  Christ's  greatest  exploits  had  been  done.  They  had  for  ages  '*  desired 
earnestly  to  look  into  "  this  mystery  of  His  humiliation ;  now  they  understood 
what  it  meant.  3.  Then  the  choir  of  creatures  begins  the  anthem  assigned  to  them ; 
and  now  the  theme  is  the  dominion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  13).  Just  notice 
the  very  singular  voices  employed  in  this  choir.  Birds  and  beasts,  and  worms  and 
fishes — oh,  wonder  I  how  will  such  creatures  be  able  to  sing  together  ?  God  is  to 
listen,  and  He  will  understand  them  and  be  satisfied.  God  hears  and  loves  what 
does  not  ever  reach  us ;  our  silences  may  be  full  of  singing  to  Him.  4.  Now  we 
reach  the  grand  chorus  with  which  the  singing  concluded.  Led  by  representatives, 
whose  mysterious  nature  and  office  we  cannot  altogether  explain,  it  would  seem  as 
if  the  whole  three  choirs  burst  forth  into  one  final  ascription :  "  And  the  four 
beasts  said.  Amen.  And  the  four  and  twenty  elders  fell  down  and  worshipped  Him 
that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever."  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.J).)  The  new  song  : — I.  A 
NEW  song.  If  a  new  tune  be  started  in  church  there  is  only  here  and  there  a  person 
that  can  sing  it.  It  is  some  time  before  the  congregation  learn  a  new  tune.  But 
not  so  with  the  new  song  of  heaven.  H.  A  commemorative  song.  We  are  distinctly 
told  that  it  makes  reference  to  past  deliverances.  Oh !  how  much  they  have  to 
sing  about.  HI.  It  wiU  be  an  accompanied  song.  I  love  the  cymbals,  for  Israel 
clapped  them  in  triumph  at  the  Red  Sea.  I  love  the  harp,  for  David  struck  it  in 
praising  the  Lord.  I  love  aU  stringed  instruments  and  organs,  for  God  demands 
that  we  shall  praise  Him  on  stringed  instruments  and  organs.  There  is,  in  such 
music,  much  to  suggest  the  higher  worship.  TV.  An  anticipative  song.  Why 
heaven  has  hardly  begun  yet.  All  the  world  is  yet  to  be  saved.  After  that  there  may 
be  other  worlds  to  conquer.  Mightier  song  as  other  garlands  are  set  on  the  brow  of 
Jesus.  Mightier  song  as  Christ's  glories  unfold.  I  stayed  a  week  at  Niagara  Falls, 
hoping  thoroughly  to  understand  and  appreciate  it.  But,  on  the  last  day,  they 
seemed  newer  and  more  incomprehensible  than  on  the  first  day.  Gazing  on  the 
infinite  rush  of  celestial  splendours,  where  the  oceans  of  delight  meet,  how  soon 
will  we  exhaust  the  song?  Never  I  never!  V.  An  unanimous  song.  There 
wiU,  no  doubt,  be  some  to  lead,  but  all  will  be  expected  to  join.  It  will  be  grand 
congregational  singing.  All  the  sweet  voices  of  the  redeemed.  Grand  music  will 
it  be  when  that  new  song  arises.  God  grant  that  at  last  we  may  all  sing  it.  But 
if  we  do  not  sing  the  praise  of  Christ  on  earth,  we  will  never  sing  it  in  heaven. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage)  The  worship  of  heaven : — I.  It  is  jubilant.  "  They  sang." 
Singing  is  the  natural  language  of  joy.  The  worship  of  heaven  is  not  mechanical, 
not  irksome.  It  is  the  outbreaking  of  the  soul  into  rapture,  of  gratitude,  admiration, 
reverence  and  love,  H.  It  is  fresh.  "A  new  song."  There  is  nothing  monotonous 
in  heaven.  Souls  have  an  instinctive  craving  for  variety,  and  the  Creator  has 
amply  provided  for  this  instinct.  In  the  life  of  souls  in  heaven,  there  is  something 
fresh  every  hour — fresh  sceneries,  fresh  occurrences,  fresh  engagements,  fresh  con- 
nections, fresh  thoughts ;  it  is  a  "  new  song."  Heaven  is  ever  fresh.  {Hovnlht.) 
The  perfect  song  : — Love  and  joy  are  said  to  make  a  musician.     How  few  becoma 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

proficients  here;  but  in  heaven  every  one  will  be  perfect.  (W.  Wayte  Andrew.) 
Tbou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book. — Jesus,  the  delight  of  heaven : — I.  The 
bright  ones  before  the  throne  adore  the  Lord  Jesus  as  worthy  of  the  high  office 
or  MEDIATOR.  They  put  in  no  claim  for  worthiness,  but  by  their  silence,  and  their 
subsequent  song  when  Christ  came  forward,  they  admitted  that  He  alone  could 
unfold  the  purposes  of  God  and  interpret  them  to  the  sons  of  men.  Notice  care 
fully  to  what  they  ascribe  this  worthiness — "  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and 
open  the  seals  thereof :  for  Thou  wast  slain."  As  mediator  our  Lord's  worthiness 
did  not  merely  arise  from  His  person  as  God  and  perfect  man  :  this  fitted  Him  to 
undertake  the  office,  but  His  right  to  claim  the  privileges  written  in  the  Magna 
Charta  which  God  held  in  His  hand.  His  right  to  take  possession  for  His  people  of 
that  seven-sealed  indenture  lies  in  this,  that  He  has  fulfilled  the  condition  of  the 
covenant,  and  hence  they  sing,  '»  Thou  art  worthy,  for  Thou  wast  slain."  H.  In 
heaven  they  adore  the  Lord  as  their  Eedeemer.  '*  Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast 
redeemed  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood."  The  metaphor  of  redemption,  it  I  understand 
it,  signifies  this.  A  thing  which  is  redeemed  in  the  strict  sense  belonged  before- 
hand to  the  person  who  redeemed  it.  Under  the  Jewish  law  lands  were  mortgaged 
as  they  are  now  ;  and  when  the  money  lent  upon  them,  or  the  service  due  for  them, 
was  paid,  the  land  was  said  to  be  redeemed.  An  inheritance  first  belonged  to  a 
person,  and  then  went  away  from  him  by  stress  of  poverty,  but  if  a  certain  price 
was  paid  it  came  back.  Now  '*  all  souls  are  Mine  "  saith  the  Lord,  and  the  souls  of 
men  belong  to  God.  The  metaphor  is  used — and,  mark,  these  expressions  are  but 
metaphors — but  the  sense  under  them  is  no  metaphor ;  it  is  fact.  We  come  back 
to  God  again,  to  whom  we  always  and  ever  did  belong,  because  Jesus  has  redeemed 
us  unto  God  by  His  blood.  And  notice  that  the  redemption  they  sing  about  in 
heaven  is  not  general  redemption.  It  is  particular  redemption.  "  Thou  hast 
redeemed  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and 
nation."  Oh,  may  we  have  a  share  in  this  particular,  efficient  redemption,  for  this 
alone  can  bring  us  where  they  sing  the  new  song.  IH.  In  heaven  they  praise  Christ 
as  the  donor  of  their  dignities.  They  are  kings  and  reign.  We  too  are  kings ; 
but  as  yet  we  are  not  known  or  recognised,  and  often  we  ourselves  forget  our  high 
descent.  Up  there  they  are  crowned  monarchs,  but  they  say,  "  Thou  hast  made  ua 
kings."  They  are  priests  too,  as  we  are  now,  every  one  of  us.  The  priesthood  of 
God's  saints,  the  priesthood  of  holiness,  which  offers  prayer  and  praise  to  God — 
this  they  have  in  heaven  ;  but  they  say  of  it,  "  Thou  hast  made  us  priests."  What 
the  saints  are,  and  what  they  are  to  be,  they  ascribe  to  Jesus.  They  have  no  glory 
but  what  they  received  from  Him,  and  they  know  it,  and  are  perpetually  confessing 
it.  IV.  They  in  heaven  adore  the  Saviour  as  Divine.  Depend  upon  it,  you  never 
will  go  to  heaven  unless  you  are  prepared  to  worship  Jesus  Christ  as  God.  They 
are  all  doing  it  there  :  you  will  have  to  come  to  it,  and  if  you  entertain  the  notion 
that  He  is  a  mere  man,  or  that  He  is  anything  less  than  God,  I  am  afraid  you  will 
have  to  begin  at  the  beginning  and  learn  what  true  religion  means.  You  have  a 
poor  foundation  to  rest  upon.  I  could  not  trust  my  soul  with  a  mere  man,  or 
believe  in  an  atonement  made  by  a  mere  man :  I  must  see  God  Himself  putting  His 
hand  to  so  gigantic  a  work.  I  cannot  imagine  a  mere  man  being  thus  praised  as  the 
Lamb  is  praised.  Jesus  is  "  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood. — The  song  of  redemp- 
tion : — I.  What  the  heavenly  singers  think  of  their  Kedeemer,  or  whom  they 
TAKE  Him  to  be.  The  very  words,  "  Thou,"  "  He,"  "  Him,  "  imply  that  their 
Eedeemer  is  a  person — a  living  being — who  has  willed  their  good,  and  to  whom 
grateful  acknowledgments  are  due.  But  whom  do  these  saints  take  their  Kedeemer 
to  be  ?  They  call  Him  "  Lord  "  and  they  caU  him  "  Lamb."  They  would  not  call 
Jesus  "  Lord,"  especially  in  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  Throne,  and  in  the  very  same 
breath  with  which  they  say,  •'  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was, 
and  is,  and  is  to  come,"  if  they  were  not  assured  that  He  still  thinks  it  is  no  robbery 
to  be  equal  with  God.  They  would  not  call  Jesus  "  Lamb  "  if  they  did  not  recognise 
in  Him  that  true  human  nature  which  He  wore  on  earth,  when  John  called  Him 
•'  the  Lamb  of  God,"  and  in  which  He  made  Himself  an  offering  for  sin.    II.  How 

THIS   SONG   describes   THE   MANNER  AND   THE   NATURE    OF   REDEMPTION.       "  ThoU   Wast 

slain."  Death  is  a  very  common  thing  in  this  world's  history.  Nor  is  it  even  an 
uncommon  thing  to  be  slain !  In  this  wicked  world  life  has  been  the  frequent  victim 
of  violence.  There  is  nothing,  then,  in  the  purity  of  Christ's  character  to  make  it 
surprising  that  "  He  was  slain."  But  numerous  as  have  been  the  martyrdoms  of 
the  world,  and  honoured  and  blessed  as  are  the  martyrs  before  God,  there  is  only 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  325 

one  of  them  whose  honours  are  celebrated  in  heaven.  And  He  is  Jesus  Christ. 
There  must  be  something  peculiar  in  His  martyrdom,  something  to  single  it  out 
from  every  other.  The  next  note  of  the  song  reveals  the  peculiarity  of  the  death  of 
Christ — "  Thou  hast  redeemed  us  by  Thy  blood."  If  Christ  has  ten  thousand  fellow 
martyrs,  He  has  not  one  fellow  redeemer.  He  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  many,  and 
by  that  ransom  the  many  are  redeemed.  The  words  of  the  song  of  redemption, 
while  they  distinguish  the  death  of  Christ  from  every  other,  teach  us  the  true  nature 
of  the  redemption  of  which  the  gospel  tells  us.  It  is  a  redemption  by  blood,  and  of 
consequence  we  know  that  it  must  be  a  redemption  from  guilt.  The  poet  and  the 
sentimentalist  may  dream  of  a  redemption  of  which  he  has  some  vague  sense  of 
need,  but  which  he  does  not  understand;  the  gospel  believer  rejoices  in  a  redemp- 
tion which  is  felt  by  him  a  simple  reality,  and  in  virtue  of  which  he  stands  pardoned 
and  sanctified  before  his  Maker  III.  Consider  the  perfected  fruits  of  redemp- 
tion AS  celebrated  in  this  song  of  heaven.  1.  "Thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  God." 
There  is  something  remarkably  instructive  in  this  little  phrase — "  to  God."  They 
were  lost  to  God — His  creatures,  but,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  terms,  '*  unprofitable 
servants,"  "  cumberers  of  His  ground."  Again,  they  were  enemies  to  God.  And 
in  that  position  they  were  separated  from  God,  both  by  their  own  enmity  and  by  the 
legal  liabilities  of  their  guilt.  They  had  wandered  from  their  centre,  and,  conse- 
quently, out  of  their  orbit,  they  were  wandering  in  darkness ;  the  moral  world  within 
them  was  reduced  to  disorder,  chaos,  and  death.  But  now  restored,  the  light  of  God 
shines  full  upon  them,  and  order,  beauty,  and  life  again  adorn  and  animate  the 
soul.  Redeemed  to  God,  they  are  redeemed  into  a  state  of  nearness  to  Him  whose 
infinite  fulness  supplies  a  universe  with  good,  and  are  the  objects  of  His  love  whose 
favour  is  life,  whose  loving-kindness  is  better  than  life.  2.  They  have  been  made 
kings  unto  God.  That  is,  they  have  been  exalted  to  a  state  of  royal,  or  more  than 
royal  honour.  They  may  have  been  slaves  on  earth,  they  are  kings  in  heaven.  3. 
And,  as  their  song  intimates,  they  are  priests  likewise.  They  realise  in  its  fullest 
import  the  prayer  of  David  (Psa.  xxvii.  4).  Not  some,  but  all  the  redeemed  are 
priests  unto  God.     Such  are  the  perfected  fruits  of  redemption.    IV.  Consider  the 

PRAISE  which   is   OFFERED  TO  ChRIST  ON  THE   GROUND   OF   THE  REDEMPTION  WHICH   He 

HAS  WROUGHT.  The  very  angels,  with  voices  whose  number  is  ten  thousand  times  ten 
thousand  and  thousands  of  thousands,  say  "Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain," 
&c.  It  is  not  the  redeemed  alone  that  say  this — there  can  be  no  suspicion  that 
grateful  emotion  exaggerates  the  benefit,  or  is  too  lavish  of  its  praise.  They  that 
needed  no  redemption  sing  the  praise  of  the  Redeemer  as  well  as  those  who  were 
redeemed  by  His  blood.  There  is  no  high  quality  manifested  in  the  works  of  crea- 
tion and  providence  which  does  not  shine  forth  more  illustriously  in  the  work  of 
redemption.  Do  you  speak  of  power?  It  is  here  in  all  its  irresistible  might,  as  well 
as  there,  though  in  other  forms.  Do  you  speak  of  wisdom  as  manifested  in  the 
reation  and  government  of  the  world  ?  In  the  work  of  redemption  you  have  the 
perfection  of  wisdom  (Rom.  xi.  33).  Do  you  speak  of  holiness  and  righteousness? 
The  song  of  creation  and  the  song  of  providence  will  both  embrace  these  attributes 
in  tones  of  varied  praise.  But  the  song  of  redemption  will  speak  of  them  with  a 
fulness  and  emphasis  all  its  own.  Both  Sinai  and  Calvary  will  be  summoned  to 
bear  witness  that  God  is  a  holy  and  righteous  God.  In  conclusion,  the  very  idea  of 
a  song  of  redemption  involves  in  it  two  great  lessons.  1.  It  teaches  us  that  we  need 
redemption.  2.  You  are  taught  by  this  song  of  heaven  that  you  are  worth  redeem- 
ing. Christ  adjudges  every  one  of  them  of  more  value  than  a  world.  {John 
Kennedy,  M.A.)  The  death  of  Christ  an  inexhaustible  theme  of  wonder  and  praise 
to  the  Church : — 1.  Who  He  was  that  was  slain.  2.  This  memorable  decease  was 
no  casual  event.  The  true  spring,  both  of  His  death  and  of  that  eternal  purpose 
by  which  it  was  foreordained,  was  no  other  than  the  free,  unmerited,  and  sovereign 
love  of  a  three-one  God  to  sinners.  3.  According  to  all  the  principles  that  are 
capable  of  influencing  human  nature,  the  highest  evidence  of  love  that  can  be 
given  is  "for  a  man  to  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friend"  (John  xv.  13;  Rom.  v.  7). 
But  they  for  whom  Christ  died  were  neither  righteous  nor  good.  4.  Our  matter  of 
praise  and  wonder  is  still  increased  when  we  consider  how  Christ  died.  (1)  As  to 
what  He  suffered,  it  was  not  simply  death  such  as  ordinary  persons  undergo.  He 
may  be  said  to  have  begun  to  die  as  soon  as  He  was  born.  And  He  died  ten  thousand 
deaths  in  one.  (2)  If  we  take  a  view  of  the  manner  in  which  He  suffered  all  this, 
it  was  not  less  wonderful.  Though  His  sufferings  were  thus  severe,  He  was  far  from 
repining  or  murmuring  under  them.  5.  We  have  additional  matter,  both  for  praise 
and  wonder,  when  we  consider  what  great  designs  He  had  in  view,  and  actually 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

accomplished  by  being  slain.  (1)  He  appeased  the  justice  of  God  and  made  way 
for  our  restoration  to  His  favour.  (2)  He  "  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of 
ordinances  that  was  against  us  and  was  contrary  to  us,  and  took  it  out  of  the  way, 
nailing  it  to  His  Cross."  (3)  He  broke  down  '*  the  middle  wall  of  partition  "  that 
was  betwixt  Jew  and  Gentiles,  and  so  made  way  for  the  introduction  of  the  pos- 
terity of  Japheth,  to  "  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem."  (4)  He  overcame  all  our 
spiritual  enemies  who  held  us  in  bondage  and  stood  in  the  way  of  our  enjoying  the 
benefit  of  that  redemption  which  He  purchased  for  us.  6.  We  have  matter  of  the 
highest  praise,  as  well  as  of  the  deepest  wonder,  when  we  consider  that  though  Christ  j 
was  once  slain.  He  is  now  alive,  and  is  "  set  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens."  Lessons :  1.  The  people  of  God  have  a  ready 
answer  to  all  the  charges  that  the  law  of  God  brings  against  them,  and  to  all  the 
accusations  of  conscience  ;  for  Christ  was  slain.  2.  There  is  no  want  of  spiritual 
provision  in  God's  house  for  any  sinner  that  is  willing  to  make  use  of  it.  3.  Here 
is  a  strong  incitement  to  the  duty  of  mortification.  4.  We  see  here  a  plain  and 
patent  way,  yea,  a  new  and  living  way,  opened  and  consecrated  for  us,  into  the 
presence  of  God,  through  the  veil  of  the  flesh  of  a  slain  Redeemer.  5.  There  is 
good  reason  why  all  who  profess  to  be  Christians  should  submit  with  cheerfulness 
to  the  government  of  Christ  as  King  of  Zion.  6.  The  disciples  of  Christ  need  never 
be  at  a  loss  for  a  subject  of  sweet  meditation  by  themselves,  nor  for  a  subject  of 
sweet  counsel,  as  they  go  to  the  house  of  God  in  companies.  7.  Here  is  a  broad  and 
sure  foundation  for  the  faith  of  every  hearer  of  the  gospel,  of  whatever  character  or 
condition  he  be.  The  Lamb  of  God  was  slain,  and,  through  His  death,  eternal  life 
is  freely  offered.  {John  Young,  D.D.)  The  song  of  redemption : — I.  The  need  op 
REDEMPTION.  1.  It  is  proved  by  the  conduct  of  the  species ;  by  the  various  modes  of 
expiation  to  which  men  of  all  ages  and  nations  have  had  recourse.  2.  It  finds  an 
evidence  in  the  breast  of  every  individual.  11.  The  sufficiency  of  eedemption  by 
THE  blood  of  Christ.  1.  The  victim  was  provided  by  Jehovah  Himself.  Infinite 
goodness  and  love  had  nothing  more  to  give.  2.  Nor  should  it  ever  be 
forgotten  that  the  vicarious  suffering  was  endured  to  its  full  extent — to  blood 
and  to  death!  3.  We  may  rely  on  the  competency  and  perfection  of  redemp- 
tion by  the  blood  of  Christ,  inasmuch  as  its  success  has  already  appeared  in  the 
actual  salvation  of  so  many  of  Adam's  race.  III.  The  truth  of  man's  redemption 
BY  THE  blood  OF  Christ.  1.  One  objection  advanced  by  the  enemies  of  the  atone- 
ment of  Christ  is,  "that  repentance  and  amendment  constitute  of  themselves  an 
acceptable  and  adequate  means  of  reconciliation  with  God."  Confidently  as  this 
maxim  is  advanced,  we  do  not  see  that  it  takes  place  in  the  governments  and  legal 
institutions  of  men.  2.  Another  of  the  most  plausible  of  those  objections  adduced 
against  the  doctrine  of  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ  is  "that  we  can  perceive 
no  reason  for,  or  connection  between,  the  shedding  of  that  blood  and  the  acceptance 
and  salvation  of  men."  But  is  the  statement  in  this  objection  true  ?  Might  we  not 
say  that  when  the  Son  of  God  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
Cross,  an  act  of  obedience  so  stupendous  became  a  reason  or  consideration  not  only 
why  God  should  highly  exalt  Him  and  give  Him  a  name  above  every  name,  but  also 
why  He  should  forgive  and  accept  all  who  repent  and  believe  in  Him  ?  IV.  The 
practical  influence  of  this  momentous  doctrine.  1.  It  is  eminently  qualified  to 
impress  us  with  holy  fear.  2.  It  should  inspire  us  with  the  fullest  confidence.  3. 
It  should  compel  our  gratitude  and  praise.  {Jas.  Bromley.)  The  Lamh  slain 
worshipped  in  heaven : — The  death  of  Christ  for  tne  redemption  of  sinners  constitutes 
the  distinguishing  peculiarity  of  His  work  and  the  high  ground  for  His  adoration. 
1.  Like  the  chapter  before  us,  the  Scriptures  everywhere  teach  us  to  regard  the 
death  of  Christ  in  a  peculiar  manner.  While  the  Scriptures  have  recorded  the 
history  of  His  birth,  of  His  life,  of  His  sufferings  and  conversation,  they  have  mani- 
festly done  this  only  in  explanation  of  His  character  and  to  give  us  a  just  view  of  His 
amazing  condescension  ;  and  all  these  things  they  concentrate  to  one  point,  as  they 
gather  them  all  around  the  crowning  matter  of  the  whole — His  amazing  death  I  He 
became  incarnate  that  He  might  be  able  to  die.  2.  The  manner  in  which  He  met 
death  was  peculiar.  He  met  it  as  no  living  man  could  have  expected ;  as  no 
righteous  man  that  we  know  of  ever  did.  How  would  you  expect  Christ  to  die,  who 
lived  without  sin,  if  a  life  of  holiness  was  His  main  work  here,  and  if  He  had  no 
more  of  difficulty  to  encounter  with  the  king  of  terrors  than  falls  to  the  lot  of  the 
righteous  ?  He  had  more.  And  hence  He  quailed  at  the  prospect.  Willing  to  die, 
ready,  He  still  trembles  ;  in  agony  He  prays,  "  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup 
pass  from  Me."    3.  The  sacred  Scriptures  uniformly  speak  of  this  death  in  a  manner 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  327 

totally  different  from  that  in  which  they  mention  the  death  of  any  other  being. 
Isaiah,  Abel,  Zecharias,  Stephen,  Peter,  James,  Paul — not  one  of  the  whole  army  is 
spoken  of  as  making  atonement  for  sin  or  any  procurement  of  eternal  life.  But,  on 
the  contrary,  the  death  of  Christ  is  uniformly  mentioned  as  having  such  an  intention 
and  such  a  result.  4.  On  the  ground  of  this  death  the  Scriptures  found  the  argu- 
ment for  even  the  common  morality  of  life.  5.  The  holy  Scriptures  uniformly  expect 
to  affect  us  most,  and  to  furnish  us  the  highest  lessons  of  holiness,  by  affecting  our 
hearts  with  the  contemplation  of  the  death  of  Christ.  They  want  faith  to  fix  there. 
Christ  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  a  ransom.  They  expect  to  furnish  an  antidote 
to  the  love  of  sin  by  leading  us  to  faith  in  Him  who  died  to  expiate  it.  6.  This 
death  of  Christ  is  an  incomparable  manifestation  of  Divine  love,  and  hence  is 
calculated  to  have  an  unequalled  moral  influence.  All  else  must  yield  to  it.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  This  is  the  adoration  of  heaven.  Hearts  on  earth  ought  to  assort  with 
hearts  in  heaven  over  every  contemplation  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of 
God.  2.  As  love  constitutes  the  mode  in  which  God  seeks  to  save  us,  and  at  the 
same  time  constitutes  the  highest  manifestation  of  His  unfathomable  perfections,  the 
religion,  whereby  we  hope  to  be  at  peace  with  Him,  must  very  much  consist  in  the 
same  kind  of  affection.  Open  your  heart  to  God,  just  where  God  opens  His  heart 
to  you.  Consent  to  love  Him  as  His  child.  3.  There  is  no  occasion  for  that 
gloomy  despondency  which  sometimes  feels  that  it  may  not  confide  in  Christ,  because 
it  has  nothing  but  a  heart  to  offer.  Christ  wants  nothing  but  your  heart.  4.  You 
need  not  fear  to  worship  Christ.  He  is  worshipped  in  heaven.  5.  Finally,  what 
unequalled  humility  and  penitence  become  us  at  the  communion-table !  {I.  S. 
Spencer,  D.D.)  The    Redeemer's    sufferings : — I.    The    remembrance    of    the 

Bedeemer's  sufferings  is  constantly  kept  up  by  the  blessed  inhabitants  of 
HEAVEN.  II.  With  what  peculiar  advantages  do  the  worshippers  above  pursue 
their  researches  into  the  mystery  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  1.  The  inhabitants 
of  heaven  enjoy  an  undisturbed  leisure.    2.  They  possess  perfect,  inward  rectitude 

€d  vigour.  No  irregularity  of  thought,  no  languishing  of  affection,  can  invade  them. 
They  are  wonderfully  illuminated  in  the  knowledge  of  those  Divine  truths,  which 
2  supposed  in  the  gospel  mystery,  and  on  which  it  is  built.  4.  They  have  the 
fulness  of  evangelical  illumination.  5.  The  presence  of  the  Lamb,  or  of  the 
Mediator  in  His  human  nature,  in  the  midst  of  them.  6.  The  presence  and 
experience  of  the  glorious  fruits  of  His  death.    HI.  The  happy  and  precious  effects 

WHICH  CONSTANTLY  ATTEND  THOSE  PERFECT  VIEWS  OF  THE  EeDEEMER's   SUFFERINGS,  IN 

THE  MINDS  OF  SAINTS  AND  ANGELS.  1.  Their  vicws  of  these  wonderful  sufferings  are 
the  chief  means  of  their  beatific  vision  of  God.  2.  While  the  blessed  thus  look  upon 
the  Three-One  God,  they  love  Him  with  an  increasing,  and  most  joyful  and  pure 
love.  They  rest,  delight,  and  rejoice  in  God  with  ineffable  pleasure.  3.  While  they 
thus  love  God  supremely,  they  are  knit  together  in  the  most  endeared  mutual  affec- 
tion to  each  other ;  each  member  of  that  vast  assembly  passionately  loves  the  whole, 
and  is  beloved  by  all.  4.  These  inward  feelings  are  attended  with  most  perfect  acts 
of  worship  to  God,  and  expressions  of  kindness  to  each  other.  (J".  Love,  D.D.) 
Redemption  to  God  by  blood  : — These  words  show  that,  naturally,  we  are  in  a  state  of 
bondage,  and  under  condemnation.  We  are  enthralled  by  sin,  from  which  we  need  to 
be  redeemed  by  price  and  by  power.  Then  the  words  call  attention  to  the  wonderful 
personage  by  whom  we  are  redeemed.  None  but  Emmanuel,  the  eternal  Word 
Incarnate,  was  adequate  to  the  work.  Note  another  truth :  That  the  theme  of 
praise  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  one.  Here  the  strain  is  learned :  there  it  is  con- 
summated. I.  Christ  redeemed  us  to  God,  to  be  His  property.  His  children,  Hia 
freedmen  ;  to  live  with  Him  and  for  Him.  1.  We  are  redeemed  to  God  for  our  own 
happiness ;  we  are  brought  near  to  Him,  united  to  Him,  made  Hke  to  Him.  In 
God's  favour  is  life :  His  lovingkindness  is  better  than  life.  How  shall  guilty 
sinners  obtain  peace  with  God  ?  By  washing  in  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for 
uncleanness.  Our  iniquity  is  forgiven,  our  sin  is  covered.  Again,  the  Redeemer 
brings  us  into  the  family  of  God.  Adoption  is  bestowed  on  us  as  an  act  of  free  grace 
for  His  sake.  The  prodigal  sons  are  welcomed  back  to  the  plenty  and  endearments 
of  their  Father's  house.  We  have  boldness  to  enter  into  His  presence  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  But  further,  besides  reinstating  us  in  the  favour  and  family  of  God,  Christ 
restores  within  us  His  image.  Our  eyes  are  opened  that  we  may  see  Him,  and  our 
hearts  renewed  to  love  His  holiness.  Once  more,  we  were  brought  to  the  enjoyment 
of  God.  Being  freely  justified,  we  have  a  right  to  be  happy ;  and  amidst  the  teara 
which  bereavements  cause,  and  the  anxieties  which  arise  from  blighted  harvests  and 
empty  stalls ;  when  health  fails,  and  friends  forsake,  and  life  is  a-departing,  may 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  v. 

we  not  joy  in  the  God  of  our  salvation?  2.  Let  us  view  our  redemption  to  God  as 
it  respects  His  glory.  For  example,  God's  power  is  magnified.  For  the  Son  to  bear 
the  sins  of  an  apostate  world  is  more  than  to  poise  the  earth  upon  nothing,  and 
stretch  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain.  He  bruised  Satan's  head,  magnified  the  law, 
punished  sin,  and  saved  sinners.  Divine  holiness,  likewise,  and  justice  and  truth, 
are  glorified.  How  marvellously  were  all  the  promises  and  all  the  threatenings 
accomplished !  And  rather  than  one  jot  or  tittle  should  fall  to  the  ground,  the  sword 
was  awaked  against  Jehovah's  Fellow !  Comparable  with  this,  where  is  there  an 
evidence  of  truth  and  righteousness  ?  We  are  redeemed,  also,  to  the  glory  of  God's 
wisdom.  Finally,  what  shall  be  said  of  the  mercy  and  the  love  which  shine,  as  they 
nowhere  else  shine,  in  redemption  ?  11.  The  text  tells  us  of  the  price  by  which 
Christ  redeems  us  to  God,  not  by  the  simple  fiat  of  power,  or  by  the  bare  exercise  of 
mercy,  nor  by  any  compromise  or  unworthy  concession,  nor  with  corruptible  things, 
as  silver  and  gold  ;  but  with  His  own  precious  blood,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish 
and  without  spot.  Scripture  uniformly  testifies,  that  the  ransom  which  the  Son  of 
Man  paid  was  His  own  life.  But  it  is  very  worthy  of  regard  how  frequently  it  is 
described  by  this  name  of  blood.  In  the  books  of  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers, 
and  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  you  may  see  what  a  value  was  attached  to  blood 
under  the  Old  Testament.  Why  is  the  Saviour's  blood  thus  prominently,  in  both 
dispensations,  pressed  on  our  attention  ?  One  end  which  this  mode  of  expression 
serves  is  to  certify  to  us  the  reaUty  of  His  death.  We  see  His  heart  pierced,  and  the 
blood  drawn  off ;  and  we  know  that  the  penalty  has  been  borne,  and  our  peace 
secured.  I  suggest  two  additional  reasons  for  this  interesting  phraseology.  1. 
That  we  may  be  constantly  reminded  of  the  manner  of  His  death.  It 
was  not  natural,  but  effected  by  violence.  It  was  not  by  hanging  or 
suffocation ;  it  was  bloody.  Conscious  of  innocence,  of  benevolence,  of 
the  greatest  love  to  His  enemies,  the  buffetings  of  His  body  were  only  emblems 
of  the  grievous  wounds  with  which  His  soul  was  stabbed.  2.  In  order 
to  affect  us,  to  excite  to  penitence,  gratitude  and  love.  {J.  C.  Herdman,  M.A.) 
Hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests. — The  kingly  priesthood  of  the 
saints  : — I.  The  Eedeemeb's  doings.  1.  He  made  us  kings  and  priests,  virtually, 
when  He  signed  the  covenant  of  grace.  2.  But  He  did  not  stop  there.  It  was  not 
simply  agreeing  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty ;  but  in  due  time  He  filled  it  all — yes,  to 
its  utmost  jot  and  tittle.  3.  Christ  finished  the  great  work  of  making  us  what 
we  are,  by  His  ascension  into  heaven.  If  He  had  not  risen  up  on  high  and  "  led 
captivity  captive,"  His  death  would  have  been  insufficient.  He  "  died  for  our  sins," 
but  He  "  rose  again  for  our  justification."  II.  The  saikts*  honoubs.  1.  His 
royal  office :  a  Christian  is  a  king.  He  is  not  simply  like  a  king,  but  he  is  a  king, 
actually  and  truly.  However,  I  shall  try  and  show  you  how  he  is  like  a  king. 
Eemember  his  royal  ancestry.  Again,  the  saints,  like  monarchs,  have  a  splendid 
retinue.  Kings  and  monarchs  cannot  travel  without  a  deal  of  state.  If  you  had 
eyes  to  see,  you  would  perceive  a  body-guard  of  angels  always  attending  every  one 
of  the  blood-bought  family.  Now,  notice  the  insignia  and  regalia  of  the  saints. 
Kings  and  princes  have  certain  things  that  are  theirs  by  perspective  right.  For 
instance.  Her  Majesty  has  her  Buckingham  Palace,  and  her  other  palaces,  her 
crown  royal,  her  sceptre,  and  so  on.  But,  has  a  saint  a  palace  ?  Yes.  I  have  a 
palace !  and  its  walls  are  not  made  of  marble,  but  of  gold.  Have  Christians  a 
crown  too  ?  Oh,  yes ;  but  they  do  not  wear  it  every  day.  They  have  a  crown,  but 
their  coronation  day  is  not  yet  arrived.  They  have  been  anointed  monarchs. 
they  have  some  of  the  authority  and  dignity  of  monarchs ;  but  they  are  not 
crowned  monarchs  yet.  Kings  are  considered  the  most  honourable  amongst  men. 
They  are  always  looked  up  to  and  respected.  A  monarch  generally  commands 
respect.  Ah  1  we  think  that  worldly  princes  are  the  most  honourable  of  the  earth  ; 
but  if  you  were  to  ask  God,  He  would  reply,  "  My  saints,  in  whom  I  delight,  these 
are  the  honourable  ones."  Lastly — 1.  Kings  have  dominion:  and  so  have  the  saints. 
2.  Saints  are  not  only  kings  but  priests.  We  are  priests  because  priests  are  Divinely 
chosen  persons,  and  so  are  we.  "  No  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself,  but  he 
that  is  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron."  But  we  have  that  calling  and  election  ;  we 
were  all  ordained  to  it  from  the  foundations  of  the  world.  Then  next,  we  are 
priests,  because  we  enjoy  Divine  honours.  None  but  a  priest  might  enter  within  the 
vail ;  there  was  a  court  of  the  priests  into  which  none  might  ever  go,  except  the 
called  ones.  Priests  had  certain  rights  and  privileges  which  others  had  not.  Saint  of 
Jesus  I  heir  of  heaven  !  thou  hast  high  and  honourable  privileges,  which  the  world 
wots  not  of  1     Then  another  remark  shall  be,  we  have  a  Divine  service  to  perform. 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  329 

"  — ■ — ' — « 

(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Kings  by  the  grace  of  God  (with  Prov.  xvi.  32): — Wilberf  orce  was 
once  asked,  who  was  the  greatest  man  he  had  ever  known.  He  replied,  "  Out  of  all 
comparison,  Pitt,  but  I  never  think  of  his  superiority  without  reflecting,  that  the 
least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."  So  real,  earnest,  supremely 
noble,  is  a  true  Christian  life.  The  best  things  in  it  are  not  those  which  dazzle  by 
their  glitter  and  their  glare.  It  was  an  old  heathen  saying,  "the  wise  alone  are 
kings."  Of  those  who  have  been  made  "  wise  unto  salvation,"  it  is  infinitely  more 
true  that  they  alone  are  kings.  They  have  been  made  kings  unto  God  by  Jesus 
Christ.  From  Christ's  pierced  hand  we  receive  a  royal  sceptre  to  reign  on  earth. 
The  song  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven  is  descriptive  of  our  dignity  in  this  world,  and 
our  glory  in  the  next,  as  "  kings  unto  God."  This  royal  honour,  with  the  sovereign 
power  it  insures,  we  are  slow  to  appropriate.  It  is  a  truism,  perhaps,  to  say  that  ta 
lead  a  healthy  Christian  life,  we  must  live  by  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christr 
Jesus,  seeking  the  accomplishment  of  right  objects  in  a  right  spirit,  subduing  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  in  a  way  that  men  cannot  do  who  live  "  after  the 
law  of  a  carnal  commandment."  We  are  under  great  temptations  of  living  so  that 
we  may  make  money,  and  gain  influence  and  power,  and  this  to  the  almost  total 
exclusion  of  the  grander  requirements  of  self  governance.  Christ  has  made  us 
kings,  and  the  first  subject  He  gives  us  to  rule  is  our  own  spirit.  The  man  "  who 
ruleth  his  own  spirit  is  greater  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  To  rule  our  spirit,  to 
get  the  ascendancy  over  ourselves,  to  be  able,  under  all  circumstances,  to  do  the 
tKing  that  ought  to  be  done,  not  only  in  the  right  way,  but  under  the  influence  of 
the  right  motives — this  ought  to  be  the  life-long  endeavour  of  every  true  Christian. 
No  grander  empire,  no  brighter  crown  can  be  won.  The  ruler  of  his  spirit  is  the 
only  real  potentate.  He  who  has  no  command  of  himself  is  "  like  a  city  broken 
down  and  without  walls  " — defenceless,  open  to  the  attack  of  every  enemy,  an 
object  of  reproach  to  every  beholder.  The  man  in  such  a  plight  is  weak  at  the 
very  place  where  he  should  be  strong  ;  and  this  weakness  impels  him  to  play  the 
coward,  when  he  ought  to  be  valiant  in  the  fight.  He  flees  from  himself  and  seeks 
company.  He  can  live  in  turmoil,  business,  amusement,  and  enjoy  his  activities 
there  ;  but  he  sadly  lacks  the  courage  to  seek  a  solitude — to  close  and  grapple  with 
the  enemy,  the  evil  which  he  consciously  knows  and  feels  is  gaining  the  tyranny 
over  him.  Hence  it  is  that  some  of  the  earth's  greatest  heroes  have  been  the 
basest  moral  cowards,  because  they  have  shirked  self-discipline  and  self-control. 
"For  a  man  to  overcome  himself  is  to  overcome  the  world;  for  a  man  is  a 
microcosm,  a  little  world,"  So,  when  Epictetus  was  asked,  "  Who  is  free  ?  "  he 
replied,  "He  who  masters  himself  " — with  much  the  same  tone  of  expression  as 
Solomon,  "  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty,  and  he  that  ruleth 
his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  This  leads  to  the  inquiry,  wherein  lie  the 
rebelliousness  and  disobedience  of  the  spirit  we  are  to  rule  ?  Our  spirit  is  loosed 
from  law  by  transgression.  Our  foes  are  those  of  our  own  household:  sinful 
thoughts,  carnal  desires,  unholy  dispositions.  These  must  be  repressed,  subjugated, 
conquered.  We  are  to  do  battle  with  the  inward  corruptions  and  propensities  of  our 
degenerate  nature.  The  town  of  Mansoul  is  like  a  besieged  city,  having  within  its 
citadel  an  enemy  not  unwilling  to  help  the  besieger;  sometimes,  indeed,  really 
anxious  to  put  into  his  hands  an  important  battery  or  stronghold.  Incessant 
watchfulness,  untiring  warfare  is  needed,  until  the  traitor  has  been  either  expelled 
or  crushed.  Of  all  the  faculties  of  the  human  soul  we  may  affirm  that  they  are 
good  servants  but  bad  masters.  Every  one  of  them  must  be  ruled  and  regulated  by 
right  reason  and  God's  pure  counsel,  so  as  to  perform  its  proper  work  at  the  right 
time,  and  in  the  spirit  of  loving  obedience  to  our  Eedeemer-King.  Our  judgment 
must  not  be  overthrown  by  wild  desire  or  vaulting  ambition,  yet  covetousness  is 
good,  if  I  "  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts  ";  and  ambition  is  good,  if  its  object  be  to 
excel  in  all  that  is  pure  and  lovely  and  of  good  report.  The  ambition  that  would 
wade  remorselessly  through  slaughter  to  a  throne,  if  directed  to  a  worthy  end, 
would  become  an  enthusiasm  for  goodness  and  God,  which  could  say  of  itself, 
"  The  zeal  of  Thy  house  hath  eaten  me  up."  Stiff-necked  stubbornness  and  firm 
determination  to  have  our  own  way  are  not  evil  in  themselves.  They  are  good, 
ennobling,  and  Christ-like,  when  with  unflinching  courage  we  seek  through  their 
action  the  God-like  and  the  true.  When,  in  doing  our  own  wUl,  we  are  doing  God's 
will,  there  is  only  one  road  to  go,  and  that  is  straightforward,  without  bend  or 
divergence  to  the  right  hand  or  the  left.  It  was  thus  that  Christ,  our  Lord,  was  so 
self-possessed — so  thoroughly  master  of  Himself.  It  was  His  meat  to  do  the  will  of 
Him  that  sent  Him.     And  herein  He  left  us  an  example.     The  gospel  of  Chrisfc 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

does  not  propose  to  root  out  our  desires,  or  even  to  repress  them  in  any  way.  It  pro- 
poses rather  to  purify,  regenerate,  and  intensify  them,  only  turning  them  away 
from  what  is  selfish  and  mean  to  what  is  worthy  and  good.  Christ  has  made  us 
kings,  not  unto  ourselves  but  unto  our  God ;  not  for  our  own  selfish  ends,  but  for 
Eis  glory  and  the  good  of  men.  Therefore,  we  are  to  get  the  governance  of  our 
spirits,  to  make  them  nobler  and  loftier,  more  Christ-like  in  character,  more 
unselfish  in  aim.  Of  one  of  our  English  kings  it  was  said  that,  "  endowed  with  a 
great  command  over  himself,  he  soon  obtained  an  uncontrolled  ascendancy  over  his 
people."  This  is  the  royal  road  to  real  power.  Every  one  of  us  has  his  own  battle 
to  fight ;  the  battlefields  may  vary,  but  the  conquest  in  every  case  is  to  be  for  self - 
conquest,  for  rule  of  spirit,  for  the  inheritance  of  the  conqueror.  The  struggle, 
taxing  and  tasking  all  our  energies,  becomes  through  Christ  a  triumph.  Made 
kings  by  Him,  we  are  made  more  than  conquerors  through  Him.  Our  very  struggles 
for  self-mastery  become  a  possession,  crowning  us  with  a  glory  which  apart  from 
them  we  could  never  acquire,  and  we  come  to  realise  in  our  own  experience  that 
"  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is  better  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  {Wm.  Leitch,  B.A.) 
Royal  prerogatives  and  royal  giving  : — I.  Powek.  His  power  is  applied  in  three 
directions.  1.  Selfward.  One  of  the  first  blessings  conferred  by  the  gospel  is 
self-control.  Our  kingship  is  not  merely  prospective.  We  are  to  Uve  like  kings. 
2.  Manward.  The  most  Christian  nations  are  to-day  the  most  powerful.  3.  God- 
ward.  By  our  relation  to  Christ  we  are  raised  to  a  rank  where  we  may  treat  with 
heaven.  The  Christian  has  power  with  God.  JI.  Great  possessions.  Who 
would  not  be  a  Christian  ?  Ill,  Administration.  The  whole  question  of  royal 
right,  duty  and  responsibility,  may  be  summed  up  in  one  word,  administration. 
And  this  word,  with  its  sublime  right  of  meaning,  applies  with  full  force  to  the 
Christian.  In  a  high  and  kingly  sense,  and  in  a  sacred,  priestly  sense,  he  is 
administrator  for  the  kingdom  of  God  in  this  world.  True  Christians  are 
not  only  royal  livers  but  royal  givers.  (J.  C.  Allen.)  All  saints  kings  and 
priests: — It  was  a  "new  song" — new,  because  its  topics  were  new;  for  what 
so  new  and  strange  as  God  incarnate  shedding  His  blood  upon  the  Cross,  and 
by  virtue  of  that  offering  redeeming  the  most  distant  nations  of  the  earth,  and 
making  them,  however  low  in  estate,  to  reign  kings  and  priests  upon  the  earth 
— new,  because  it  is  the  song  of  the  new  creation ;  the  song  of  those  to  whom 
♦'  behold  all  things  have  become  new,"  new  hearts,  new  lips,  new  hopes,  new  graces. 
I.  Kings — that  is,  half,  the  lasting,  eternal  half  of  their  Christian  greatness.  They 
are  kings,  because  they  are  members  of  that  Christ  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords.  This  royalty  of  Christ  on  earth,  thus  partaken  by  the  Church  His  body,  is 
clearly  stated  in  many  passages  of  Holy  Scripture.  To  Christ  as  man,  aU  "  power 
was  given  both  in  heaven  and  in  earth  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  18) ;  and,  again,  "  all  things 
are  deUvered  unto  Him  by  His  Father  "  (Luke  x.  22).  He  is  "  the  heir  of  the  world," 
BO  that  all  is  of  right  His.  And  it  is  the  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  this  king- 
dom to  His  little  flock  (Luke  xii.  32),  that  is,  the  Church  ;  whereby  the  meek,  that 
is,  the  little  ones  (Matt  v.  5),  the  saints  of  God,  become  in  Him  the  rightful  inheri- 
tors of  the  earth.  U.  Thus  are  they  kings  ;  but  they  are  also  priests.  In  earher 
days,  before  the  blood  of  sprinkling  had  been  shed,  and  men  made  members  of  the 
great  High  Priest,  they  had  no  access  to  God  themselves.  If  they  desired  to 
approach  Him  it  could  be  by  some  intermediate  help,  some  priest  who,  deprecating 
the  wrath  of  God  by  the  blood  of  victims,  might  on  their  behalf  offer  prayers  for 
them,  and,  if  it  might  be,  become  the  channel  of  blessing  to  them.  But  Christ 
being  come,  the  only  true  Priest  (Heb.  ix.  7-14,  24 ;  x.  19-22)  and  the  single 
Victim  of  price,  the  access  to  God  is  opened,  the  veil  rent,  the  entrance  to  the 
holiest  unclosed.  Thenceforth  may  every  member  of  His  body  exercise  a  child's  right 
of  approaching  his  Father.  In  connection  with  the  great  doctrine,  which  in  its  con- 
sequences is  obviously  of  great  importance  to  the  whole  theory  of  the  Church,  its 
powers,  and  privileges,  there  are,  in  these  distracted  days,  two  main  errors,  held  on 
two  opposite  sides,  both  of  which  are  of  imminent  danger.  The  one  of  these  is  the 
doctrine  of  some  of  the  liberalising  or  neologian  party,  the  other,  that  of  the 
Koman  Catholics.  The  former,  or  neologian  party,  so  hold  fast  the  doctrine  of  the 
separate  priesthood  of  Christians  as  to  deny  and  disown  altogether  all  authority  and 
power  and  priestly  ofiBces  as  exercised  towards  some  Christians  by  others ;  thus 
making  each  single  Christian  his  own  standard  of  doctrine,  life,  authority,  and 
worship.  The  latter,  or  Roman  Catholic  party,  so  hold  the  existence  of  authority 
and  priestly  offices  within  the  Church,  exercised  towards  Christian  people,  that  they 
jeally  deny,  in  a  great  many  important  points,  the  royal  priestliness  of  single  Chris- 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATIOJSr,  331 

tians.  The  former  reject  lawful  and  necessary  authority,  for  the  sake  of  vindi- 
cating the  personal  rights  of  baptized  people ;  the  latter  tyrannise  over  the  just 
and  inalienable  rights  of  baptized  people,  for  the  sake  of  maintaining  an 
excessive  and  unscriptural  authority.  (Bp.  Moherly.)  We  shall  reign  on 
the  earth. — The  reign  of  the  saints  on  the  earth : — I.  The  fact  that  the  Church 
OF  God  will  eventually  triumph  over  evert  obstacle,  and  that  all  its 
members  will  partake  in  the  joys  of  its  bloodless  victory,  is  as  certain  as  any- 
thing in  revelation.  According  to  heathen  mythology,  Astrsea,  the  daughter  of 
supreme  power  and  law,  and  therefore  the  protector  and  benefactor  of  men,  dwelt 
with  them  during  the  golden  age,  in  free  and  familiar  association.  On  the  intro- 
duction of  the  silver  age  which  followed,  she  ceased  such  friendly  intercourse,  and 
made  her  abode  chiefly  among  the  lonely  mountains  ;  and  though  she  occasionally 
still  visited  the  abodes  of  men,  it  was  only  amid  the  shades  of  evening  when  she 
could  not  be  seen.  But  when  the  brazen  age  began,  she  fled  to  heaven  to  return  no 
more.  Such  is  the  classic  myth  ;  and  well  does  it  display  the  hopelessness  in  which 
heathen  fable  finds  and  leaves  the  human  race.  But  we  have  the  fact,  not  the 
fable  ;  and  the  fact,  thank  God,  is  far  more  cheering  than  the  fable.  'Tis  true  the 
golden  age  has  passed  away,  and  the  silver  age  has  come,  and,  worse  than  that,  the 
brazen  and  the  iron  age.  It  is  true  also,  that  because  the  fine  gold  has  become  dim 
and  the  pure  gold  adulterated,  a  curse  has  fallen  on  our  world,  and  the  Divine 
favour  has  been  in  a  measure  withdrawn.  But  still,  not  wholly.  Though  in 
a  measure  God  has  turned  away  His  face  from  us,  yet,  with  loving-kindness  and 
tender  mercy  is  He  gathering  us  again  to  Himself.  The  origin  and  history  of  the 
Church  of  God  and  Christ  are  proof.  Every  civilised  nation  this  moment  on  the 
earth  is  in  possession  of  Christianity,  in  one  degree  or  another.  Christianity  made 
them  civilised ;  for  though  in  some  cases,  in  a  measure,  civilised  before  its  intro- 
duction, alas,  what  a  civilisation  !  how  false  and  how  impure !  H.  The  form  or 
MODE  OF  THIS  DOMINION — how  the  saints  shall  reign  upon  the  earth.  When  we 
.  would  rightly  understand  these  words  of  promise,  that  the  "  saints  shall  reign  upon 
the  earth,"  we  must  cast  out  of  our  minds  everything  that  panders  to  the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  and  look  for  a  meaning  more 
spiritual  and  heavenly.  1.  The  saints  shall  reign,  as  reigning  implies  holiness. 
Every  true  servant  of  God,  in  a  measure,  now  reigns  over  sin  and  Satan — over  an 
evil  nature,  and  over  the  Prince  of  this  world ;  and  so  far  forth,  therefore,  he 
reigns  in  holiness.  2.  They  will,  in  the  next  place,  reign  numerically.  Now  the 
true  and  undoubted  servants  of  Christ  are  a  small  minority  in  the  world ;  and  yet, 
even  now  they  exert  a  mighty  influence.  But,  in  the  happy  times  to  which  we  are 
permitted  to  look  forward,  what  is  now  but  partial  will  be  almost  total.  Christians 
will  have  the  control  of  all  things ;  it  will  belong  to  them  of  right,  numerically, 
and  it  will  belong  to  them  because  of  their  fitness  to  use  it.  They  will  fashion 
public  opinion,  because,  in  fact,  they  will  constitute  the  public.  3.  Again,  they  will 
reign  because  their  Master  wiU  then  triumph.  He  is  triumphing  now  in  every 
individual  that  is  converted  to  God,  in  every  increase  of  holiness  in  the  Church,  in 
every  new  introduction  or  further  spread  of  the  gospel  in  heathen  or  Mahometan 
lands.  But  His  triumph  then  is  to  be  more  marked  and  decisive.  4.  Lastly,  the 
saints  wQl  reign  in  millennial  times,  as  reigning  implies  happiness.  The  great 
English  dramatist  makes  one  of  his  monarchs  say,  '•  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that 
wears  a  crown  " ;  and  no  doubt  there  is  much  truth  in  it ;  but  still,  the  secret  con- 
viction of  poor  human  nature  is  more  faithfully  expressed  in  the  proverbial  phrase, 
**  Happy  as  a  king."  On  the  strength  of  this  we  may  say,  that  when  it  is  foretold 
that  the  saints  shall  reign  upon  the  earth,  it  is  meant  to  be  intimated  by  the  figure, 
in  conformity  with  this  universal  feeling,  that  they  shall  be  highly  blessed  and 
enjoy  great  felicity.  Can  it  be  doubted  that  such  will  be  their  lot  ?  ( W.  Sparrow,  D.D.) 

Vers.   11-13.    The  voice  of  many  angels  round  about  the  throne. — The  great 
festal  gathering  and  song  of  heaven : — I.  The  complacency  with  which  Christ 

LOOKS  BACK  ON  HiS  OWN  ATONING  WORK  AND  SUFFERINGS.  II.  ThE  PERPETUAL 
EFFICACY  OF  THE  SaVIOUR'S  SACRIFICE.  III.  ThE  CONTINUED  IDENTITY  OF  ChRIST'S 
PERSON  AS  GOD-MAN  MEDIATOR.  IV.  REDEMPTION  IS  THE  GRAND  THEME  OF  ADORATION 
FOR  UNREDEEMED  ANGELS  AS  WELL  AS  FOR  THE  REDEEMED  FAMILY  OF  GOD.  V.  ThB 
PRE-EMINENT  DIGNITY  AND  BLISS  OF  THE  RANSOMED  SAINTS.  VI.  ThE  UNITY  WHICH 
PERVADES  THE  HEAVENLY  RANKS.      VII.    ThE    VISION   SEEMS  INTENDED  TO   PREPARE    THE 

Church  on  earth  for  her  own  sufferings,  and  reconcile  her  to  her  approaching 
TRIBULATION.     {J.  R.  Macduf,  D.D.)        The  hymn  of  the  angels  and  of  creation : — 


832  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

I.  First  let  us  understand  the  attitude  and  position  of  the  angels.  They  are 
round  about  the  throne  of  God,  around  the  elders — that  is,  the  Church — and 
around  the  living  creatures.  They  are,  therefore,  the  sentinels  and  the  guardians 
of  Divine  and  human  things.  So  they  stand  equally  around  the  emblem  of  eternal 
power,  around  the  fourfold  forms  of  life,  around  its  drudgery  as  well  as  its  ambi- 
tion, and  around  the  Church,  distressed  and  broken  and  divided  and  betrayed. 
No  thought  of  fear  dims  the  lustre  of  their  eyes,  nor  lessens  the  precision  and  the 
emphasis  of  their  song.  And  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  they  secure  ample  leisure 
for  worship.  It  is  a  lesson  that  ought  not  to  be  lost  upon  our  hurrying  age. 
Thank  he^aven,  there  are  still  secluded  corners  of  our  land  where  the  shriek  of 
steam-engmes,  the  clamour  of  crowded  streets,  the  driving  of  pulse  and  brain,  is 
unknown ;  where  the  valleys  laugh  and  sing  with  the  standing  corn,  where  the 
hilltops  are  silent  as  the  seas,  and  where  jaded  brains  may  shape  some  thought  of 
God.  But  heaven  is  busy  too,  and  there  is  work  enough  to  be  accomplished. 
There  are  sinners  lost  in  the  wilds  of  the  hill,  and  in  loathsome  dens  of  the 
city,  who  will  need  to  be  brought  home.  There  are  claims  and  needs  and 
dangers  of  the  ^  Church  the  world  over — energies  to  be  cherished,  works  to 
be  encouraged,  impurities  to  be  purged,  sorrows  and  disappointments  to  be 
assuaged.  And  with  all  these  interests  in  hand  their  eye  is  upon  the  throne, 
for  here  only  do  angels  and  men  alike  behold,  and  thence  only  receive  the 
interpretation  of  life  and  the  wisdom  and  guidance  for  work.  And  well  were 
it,  not  only  for  its  honesty,  but  even  more  for  its  progress,  if  the  commerce  of 
England  and  Scotland  and  Ireland  were  directed  by  the  laws  which  abide  in  God. 
Only  those  who  obey  can  worship,  and  only  those  who  rightly  worship  can  truly 
live.  And  so— II.  The  centra,  thought  of  the  angels,  like  that  of  the  Church,  was 
the  worthiness  of  Christ.  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."  And  as  it  was 
in  the  mind  of  the  Church,  so  here  again  this  worthiness  is  associated  with 
sacrifice.  For  most  men  suffer  only  when  they  must,  and  they  fail  to  perceive  that 
sacrifice  at  once  tests  what  we  are,  and  makes  us  what  we  ought  to  be.  In  this 
way  Christ's  sacrifice  proved  His  essential  worth,  and,  beyond  this,  proves  to-day 
His  permanent  worth  to  His  people.  It  is  not  His  power  alone.  That  never  elicits 
adoration.  It  is  the  goodness  that  reigns  paramount  within  Him  which  men 
worship  and  love.  HI.  The  response  of  creation.  The  poet  of  Palestine  had  said, 
many  a  year  before  St.  John  lived,  that  there  is  neither  speech  nor  language 
throughout  the  earth  in  which  the  voice  of  the  firmament  is  not  heard.  "  The 
songs  of  the  spheres  "  was  another  method  of  expressing  the  same  truth.  The  sky 
vibrates  with  praise  as  the  great  stars  stand  out  in  their  places.  "  Earth,  with  its 
thousand  voices,"  said  Coleridge,  "  praises  God."  And  while  these  call  to  man, 
whatever  his  tongue  or  hia  worship,  man  the  world  round  feels  that  he  must 
respond.  He  cannot  help  worshipping.  Under  the  gaslight,  and  in  the  heated 
atmosphere  of  some  remote  meeting-place  in  the  big  town,  he  may  lustily  proclaim 
that  God  is  nothing  to  him.  But  when  the  gas  is  out  and  the  cheering  companions 
are  gone,  when  he  is  alone  on  the  mountain-side,  and  the  thunder  booms  out  its 
terror  above  and  the  lightning  flashes  death  around  him,  a  voice  within  answers  the 
voices  without,  and  the  infidel  is  compelled  to  pray.  And  as  man  must  worship, 
so  his  worship  adopts  a  more  expansive  form  than  that  which  angels  take  as  yet 
(chap.  vii.  12).  His  eyes,  too,  are  indeed  fiUed  with  the  image  of  the  Lamb.  What 
mind  can  forget  Calvary  and  Olivet?  But  away  beyond  the  present  fact  he  con- 
templates the  continuous  recognition,  and  age  upon  age  he  hears  the  same  hymn. 
And  further  yet,  and  fuller,  the  worship  of  the  Lamb  broadens  into  the  worship  of 
the  Godhead.  It  is  offered  to  "Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne."  And  it 
expresses  the  spiritual  history  of  every  saint.  We  see  ourselves  in  this  hymn. 
When  first  our  life  lay  before  us,  and  we  took  it  up  and  placed  it  upon  the  altar  of 
God's  salvation,  Jesus  Christ  was  all,  was  everything  to  us.  Then  as  faith 
deepened  and  threw  up  the  greater  and  stronger  life,  we  saw  Jesus  in  all  things. 
And  then  we  beheld  the  love  of  the  Father  to  be  as  great  and  tender  as  the  love  of 
the  Son,  and  the  strength  of  the  Holy  Ghost  gathered  round  us  and  within  us,  and 
God  in  His  blessed  Trinity  embraced  all  things.  {W.  M.  Johnston,  M.A.)  Christ 
the  object  of  angelic  worship  : — I.  The  homage  here  represented  as  rendered  to 
the  Saviour  by  the  angelic  hosts.  1.  Angels  are  the  worshippers  to  whom  our 
attention  is  more  particularly  directed  in  the  text.  2.  The  nature  of  the  homage 
which  they  render  Him.  The  particulars  here  specified  relate  rather  to  the  natural 
than  the  moral  attributes  of  our  Saviour,  to  His  greatness  rather  than  His 
goodness;  that  is,  to  His  prerogatives  and  glories  which  He  most  obscured  in 


CHAP,  v.]  REVELATION.  333 

His  humbled  state,  or  of  which  He  then  emptied  Himself,  as  the  Scripture 
expresses  it.  3.  The  ground  of  this  homage.  As  a  person  inherently  possessed 
of  all  Divine  excellences  and  glories,  the  Son  of  God,  in  common  with  the 
Father,  has  an  incontestable  title  to  the  worship  and  obedience  of  the  heavenly 
hosts.  He  has  a  further  claim  as  the  author  and  preserver  of  their  existence, 
and  as  the  source  and  dispenser  of  all  their  happiness.  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, on  this  ground,  strong  as  it  is,  that  the  homage  manifested  in  the  text  is 
rendered  Him.  Look  to  the  passage  and  you  will  at  once  perceive  that  the  basis 
on  which  the  Son  of  God  is  worshipped,  both  by  the  representatives  of  the  Church 
and  by  the  angelic  hosts,  is  His  death  or  sacrifice.  But  does  the  death  of  Christ 
give  Him  any  new  or  peculiar  claims  to  the  homage  of  the  heavenly  hierarchies 
who  are  not  immediately  interested  in  its  benefits  ?  Unquestionably  it  does,  and 
some  of  these  claims  it  is  not  difficult  to  discover.  His  death  was  not  only  in  itself 
the  most  extraordinary  event  that  ever  took  place,  it  afforded  incomparably  the 
most  magnificent  display  that  ever  was  exhibited  of  generosity  and  kindness,  of 
compassion  and  tenderness.  It  is  an  essential  part  of  true  excellence  to  admire 
excellence  in  another,  and  the  admiration  ought  to  be  proportioned  to  the  measure 
of  excellence  displayed.  What  a  resistless  impulse,  then,  must  it  communicate  to 
the  adoration  and  praise  of  the  holy  angels,  to  contemplate  the  death  of  the  Son  of 
God.  Eecollect  next  the  display  of  the  Divine  character  and  p«*rfections  exhibited 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  you  will  see  in  it  another  reason  to  jmpel  the  hosts  of 
heaven  to  honour  and  adore  Him.  Consider,  again,  that  while  the  death  of  Christ 
contributes  so  much  to  advance  the  honour  of  God,  it  contributes  not  less  to  pro- 
mote the  happiness  of  man.  "  They  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  In 
further  illustration  of  this  topic,  I  might  add  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  great  Mr. 
Howe,  and  of  some  other  eminent  divines,  that  angels,  though  not  redeemed  by 
Christ,  are  confirmed  in  happiness  in  consequence  of  their  union  to  Him.  It  is 
further  certain  that  in  Him  angels  and  saints  are  united  in  one  harmonious  and 
happy  association,  and  that  it  has  pleased  the  Father  by  Him  to  reconcile  all  things 
unto  Himself ;  by  Him,  I  say,  whether  they  be  things  in  earth  or  things  in  heaven." 
And  these  wonderful  arrangements  furnish  angels  with  another  reason  to  worship 
and  serve  "  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."    II.  The  abgument  suggested  by  theib 

CONDUCT  TO  INDUCE  US  TO  RENDER  THE  LaMB  A  SIMILAR  HOMAGE.       1.    We  haVC  a  diiect 

and  personal  interest  in  His  death.  If  His  matchless  love  excites,  as  well  it  may^ 
the  admiration  even  of  creatures  not  immediately  interested,  and  impels  them  "  to 
prepare  new  honours  for  His  name,"  what  words  can  express  the  claims  which  He 
has  to  our  admiration,  gratitude,  and  praise  ?  2.  We  are  still  in  circumstances  of 
danger.  Many  and  formidable  are  the  enemies  who  seek  our  ruin,  numerous  and 
painful  are  the  toils  and  hardships  we  must  encounter  ere  we  reach  our  "  Father's 
loved  abode."  There  is  one,  and  only  one,  who  can  protect  you  amid  your  multi- 
tudinous dangers,  and  bring  you  to  the  land  which  you  wish  to  reach.  "  Jesus 
Christ,  the  captain  of  salvation,  having  been  made  perfect  through  sufferii^gs,  will 
conduct  you  to  glory,"  if  only  you  will  confide  in  Him.  What  an  argument  to  love 
and  trust,  to  adore  and  praise  Him !  3.  I  might  remark  that,  allowing  He  has 
conferred  on  angels  higher  capacities  and  higher  joys,  our  happiness  has  been  pro- 
cured by  Him  at  a  price  far  more  costly.  To  communicate  to  ungels  e^i^tence  and 
happiness  required  nothing  more  than  a  simple  volition  of  His  irresistible  will,  a 
single  word  of  His  omnipotent  voice.  It  was  not  thus  that  the  happmess  of  the 
apostate  race  could  be  restored,  that  the  redemption  of  our  lost  world  was  to  be 
achieved.  Lessons :  1.  How  inconceivably  glorious  must  heaven  be,  and  how 
worthy  of  our  earnest  desire  and  our  constant  pursuit !  2.  How  reasonable  tuac  we 
should  render  Divine  honours  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  3.  How  important  that  we  culti- 
vate a  love  to  the  exercises  of  heaven.  4.  This  subject  suggests  a  test  by  which  we 
may  ascertain  whether  we  are  fit  for  heaven.  To  ascertain  your  meetness  for 
heaven  you  have  then  only  to  inquire  whether  you  take  delight  in  devotional 
exercises  and  in  holy  pursuits  and  enjoyments.  5.  This  subject  shows  us  the  folly 
of  the  irreligious.  Think  of  heaven  with  all  its  joys  and  splendours.  Contrast 
with  this  hell  with  its  horrors,  a  place  of  outer  darkness  and  of  gnashing  of  teeth. 
{R.  Balmer,  D.D.)  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  alahL—The  worthy  sacrifice  of 
Christ : — I.  Contemplate  Christ  as  He  is  represented  under  the  character  of  a 
LAMB.  The  lamb  is  an  appropriate  symbol  of  innocence  and  meekness.  Never  were 
the  lamb-like  virtues  brought  to  so  severe  a  test,  and  never  were  they  so  strikingly 
portrayed.  A  recluse  in  his  ceU  may  reason  justly  on  the  duties  of  forbearance  and 
forgiveness,  but  it  is  difficult  to  carry  into  practice  the  dictates  of  sober  soUtude,  yet 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

Jesus  gave  not  only  the  theory  but  the  practice  of  every  possible  virtue.  II.  Meditate 
ON  THE  DEATH  OF  Christ.     1.  He  was  slaiu  decretively  in  the  purposes  of  Jehovah. 

2.  He  was  slain  emblematically  by  the  sacrifices  under  the  Levitical  dispensation. 

3.  He  was  slain  instrumen tally  by  the  hands  of  the  Jews.  4.  He  was  slain  really  by 
the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  of  His  people.  III.  Celebrate  His  praise.  1.  He  is 
worthy  of  the  trust  and  confidence  of  His  people.  2.  He  is  worthy  of  the  adoration 
and  praise  of  the  redeemed  spirits  above.  3.  He  is  worthy  the  adoration  of  the  purest 
intelligences  of  the  universe.  4.  He  is  worthy  of  the  final  conquest  of  the  world. 
{T.  Adkins.)  Christ  the  Lamb  slain : — I.  The  wonderful  person  of  the  glorious 
sufferer  will  furnish  occasion  of  unceasing  admiration  to  the  great  multitude  before 
the  throne.  H.  The  multitude  before  the  throne  will  have  occasion  to  give  glory  to 
the  great  Kedeemer  when  they  contemplate  the  mysterious  nature  or  His  suffer- 
ings, ni.  Similar  acknowledgments  will  be  called  forth  when  the  saints  in  heaven 
remember  their  sins  as  the  procuring  cause  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  IV.  The 
sufferings  of  the  Kedeemer  are  considered  by  the  multitude  before  the  throne  as  the 
result  of  A  PLAN  CONTRIVED  BY  THE  INFINITE  WISDOM  OF  GoD  in  His  eternal  counsels. 
V.  The  sufferings  of  the  Eedeemer  are  considered  by  the  multitude  before  the 
throne  as  the  genuine  effect  of  His  own  uncontrolled  and  sovereign  pleasure. 
To  Himself  alone,  and  to  the  free  exercise  of  His  own  good  will,  this  act  of  grace 
and  humiUation  must  be  referred.  VI.  The  sufferings  of  the  Kedeemer  are  con- 
sidered by  those  who  stand  around  the  throne  as  affording  the  brightest  manifes- 
tation OF  THE  Divine  perfections.  VH.  The  sufferings  of  the  Kedeemer  present 
new  occasion  of  admiration  and  triumph  to  the  multitude  before  the  throne, 
because  thereby  redemption  is  completely  purchased.  (John  Russell.)  Glory 
ascribed  in  heaven  to  the  Lamb  : — 1.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  has  had  the  effect  of 
developing  the  hidden  perfections  and  glories  of  God  in  what  may  be  considered 
their  Christian  and  evangelical  aspect,  both  in  the  Church  above  and  in  the  Church 
below,  consequently  all  glory  is  due  to  Christ  upon  this  principle.  2.  The  elemen- 
tary state  and  high  reward  of  heaven  is  the  result  of  our  Saviour's  work,  and 
consequently  the  glory  must  be  due  to  Him.  3.  The  relationship  in  which  the 
triumphant  Church  wUl  stand  to  her  Lord  will  induce  these  sentiments,  and  lead  to 
this  triumphant  song.  In  what  relationship  does  He  stand  to  us  here  ?  "  God 
with  us."  In  what  relation  does  He  appear  to  the  Church  above  ?  "  God  with 
them."  {J.  Dixon.)  The  worthiness  of  Christ  to  receive  man\  riches  : — I. 
Because  He  is  the  original  proprietor  of  it.  The  gold  that  any  man  holds  in 
his  hands  is  his  in  a  very  secondary  sense ;  his  property  a  few  years  ago  was  in 
the  possession  of  others,  and  a  few  years  hence  it  will  pass  from  him  into  other 
hands.  All  material  wealth  belongs  to  Christ.  II.  Because  He  has  enabled  you 
TO  procure  it.  Why  have  you  wealth  more  than  others  ?  Has  it  come  to  you 
through  heirdom,  legacy,  or  your  own  industry?  In  either  case  you  have  it 
through  Christ.  HI.  Because  He  gives  you  the  qualification  to  enjoy  it.  Who 
gave  you  the  unmiserly  spirit,  the  bodily  health,  the  mental  capacity  by  which  you 
can  enjoy  your  riches  ?  IV.  Because  He  will  make  the  best  use  of  it.  1.  The 
best  use  of  it  for  yourselves.  There  is  no  better  investment.  Your  contributions 
to  Him  serve  you  in  many  ways.  (1)  Serve  to  test  your  character.  (2)  Serve  to 
detach  you  from  materialism.  (3)  Serve  to  ennoble  your  character.  It  is  a  great 
thing  to  be  trusted,  to  be  thrown  upon  your  honour.  Christ  trusts  you.  2.  The 
best  use  of  it  for  the  world.  When  you  are  gone  Christ's  Church  wiU  be  here 
working  with  the  means  you  have  entrusted  to  it,  and  working  to  spread  truth, 
virtue,  and  happiness  through  the  world.  (Homilist.)  Praise  a  duty : — No 
other  duty  is  enjoined  so  often  in  the  Scriptures  as  praise.  The  Bible  is  full  of 
music.  The  woods  in  the  summer  days  are  not  so  full  of  bird-notes  as  this  sacred 
book  is  of  voices  of  song.  Christian  life  can  reaUse  the  Divine  thought  for  it  only 
by  being  songful.  The  old  fable  of  the  harp  of  Memnon,  that  it  began  to  breathe 
out  sweet  music  the  moment  the  morning  light  swept  its  chords,  has  its  true  fulfil- 
ment in  the  human  soul,  which,  the  instant  the  light  of  Divine  love  breaks  upon  it, 
gives  forth  notes  of  gladness  and  praise.     {J,  B.  Miller,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION.  335 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Vebs.  1-17.  The  Lamb  opened  one  of  the  seala.—The  development  of  good  and  evil 
in  human  history  : — I.  The  development  of  good  in  human  history.  1.  The  good  is 
embodied  in  a  personal  life.  "  He  that  sat,"  <fec.  "  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus 
Christ."  He  was  the  Right — incarnate,  living,  acting ;  and  this,  not  only  during 
His  corporeal  life  here,  but  in  all  His  disciples  through  all  times.  2.  The  good 
embodied  in  a  personal  life  is  aggressive  in  its  action.  "  He  went  forth,"  (fee. 
Wherever  the  sunbeams  break,  darkness  departs ;  so  with  the  right,  it  is  always 
conquering.  In  its  aggressiveness  it  moves — (1)  Righteously.  The  "  horse  "  is 
the  instrument  it  employs  to  bear  it  on  to  victory.  The  good  is  not  only  pure  in  its 
nature  and  aims,  but  pure  in  its  methods.  (2)  Triumphantly.  The  "  bow  "  carries 
the  arrow,  and  the  arrow  penetrates  the  foe.  (3)  Royally.  "  There  was  given 
unto  Him  a  crown."  Right  is  royal,  the  only  royal  thing  in  the  universe,  and  the 
more  perfectly  it  is  embodied  the  more  brilliant  the  diadem.  Hence  Christ  is 
crowned  with  glory  and  honour,  "  exalted  above  all  principalities  and  powers,"  <fec. 
II.  The  development  of  evil  in  human  history.  1.  War  (ver.  4).  The  spirit  of 
murder  burns  throughout  the  race.  The  "  red  horse  "  is  ever  on  the  gallop.  2. 
Indigence  (ver.  5).  Famine  generally  follows  the  sword.  3.  Mortality  (ver.  8). 
With  every  breath  we  draw  some  one  falls.  4.  Martyrdom  (vers.  9-11).  (1)  A 
martyr  is  one  who  dies  for  the  truth.  (2)  He  is  one  who  in  heaven  remembers  the 
injustice  of  His  persecutors.  (3)  He  is  one  who  in  the  heavenly  world  is  more 
than  compensated  for  all  the  wrongs  received  on  earth.  In  heaven  they  have — 
(a)  Purity.  (6)  Repose,  (c)  Social  hopes.  5.  Physical  convulsion  (vers.  12-17). 
(1)  Our  earth  is  constantly  subject  to  great  physical  convulsions.  (2)  These  are 
always  terribly  alarming  to  ungodly  men.  (3)  The  alarm  of  ungodly  men  is  > 
heightened  by  a  dread  of  God.  "  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  A  more  terrific  idea  I 
cannot  get.  It  is  an  ocean  of  oil  in  flames.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  A  white  horse. 
— The  going  forth  of  the  gospel : — 1.  That  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  cometh  not 
by  guess  amongst  a  people,  but  is  sent  and  ordered  as  other  dispensations  are,  and 
hath  a  particular  commission.  It  is  one  of  the  horses  He  sendeth  here.  So, 
Acts  xvi.,  the  Spirit  putteth  them  to  one  place,  and  suffereth  them  not  to  go  to 
another  place.  There  is  not  a  sermon  cometh  without  a  commission.  2.  That  the 
success  of  the  gospel  goeth  not  by  guess.  The  gospel  hath  its  end  as  well  as  its 
commission  (Isa.  Iv.  10;  2  Cor.  ii.  14).  3.  The  gospel  is  most  mighty  to  conquer 
when  Christ  armeth  it  with  a  commission  and  doth  concur  therewith  (2  Cor.  x.  4). 
4.  From  this  description  of  the  horse  and  his  rider  and  his  employment,  observe 
that  the  great  end  of  the  gospel,  where  it  cometh,  is  to  subdue  souls.  That  is  the 
end  of  a  ministry,  to  bring  souls  in  subjection  to  Christ  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  And  it  hath 
its  end  when  Christ's  arrows  are  made  powerful  to  pierce  hearts  (Eph.  iv.  8 ;  Psa. 
Ixviii.  18).  5.  The  gospel  conquereth  more  or  less  wherever  it  cometh.  When 
Christ  is  mounted  He  is  going  to  conquer,  if  it  were  but  to  take  one  fort  or  one  soul 
from  Satan.  6.  Taking  this  conquest  and  flourishing  estate  of  the  gospel  to  relate 
to  the  first  times  thereof  when  it  came  into  the  world.  Observe  that  most  fre- 
quently the  gospel  at  its  first  coming  amongst  a  people  prevaileth  most,  and  hath 
more  sensible  success  than  at  any  other  time.  So  was  it  when  it  came  first  to  the 
world,  its  victories  were  swift  and  speedy,  increasing  more  for  a  few  years  at  that 
time  than  afterwards  in  many  generations.  {James  Durham.)  Conquering*,  and 
to  conquer. — The  Redeemer's  conquests : — I.  The  adversaries  of  our  Redeemer. 
1.  The  powers  of  darkness.  2.  All  men  in  an  unrenewed  and  unconverted  state. 
3.  False  systems  of  religion,  which,  although  perhaps  assuming  the  name  of 
Christianity,  are  hostile  to  its  spirit  and  design.  U.  Tece  instruments  which  our 
Redeemer  employs.  1.  The  publication  of  His  Word.  2.  The  agency  of  His 
Spirit.  III.  The  victories  op  our  Redeemer.  1.  They  are  founded  upon  His 
right  to  universal  domain.  2.  They  are  continuous,  and  widely  extended.  3.  They 
are  essentially  connected  with  the  diffusion  of  pure  and  perfect  happiness.  In 
conclusion :  how  important  it  is — 1.  That  you  should  yourselves  surrender  your 
hearts  in  personal  subjection  to  the  Redeemer's  power.  2.  That  you  devote  your 
energies  to  the  further  extension  of  His  empire.  {J.  Parsons.)  The  future  tHtimph 
of  our  King : — I.  The  illustrious  personage  described.  1.  His  spotless  cha- 
racter. ♦•  A  white  horse."  2.  His  warfare.  "  A  bow."  3.  His  exaltation  to 
regal  dignity.  "  A  crown."  4.  His  gradual  conquest.  ♦'  Conquering  and  to 
conquer."     H.   Sentiments  and  reflections  sxhtable  to  the  subject.     1.  We 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

should  cultivate  and  cherish  the  most  exalted  estimate  of  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  The  imminent  peril  in  which  those  are  placed  who  continue  among  the 
adversaries  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Are  you  among  His  true  and  faithful  subjects  ?  4. 
Strive,  by  every  means  in  your  power,  to  advance  the  extent  and  glory  of  His 
dominion.  {J.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  Conqueror : — Behold  the  combat  beyond  all 
others  important,  the  combat  between  Christ  and  Satan  for  the  human  soul.  I. 
The  cause  of  strife — the  soul.  A  colony  of  heaven  had  been  taken  by  the  powers 
of  hell,  and  the  effort  to  restore  it  to  allegiance  was  the  main  cause  of  this  celestial 
war.  The  domination  of  Satan  over  the  human  soul  is  despotic,  degrading,  and 
destructive.  II.  The  battle.  The  Divine  Saviour  stronger  than  the  strong  man 
armed  as  our  champion.  The  first  grapple  seems  to  have  been  the  temptation  in 
the  wilderness,  the  next  in  the  performance  of  miracles,  the  next  the  death  grapple, 
the  last  the  rising  from  the  dead  and  ascension  into  heaven.  III.  The  victory. 
It  was  complete,  it  was  benevolent,  it  was  unchanging.  The  attack  which  the 
Saviour  made  upon  the  enemy  was  such  as  to  tear  away  the  very  source  and 
energies  of  his  power.  In  the  time  of  the  Lord's  victory  we  do  not  see  traces  of 
carnage,  nor  hear  orphans  waili;ng  the  dead  ;  but  a  voice  breathes  the  comfortable 
word,  "  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  My  holy  mountain."  The  triumphs 
of  the  Saviour  brighten  with  the  lapse  of  time.  Time  cannot  tarnish  their  lustre, 
nor  death  itself  destroy.     {W.  M.  Punshon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Another  horse  that  was  red ; ...  to  take  peace  from  the  earth. — The  cry 

of  the  world  in  selfishness : — The  red  colour  is  the  emblem  of  bloodshed,  the  destruction 
of  life.  It  recalls  the  vision  of  Isaiah  concerning  the  traveller  from  Edom,  "  with 
dyed  garments  of  Bozrah,"  or  that  later  vision  of  St.  John  concerning  the  King  of 
kings,  who  leads  the  armies  of  heaven,  His  "  vesture  dipped  in  blood."  "  There 
went  out  another  horse  that  was  red :  and  power  was  given  to  him  that  sat  thereon 
to  take  peace  from  the  earth,  and  that  they  should  kill  one  another."  It  is  every 
man  for  himself — the  spirit  of  selfishness.  Let  me  draw  for  you  a  picture  of 
yourself.  You  are  a  person  with  certain  wants,  natural  and  material — wants,  that 
is  to  say,  of  those  things  which  are  needful  for  the  support  and  well-being  of  your 
bodily  life.  You  are  a  person  with  certain  tastes,  natural  and  intellectual,  at  least 
as  necessary  to  the  prosperity  of  your  mind  as  food  is  to  the  prosperity  of  your 
body.  You  have  also  certain  desires  and  aspirations  which  we  may  call  natural 
and  spiritual.  Then,  your  life  is  surrounded  by  certain  circumstances,  which  you 
may  modify,  but  cannot  possibly  do  away  with.  Amongst  these  circumstances  are 
your  fellow  men  and  women.  And  these  have  wants  and  tastes  and  desires  of 
their  own  ;  the  wants  may  be  identical  with  yours,  in  which  case  your  neighbour's 
possession  of  the  things  wanted  may  well  interfere  with  your  own  possession  of 
them.  You  are  in  each  other's  way.  Or  your  tastes  and  desires  may  be  dissimilar, 
in  which  case  you  are  liable  to  be  irritated  and  outraged  by  contradiction.  In  any 
case  you  cannot  go  through  life  without  having  your  path  traversed  every  day  by 
others,  going  their  own  way,  regardless  of  you.  Let  us  go  further.  You  are 
supremely  important  to  yourself,  and  you  have  been  so  from  your  childhood.  See 
how  a  child  thinks  his  own  affairs  the  first,  and  at  all  moments  thrusts  upon  your 
notice  the  thing  which  happens  to  be  especially  interesting  to  himself.  And 
certainly  in  this  we,  grown  men  and  women,  cannot  say  that  we  have  "put  away 
childish  things."  But  this  self-importance  is  a  reasoning  spirit.  I  am  always 
present  to  myself,  you  say;  I  cannot  get  away  from  pain  and  discomfort  and 
disappointment  and  the  hundred  ills  that  my  flesh  is  heir  to.  I  move  through  life, 
the  centre  of  my  own  little  world ;  it  all  concerns  my  happiness  or  misery ;  how, 
then,  can  I  say  that  I  am  not  supremely  important  to  myself  ?  I  may  stop  at  the 
requirements  of  my  earthly  life,  or  I  may  go  further.  I  may  be  a  religious  sort  of 
person.  But  is  this  realisation  a  cure  for  my  selfishness  ?  Alas,  that  one  must 
answer,  No!  For  the  possible  selfishness  of  the  religious  person  is  quite  the 
strongest  and  most  terrible  form  that  selfishness  assumes.  Now,  it  is  my  own  soul, 
my  own  eternal  happiness,  my  own  personal  salvation.  Look  at  your  own  life,  at 
your  own  heart,  and  say.  Is  there  nothing  of  this  spirit  in  me  ?  For,  after  all,  this 
selfishness  seems  so  natural.  How  can  one  help  it,  in  the  lower  interests  of  the 
body — far,  far  less  in  the  higher  interests  of  the  soul  ?  How  can  one  help  it  ?  The 
one  thing  to  be  sure  of  in  this  world  of  crossing  interests  is  oneself.  Surely  St. 
John's  terrible  vision  is  overdrawn.  What  has  it  to  do  with  me,  that  blood-stained 
figure,  with  the  great  sword?  Surely  my  harmless,  natural,  inevitable  egotism 
does  not  look  like  that  in  heaven  ?    But  stay,  and  ask  yourself.  Why  not  ?    I  am 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION.  337 

not  aJone  in  the  world.  A  thousand  million  others  are  engaged  in  this  strange 
dance  of  life,  equally  with  me.  Each  one  may  be  supreme  unto  himself.  Each 
one  has  his  own  place ;  to  him  I  am  as  he  to  me.  And  if  this  be  so,  what  must 
result  from  it  but  one  vast  scene  of  conflict,  world-wide  and  age-long  ?  How  shalt 
not  peace  be  taken  from  the  earth  ?  How  shall  not  men  kill  one  another  ?  How 
shall  not  the  spirit  of  conflict,  the  dazzling  horseman,  with  the  bow  and  with  the 
crown,  go  forth  "  conquering  and  to  conquer  "?  It  is  the  spirit  of  Jesus  which  is 
wanted  here.  And  what  is  that  ?  Go  back  to  the  thought  of  the  great  renunciation 
of  the  Son  of  God.  Surely  it  is  the  everlasting  condemnation  of  selfishness.  Not 
the  terrible  vision  of  St,  John,  not  the  extremest  picture  of  horror  that  man's  mind 
can  conceive,  can  ever  delineate  too  fearfully  the  spirit  which  is  set  in  such 
antagonism  to  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.     {A.  H.   Simms,  M.A.)  The  spirit 

of  war : — This  vision  of  the  blood-red  horse  corrects  the  idea  which  we  might 
have  entertained  from  the  fact  that  the  Prince  of  Peace  had  begun  His  reign. 
We  should  have  supposed  that  the  progress  and  triumphs  of  the  gospel  would  at 
least  have  assured  to  the  earth  a  deliverance  from  the  miseries  of  war,  but  it  is  not 
so.  Since  the  time  of  the  first  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  present  moment, 
there  have  not  been  twenty  years  of  continued  peace  amongst  the  nations  and 
people  with  which,  as  we  suppose,  the  various  visions  in  this  Book  have  to  do. 
And  this  history  of  war  is  not  occupied  with  the  wars  of  Christians  against  heathen, 
but  with  the  wars  of  professing  Christians  against  one  another.  Before  the 
Beformation,  when  all  the  Christians  of  Europe  professed  to  belong  to  one  Church, 
there  was  a  constant  state  of  warfare  amongst  them.  Since  then  the  state  of  war 
has  been  quite  as  continuous — not  Protestants  with  Papists  only,  but  Protestants 
among  themselves.  Thus  in  this  country,  on  the  murder  of  Charles  I.,  an  ultra- 
Protestant  republic  was  established,  and  the  very  first  thing  it  did  was  to  go  to  war 
with  the  only  Protestant  republic  then  existing — the  Dutch.  In  our  own  time  also 
we  have  seen  the  most  powerful  republic  in  the  world,  a  republic  more  Protestant 
or  Evangelical  than  any  other,  engaged  in  a  long  and  sanguinary  civil  war.  So 
that  we  have  before  us  this  most  remarkable  fact,  that  for  1,800  years  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  and  the  Demon  of  War  have  ridden  side  by  side.  For  the  rider  on  the  red 
horse  does  not  himself  war  or  fight.  He  is  apparently  engaged  in  stirring  up  strife 
in  which  he  personally  takes  no  part.  He  is  no  human  tyrant  or  general,  but,  as  it 
were,  the  embodiment  of  the  Spirit  of  War,  who  has  power  given  to  him  to  take 
peace  from  the  earth,  and  that  they  should  kill  one  another.     {M.  F,  Sadler^  M.A.) 

Vers.  6, 6.  A  black  horse ;  .  .  .  a  pair  of  balances. — The  cry  of  the  world  in  want: 
— It  is  a  vision  of  scarcity,  of  insufficiency,  not  of  absolute  famine.  The  world 
does  not  seem  to  contain  enough  for  all,  and  there  happens  a  continual  struggle  for 
the  bare  necessaries  of  bodily  life.  Every  year  this  is  becoming  more  evident. 
Most  present-day  problems  have  their  roots  in  it,  and  these  problems  press  with 
such  terrible  force  upon  us  that,  I  suppose,  St.  John's  vision  can  never  have  seemed 
more  picturesquely  true  than  it  seems  to-day.  With  our  constantly  growing  popula- 
ion,  the  difficulty  increases  by  leaps  and  bounds.  The  effect  of  it  is  an  absorbing 
anxiety,  a  restless  elaboration  of  contrivance — How  can  these  present  difficulties  be 
overcome  ?  and  what  new  ones  will  start  into  sight  when  the  old  ones  have  dis- 
appeared ? — till  a  large  part  of  life  seems  taken  up  by  the  problem  of  how  to  live. 
Is  any  precept  of  Christ  harder  than  this,  "  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,"  &c. 
Perhaps  if  we  were  alone,  with  nothing  but  our  own  personal  salvation  to  think 
about,  it  would  be  easier.  But  you  are  not  alone.  Others  depend  on  you. 
Husband,  think  of  your  wife ;  think  of  the  children  whose  future  depends  so  much 
on  you.  And  if  we  go  down  in  social  life  to  the  lowest  depths  of  poverty,  the 
struggle  for  existence  becomes  piteous.  It  is  terrible  to  face  it,  but  it  is  well  to 
face  it  sometimes.  In  this  abyss,  insufficiency  has  become  destitution  ;  the  struggle 
has  lost  all  that  it  seemed  to  have  of  manliness  and  force ;  it  has  deformed'life  into 
a  chaos  of  brute  instincts ;  it  has  become  parent  of  crime,  disease,  and  death.  Such 
is  the  vision  of  human  want.  And  from  the  living  creatures  before  God's  throne 
the  appeal  is  made  to  Jesus  Christ,  "  Come !  "  What  is  it,  this  appeal  to  the 
"  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain  "  ?  It  is  for  manifestation  of  the  higher  life,  the  true 
life,  the  eternal  life  which  is  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  and  Jesus  Christ. 
Sometimes  the  least  spiritually  impressionable  person  is  forced  to  see  that  there  is 
indeed  a  higher  life.  The  pressure  of  earthly  things  relaxes  its  hold  upon  you  for 
a  moment ;  above  the  ceaseless  clamour  of  the  world's  voices  the  voice  of  Jesus 
makes  its  way  to  your  heart,  never  lessening  its  claim  upon  your  life,  never  taking 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

from  the  promise  its  consolation,  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  Me,  for 
I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  Yes,  there 
is  indeed  a  higher  life.  But  it  seems  so  hard  of  attainment  in  the  life  that  I  am 
living  now.  I  am  in  the  shadow  of  the  black  horseman ;  I  am  a  sharer  in  the 
great  struggle  for  existence.  The  thought  of  the  higher  life  is  wearisome ;  the  life 
of  prayer,  of  hourly  coromunion  with  a  Divine  Friend,  the  life  of  the  love  of  God, 
of  joy  in  the  knowledge  of  His  presence  and  love,  the  life  of  glad  obedience,  of 
patient  endurance.  It  all  seems  so  hopeless.  We  cannot  think  of  higher  things. 
Is  not  this  true  of  you?  The  struggle  for  existence  makes  us  slaves  in  spirit. 
Surely  the  appeal  from  the  living  creatures  to  Christ  is  wanted  for  us  to-day :  Come, 
with  Thy  knowledge  of  the  Father's  will.  Come,  with  Thy  strong  rejoicing  in  the 
Father's  love.  Come,  with  Thy  unfaltering  obedience.  Come,  with  Thy  victorious 
endurance.  Let  Thine  be  the  Spirit  which  takes  possession  of  a  world  in  want,  0 
Thou  Lamb  of  God  !  (A.  H.  Simms,  M.A.)  Scarcity  in  Gospel  times  : — This 
vision  has  been  explained  in  two  ways,  naturally  and  spiritually,  and  either  yields 
a  tolerably  good  signification.  Both  explanations  are  consonant  with  what  we 
gather  from  the  rest  of  the  seals,  which  is,  that  much  in  the  time  of  the  Messiah's 
triumphal  progress  is  not  such  as  we  should  have  expected.  1.  We  should  have 
expected  that  the  times  of  the  Gospel  would  have  been  times  of  almost  universal 
prosperity.  So  it  had  been  prophesied  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  30 ;  Hosea  ii.  22 ;  Joel  ii.  19). 
And  we  should  the  rather  have  expected  this,  because  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
does  much  to  discourage  many  vices  which  occasion  distress  and  ruin  in  this  world, 
such  as  intemperance,  drunkenness,  wastefulness,  gambling,  immorality,  &c.  But 
it  has  not  been  so.  From  the  first  preaching  of  the  gospel  there  has  been  just  the 
same  hard  struggle  for  sustenance  as  there  was  before.  Of  course  there  have  been 
countries  in  which  the  poor  have  not  suffered  from  comparative  scarcity,  as  in 
newly-planted  colonies,  but  the  tendency  of  things  has  been  always  to  bring  about, 
sooner  or  later,  the  universal  struggle  for  a  bare  subsistence.  2.  But  the  riding  of 
this  horse-rider  has  been  interpreted  spiritually  to  mean  this,  that  in  the  day  of 
Christ's  power  there  has  not  been,  nor  will  be,  that  plentiful  supply  of  the  whole- 
some and  nourishing  Word  of  God  which  we  should  have  expected.  The  more 
thoroughly  we  examine  the  history  of  religion,  I  do  not  mean  of  the  Church,  but 
of  individual  religion,  the  more  we  shall  discover  the  truth  of  this.  For  well  nigh 
1,500  years  the  Word  of  God  has  been  altogether  out  of  the  reach  of  the  vast 
majority  of  Christians.  Till  the  invention  of  printing  each  copy  had  to  be  written 
fully  and  fairly  out.  And  look  also  at  the  comparative  fewness  of  those  who  if  by 
chance  they 'possessed  a  copy  could  read  it.  But  we  must  not  for  a  moment  limit 
this  scarcity  of  the  wholesome  nourishing  Word  to  the  scarcity  of  Bibles.  The 
nourishment  of  the  vast  body  of  the  Church  is  through  teaching  and  preaching,  and 
there  may  be  a  vast  circulation  of  Bibles,  and  yet  these  Bibles  unread  and  their 
contents  undigested.  {M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  Price  lists  made  in  heaven  : — People 
do  not  generally  suppose  that  God  has  much  to  do  with  price-lists.  They  go  up  and 
down,  and  millions  higgle  over  them  every  day,  but  no  one  thinks  of  anything 
Divine  connected  with  them.  But  whether  men  realise  it  or  not,  price-lists  are 
made  in  heaven.  John  hears  the  rates  of  corn  and  bread  announced  by  the  same 
heavenly  powers  by  which  these  mystic  horses  are  called  into  action.  Whatever 
the  weather,  the  crops,  the  quantities  of  money  in  the  country,  the  extent  of 
speculation  in  the  market,  or  other  subordinate  causes  may  have  to  do  with  it,  the 
prime  and  aU-controlhng  cause  is  the  decree  of  the  throne.  It  is  God  from  whom 
we  have  our  daily  bread,  and  it  is  by  His  will  that  it  is  plentiful  and  cheap,  or 
scarce  and  costly.     {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7, 8.  A  pale  horse :  .  .  .  Death,  and  hell. — Death  on  the  pale  horse : — I.  This 

HORSE  AND  HIS  RIDER  SET  OUT  AFTER  US  AS  SOOlf  AS  WE  WERE  BORN  ;  THEY  ARE  PER- 
PETUALLY GAINING  GROUND  ON  US,  AND  THEREFORE  SOONER  OR  LATER  THEY  MUST  OVER- 
TAKE  US.      II.    It    is    AWFULLY   UNCERTAIN   WHEN    HE   WILL    OVERTAKE    US.       III.    It   iS 

equally  certain,  that  when  he  does  overtake  us  he  will  strike  his  blow,  and 
NOTHING  CAN  PREVENT  IT.  There  is  a  great  deal  said  at  this  day  about  the  march  of 
inteDect.  Yes ;  but  intellect  with  all  its  march,  never  out-marches  Death.  He 
marches  faster  than  intellect,  and  he  will  soon  overtake.  Nor  can  the  greatest 
peace,  holiness,  and  usefulness  prevent  it.     IV.  Who  then  are  the  characters 

THAT,  WHEN  DeATH   STRIKES   THE   BLOW,  WILL  DROP  INTO   HELL,  IN  THE   LITERAL   SENSE 

OF  THE  WORD  ?  1.  Those  who  have  never  broken  off  their  sins  by  true  repentance. 
2.  Those  who  have  not  a  personal  interest  in  Jesus  Christ  by  faith.    3.  Those  who 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION  339 

have  not  experienced  the  regenerating  influence  of  God ;  die  as  you  are,  without 
being  born  again,  and  you  will  be  lost.  4.  Those  who  did  once  run  well,  but  who 
have  now  ceased  to  run  well.  {W.  Dawson.)  The  life  of  faith  in  death: — But 
what  now  are  we  come  out  to  see?  I.  Behold  the  seal  opened.  Seals  we  use 
commonly  to  confirm  and  conceal,  to  make  things  sure,  and  to  keep  things  secret. 
And  thus  death,  as  all  God's  judgments,  is  said  to  be  sealed  (Job  iii.  3),  and 
that  with  a  firmer  seal  than  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.  In  a  word,  men  die  not  by 
chance,  course  of  nature,  influence  of  stars,  but  then  and  therefore,  because  it  is 
appointed.  That  Christian  who  believes  this,  though  he  may  desire  David's 
ariliimetic  to  number  his  days  aright,  yet  will  he  never  study  the  black  and  sense- 
less art  of  calculating  his  birth  and  death.  None  but  fools  are  curious  and 
inquisitive  to  know  that  which  is  under  God's  privy  signet.  We  are  all  as  soldiers 
sent  to  sea  with  commission  under  seal,  not  to  be  opened  till  we  come  to  such  and 
such  a  point.  Some  deaths,  indeed  (as  some  clocks),  give  warning  before  they 
strike,  with  symptoms  and  signs  infallible ;  but  generally  God  hath  seen  this  the 
best  for  us,  that  it  should  be  for  the  general  most  certain,  for  the  particular  most 
uncertain,  to  him  sealed,  to  us  concealed ;  of  which  he  would  have  us  make  these 
uses.  1.  First,  for  our  bodily  health,  not  to  be  too  careful,  nor  too  careless.  2. 
Secondly,  for  our  soul's  provision,  not  to  do  as  most  that  have  set  days  of  truce  and 
peace,  and  in  which  they  hang  up  their  armour  a-rusting,  and  their  beacons 
unwatched ;  but  as  people  that  Hve  in  perpetual  hazard  of  war  have  aU  things  in 
a  daily  readiness  for  service  upon  the  least  alarm.  3.  Whenever  this  horse  comes 
to  fetch  away  us,  or  any  of  ours,  children,  or  friends,  a  believer  stamps  not,  and 
rages  not,  murmurs  not,  repines  not,  as  the  wild  Irishmen  without  hope;  ex- 
postulates not  with  destiny,  but  with  Aaron,  lays  his  hand  on  his  heart  and  mouth 
for  his  sons'  sudden  death,  knowing  what  God  hath  sealed  shall  be  and  must  be. 
II.  The  seal  being  thus  opened,  "  come  and  see  "  the  creatube  that  issues  forth. 
Behold  an  horse,  a  fierce,  a  strong,  a  warlike,  a  speedy  creature,  so  described  by 
God  Himself  (Job  xxxix.).  Look,  as  the  sturdy  steed  dashes  out  the  little  whappet's 
brains,  so  easily  doth  Death  with  the  least  kick  and  spurn  of  his  heel  the  stoutest 
constitution,  triumphing  like  an  emperor  over  all  sorts  of  people,  treading  on  the 
necks  of  kings  and  princes,  as  Joshua  over  them  in  the  cave.  What,  then,  is  the 
course  the  Christian  takes  ?  He  neither  foohshly  thinks  to  resist  or  escape,  nor  yet 
cravenly  yields;  but  addresseth  himself  for  the  encounter.  III.  Behold  also 
the  colour  of  this  horse,  the  colour  of  the  withering  leaf,  pale  and  wan, 
symbolising  and  noting  the  effect  he  hath  first  upon  the  living,  whom  he  appals. 
See  we  not  often  prisoners  at  the  bar  wane  away,  and  dye  as  white  as  a  cloth  at  the 
sentence  of  death  pronounced  on  them.  A  second  effect  of  this  pale  horse  is  after 
death,  bereaving  the  bodies  of  all  blood  and  colour,  making  them  lifeless,  till  the 
fashion  of  them  be  utterly  altered,  the  beauty  consumed,  and  shape  turned  into 
rottenness.  Oh,  how  grievous  is  this  to  such  Absaloms,  Jezebels,  and  Kosamonds, 
who  have  set  much  by  their  painted  sheaths  and  pampered  carcases.  Dust  they 
were,  and  to  dust  they  must  return.  Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  vanity. 
IV.  Well,  then,  behold  also,  even  hell,  the  page  and  follower  of  Death,  attending 
him  wherever  he  goes  among  the  wicked  sort.  Whence  it  is  that  they  are  so  often 
coupled  in  this  book,  death  and  hell.  Look  as  the  foxes  wait  upon  lions,  carrion 
crows  upon  armies,  gaolers  upon  sergeants  for  a  prey,  so  diligently  does  the  devil 
on  Death  for  a  booty.  No  fowler  does  more  cunningly  stalk  behind  the  horse,  or 
creep  behind  hedges,  to  get  his  aim  at  the  shy  fowls.  No  sergeant  hides  his  mace, 
no  angler  his  hook  more  warily,  knowing  that  else  hell  should  never  swallow  so 
many.  In  this  consists  the  devil's  chiefest  policy  and  our  grossest  simplicity,  and 
even  this  is  the  cause  of  our  sottish  and  foolish  living  and  dying.  {T.  Adams.) 
Views  of  death : — I.  The  description  given  us  of  death.  1.  Death  is  under  a 
seal.  It  has  a  commission  to  execute,  and  cannot  go  beyond  it ;  limits  are  fixed  to 
it  by  the  purpose  and  power  of  God,  and  it  cannot  break  through  them.  Death  is 
inevitable,  because  the  Divine  decree  is  unalterable.  We  fear  death,  and  we  fear 
hell ;  but  he  is  more  to  be  feared  who  has  the  keys  of  both.  We  are  immortal  till 
our  time  is  come,  and  our  work  is  done.  The  king  of  terrors,  before  he  can  level 
his  dart  so  as  to  do  any  execution,  must  have  a  warrant  from  the  King  of  heaven. 
2.  It  is  represented  as  riding :  not  creeping,  walking,  or  running,  but  riding ;  which 
intimates  that  he  moves  swiftly,  and  often  comes  unexpectedly.  It  may  also  denote 
something  of  state  and  majesty :  for  it  may  be  said  of  him,  as  of  the  other  horse- 
man, that  he  goeth  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer.  No  wisdom  can  deliver, 
no  strength  can  rescue,  no  wealth  can  ransom  from  this  victorious  enemy.     3. 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Death  rides  on  a  pale  horse,  and  this  colour  may  denote  the  general  appearance  of 
mortality.  4.  It  is  represented  in  our  text  as  having  hell  following  after  it.  The 
page  is  more  dreadful  than  the  master ;  death  would  not  be  so  terrible,  were  it  not 
for  that  which  follows  it.  Death  to  a  wicked  man  is  but  the  beginning  of  sorrows : 
to  make  use  of  it,  then,  as  a  remedy  for  other  griefs,  is  but  like  leaping  out  of  the 
smoke  into  the  flame.  We  may  make  a  mock  of  sin ;  but  can  we  make  a  mock  of 
hell  ?  II.  Our  duty  with  kespect  to  death.  1.  That  we  render  the  thoughts  of 
death  familiar  to  ourselves.  2.  That  we  exercise  faith  in  the  providence  and  grace 
of  God,  both  with  respect  to  death  and  its  consequences.  3.  That  we  patiently  wait 
and   cheerfully  submit  to  it.      {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)         The  pale  horse: — I.  The 

FIGUBATIVE   DESCRIPTION   HERE   GIVEN   OF   DEATH.      II.    OUB    DUTY    RESPECTING   IT.       1. 

Come  and  see  the  antiquity  of  death.  2.  Come  and  see  the  extent  of  its  devas- 
tations. 3.  Come  and  see  this  spoiler  conquered.  4.  Come  and  see  how  death  may 
safely  be  encountered.     {J.  Burns,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.    I  saw  under  the  altar   the  souls. — Activity  of  the  souls  of  the 
departed : — I.  St.  John,  we  here  read,  was  allowed  to  behold  the  souls   of  the 
martyrs,  and  they  were  living  beneath  the  altar  of  the  Lord.    What,  then,  is  the 
altar  ?    In  answer  we  say,  that  it  is  the  place  of  a  glorious  and  a  happy  security. 
It  was  to  the  altar  that  the  murderer  ran  and  clasped  its  horns,  when  the  avenger 
of  blood  was  in  hot  pursuit ;  it  was  to  the  altar,  with  all  its  beautiful  accessories, 
the  laver,  the  sacrifice,  the  shew-bread,  and  the  golden  candlesticks,  that  every 
mourner  in  Israel  looked.    Weary-hearted  men,  oppressed  with  the  load  of  life,  or 
weighed  down  by  care,  or  burdened  by  sin,  looked  there  and  found  an  unfailing 
asylum.     The  martyrs  are  beneath  the  altar ;  they  are  under  the  security  of  its  holy 
seal ;  they  are  hanging  upon  its  strong  horns  ;  the  persecutor's  arm  cannot  reach 
them ;  the  avenger  of  blood  dare  not  come  near  them  ;  they  are  kept  by  the  power 
of  God.     The  dust  and  defilement  of  earth,  the  fierce  heat  of  flame,  the  lion's  tooth, 
and  the  serpent's  strangling  coil,  are  all  past ;  there  is  heaven's  own  calm ;  their 
souls  are  under  God's  care,  and  under  the  seat  and  the  seal  of  Christ.  II.  But  what 
is  their  state  of  feeling  ?    Are  they  in  a  state  of  passive  rest,  or  earnest  enjoyment, 
or  tranquil  or  animated  hope  ?     "  They  cried  with  a  loud  voice.  How  long,  O  Lord, 
holy  and  true,  dost  Thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the 
earth  ?  "    Is  it  possible  that  they  desire  vengeance  ?    Did  Jesus  pray  for  His 
murderers  ?    Did  Stephen,  the  martyr,  echo  and  repeat  the  prayer  ?  .  And  have  not 
the  rest  of  the  glorious  band  of  martyrs  learned  and  used  it?    It  cannot  be  that  the 
martyrs  should  be  under  the  altar  of  the  Lamb,  and  yet  have  hearts  for  vengeance. 
It  is  the  cry  of  their  blood  for  vengeance,  not  of  their  hearts.    Just  as  the  blood  of 
Abel  cried  from  the  ground  against  Cain,  so  does  this  blood  cry  for  vengeance  on 
that  Cain-like  satanic  power  which  made  them  martyrs.    But  it  may  be  objected 
that  this  destroys  the  very  notion  of  the  activity  of  their  spirits.     The  picture 
before  us  is  that  of  altar-covered  souls  asking  for  a  certain  consummation.    And  no 
doubt,  for  a  consummation  we  may  truly  believe  they  do  both  wait  and  long.     But 
that  consummation  will  be  with  such  vengeance  as  is  here  alluded  to.    And  this 
shows  us  that  while  the  sin  of  the  persecutors,  written  in  the  blood  of  the  martyrs, 
calls  for  vengeance,  the  cry  of  the  martyrs  may  well  be  only  for  the  day  of  Christ, 
and  for  the  redemption  of  the  bodies  of  the  sons  and  saints  of  God.    They  long  for 
the  day  of  Christ,  "  because  it  is  the  year  of  His  redeemed."    But  then  it  may  be 
also  said,  and  history  will  bear  us  out,  that  there  is  a  certain  cry  of  sympathy  in 
behalf  of  friends  and  fellow  Christians  trodden  down  and  persecuted,  which  issues 
by  a  kind  of  necessity  in  a  cry  of  vengeance  upon  their  persecutors.    In  the  perse- 
cution which  preceded  that  of  Diocletian,  we  read  how  St.  Cyprian  addressed  the 
African  proconsul  in  the  following  words :  "  Be  assured  that  whatever  we  suffer 
win  not  remain  unrevenged ;  and  the  greater  the  injury  of  the  persecution,  the 
heavier  and  more  just  will  be  the  vengeance."     Nay,  this  very  prophetic  antici- 
pation of  vengeance  upon  the  enemies  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  only  a  phase  of 
that  conformity  of  the  mind  of  the  saint  with  the  will  of  God,  which  will  form  the 
very  essence  and  perfection  of  the  heavenly  state.     If  God  in  His  justice  comes 
forth  for  vengeance  upon  sinners,  every  saint  must  give  the  hearty  "  amen  "  of  an 
entire  concurrence  to  the  infliction.     So  it  ought  to  be  on  earth,  and  so  it  must  be 
in  heaven.     III.  The  explanation  which  we  have  given  of  the  longing  of  the  blessed 
departed  for  the  year  of  Christ's  redeemed  shows  us,  at  any  rate,  the  activity  of  their 
souls.    It  teUs  us  that  being  dead,  they  do  not  sleep,  or  even  in  a  dream ;  nay,  that 
they  are  well  awake,  and  full  of  all  that  constitutes  the  life  and  activity  of  a  living 


.VI.]  REVELATION.  841 

soul.  They  think  of  the  past,  for  they  refer  to  it ;  they  refer  to  the  blood  that 
has  been  shed  ;  it  is  past,  but  they  have  not  forgotten  it.  They  know  something  of 
the  present ;  for  it  is  because  the  great  consummation  lingers,  because  they  know 
that  it  does  so,  because  the  world  still  drives  on  in  its  wickedness  ;  it  is  because  of 
all  this  present  continuing  iniquity  that  the  souls  of  the  martyrs  cry  out.  Again, 
they  look  to  the  future  ;  their  question  discovers  this ;  they  are  conscious  that  the 
day  of  vengeance  and  the  year  of  redemption  must  come,  and  they  earnestly 
inquire  when  it  shall  arrive.  IV.  Consider  further  the  answer  which  they  received. 
1.  First,  white  robes  were  given  them  ;  their  dishonoured  names  are  all  enshrined 
in  honour ;  they  were  dressed  as  in  preparation  for  the  marriage  feast  of  the  Lamb ; 
and  when  thus  arrayed,  words  of  peace  were  spoken  to  them.  They  are  told  to 
rest,  and  we  may  well  imagine  them  sitting  in  the  tranquillity  of  a  blissful  hope. 
They  were  to  wait  till  their  brethren's  arrival,  which  was  to  be  through  the  same 
stormy  straits  as  they  had  passed.  2.  But  then,  is  it  only  the  martyrs  that  are 
thus  reserved  ?  Is  it  only  they  that  wear  white,  and  in  that  white  array  await  the 
consummation  ?  Nay,  for  there  is  a  daily  dying,  which  in  many  instances  is  no 
less  precious  in  the  sight  of  God  than  the  glorious  setting  of  a  martyr's  sun.  Our 
beloved  friends  that  have  died  in  faith  are  thus  before  Him,  they  are  in  His  very 
presence,  they  have  the  sunbeams  of  His  radiant  countenance  shining  directly  upon 
their  beatified  spirits.  3.  And  they  too,  Uke  the  martyred  spirits,  are  looking 
forward.  They,  like  them,  remember  the  past,  and  muse  upon  the  present,  and 
look  to  the  future.  And  if  so,  they  remember  what  they  did  on  earth,  and  more 
than  this,  they  remember  those  whom  they  loved,  and  whom  they  have  left  here. 
Death  and  forgetfulness  do  not  affect  that  which  is  innocent  and  sinless.  4.  And 
this  thought  is  a  sweet  and  holy  solace.      {G.  E.  Kennaway,  M.A.)  The  waiting 

of  the  invisible  Church : — We  may  gather  with  all  certainty  from  this  wonderfid 
revelation  of  the  inner  mysteries  of  the  heavenly  court,  first,  that  God  has  a  fixed 
time  for  the  end  of  the  world.  It  is  also  here  revealed  to  us  that  God  has  fixed 
that  time  according  to  the  measures  of  the  work  which  He  has  to  finish ;  even  as 
Christ  had  a  work  to  finish  on  earth ;  so  that  we  read,  again  and  again,  that  His 
♦'  hour  was  not  yet  come."  In  like  manner  now  in  heaven.  He  has  a  definite  fore- 
seen scheme  for  the  administration  of  His  mediatorial  kingdom  ;  and  according  tc 
the  accomplishing  of  this  work  wiU  be  the  time  of  His  coming.  1.  He  has 
shadowed  out  to  us  the  nature  of  the  work  that  He  has  to  do  before  the  end  comes  ; 
that  is,  to  make  up  a  certain  number  whom  God  has  foreseen  and  predestinated  tc 
life  eternal  (Mai.  iii.  17 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  31 ;  Heb.  xi.  13,  40).  Whether  this  secret 
number  be  measured  by  the  fall  of  angels,  as  some  of  old  were  wont  to  believe ; 
whether  the  companies  of  angelic  ministers  shall  be  filled  up  by  the  redeemed  ol 
mankind,  we  know  not,  but  we  know  certainly  that,  until  the  foreseen  number  is 
completed,  the  course  of  this  turbulent  world  shall  still  run  on.  2.  Again,  in  this 
gathering  out  of  the  mystical  body  of  His  Son,  God  is  carrying  on  the  probation  oi 
mankind.  In  the  inscrutable  secrets  of  His  providential  government.  He  is  so 
ordering  the  strife  of  the  seed  of  the  woman  with  the  seed  of  the  serpent,  of  the 
Church  with  the  world,  as  to  fulfil  the  manifold  purposes  of  love  and  of  long- 
suffering.  (1)  And,  first,  we  see  that  this  long-permitted  strife  is  ordained  for  the 
perfecting  of  His  saints.  By  it  our  patience,  meekness,  faith,  perseverance,  boldness 
and  loyalty  to  Christ  are  ever  tried;  and  by  trial  made  perfect.  (2)  And  this 
mysterious  work,  as  it  has  an  aspect  of  love  towards  the  saints,  so  it  has  an  aspect 
of  long-suffering  towards  sinners.  It  is  thus  that  God  gives  them  a  full  season  for 
repentance.  He  gives  all  things  for  our  salvation — warnings,  blessings,  chastise- 
ments, sorrows,  sicknesses,  words  of  fire,  and  sacraments  of  love ;  He  stays  His 
hand,  and  leaves  the  sinner  without  excuse,  that  at  the  winding  up  of  this  weary 
life,  "  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  become  guilty  before  Grod." 
3.  And  now,  from  all  this,  we  see  what  ought  to  be  the  master-aim  of  our  lives,  that 
is,  to  make  sure  of  our  fellowship  in  that  mystical  number.  {Archdeacon  Manning.) 
The  cry  of  the  world  in  oppression : — The  souls  under  the  altar  represent  the  whole 
company  of  the  oppressed.  The  former  troubles  were  general ;  all  the  world  suffers, 
whether  it  knows  it  or  not,  from  conflict  and  selfishness  and  want  and  mortality ; 
and  its  suffering  is  expressed  before  the  throne  by  the  representatives  of  all  the 
animate  creation.  Now  it  is  the  voice  of  one  part  which  is  heard,  the  voice  of  the 
oppressed.  It  is  not  the  whole  of  human  life  which  is  involved,  as  in  the  opening 
of  the  first  four  seals.  "  The  altar  "  is  an  altar  of  sacrifice,  on  which  victims  are 
offered.  The  appeal  of  the  souls  is  not  an  articulate  voice  from  blessed  spirits  in 
Paradise.    It  is  just  Uke  that  tremendous  phrase  in  Genesis,  *'  The  voice  of  thy 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

brother's  blood  crieth  unto  Me  from  the  ground."  It  is  certainly  not  a  vision  of  the 
blessed  saints  cherishing  a  spirit  of  common  revenge,  but  a  cry  to  Christ,  as  in 
former  cases,  from  the  personified  life  of  sufferers  on  account  of  right.  It  is  a  cry, 
in  oppression,  of  the  Christian  world  concerning  the  unchristian,  of  the  believing 
world  concerning  the  unbelieving.  Christ  proclaimed  it  years  before :  "  If  they 
have  persecuted  Me,  they  will  also  persecute  you,"  And  the  unbelieving  world's 
weapons  are  very  various.  Because  we  have  passed  the  times  of  persecution  by  the 
sword,  at  least  in  the  civilised  world,  we  cannot  say  that  the  force  of  this  vision  of 
St.  John  is  spent.  The  world  claims  education.  We  need  not  put  down  the  Faith 
by  common  violence,  if  we  can  destroy  it  at  its  foundation  in  the  education  of 
children.  Are  we  awakened  rightly  yet  to  the  reality  of  this  oppression  ?  These 
are  the  two  chief  ways  in  which,  at  the  moment,  the  principle  of  St.  John's  vision 
is  being  worked  out  in  Christendom.  But  there  are  many  individual  lives  that  can 
enter  in  a  wonderful  way  into  the  meaning  of  it.  "A  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of 
his  own  household."  Many  a  martyr-spirit  is  suffering  to-day,  so  that  none  but 
God  and  the  holy  angels  mark  the  suffering.  The  souls'  cry  for  vengeance  to  the 
Lamb  is  of  the  same  order  as  Christ's  vengeance  on  St.  Paul :  that  the  spirit  of  the 
Lamb  of  God  should  take  possession  of  the  world,  that  the  thoughts  and  desires  of 
it  may  be  brought,  as  St.  Paul  was,  "  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ." 
Avenge  our  blood  with  this  glorious  vengeance,  0  Thou  Master,  upon  all  them  that 
dwell  on  the  earth !  There  is,  in  this  case,  an  immediate  answer.  "  And  white 
robes  were  given,"  &c.     (A.  H.   Simms,  M.A.)  Departed  martyrs  : — I.  They 

live  in  sacred  secubitt.  "  I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them."  The  "  souls," 
not  the  bodies  ;  the  bodies  had  been  destroyed,  their  ashes  were  left  behind.  Souls 
can  exist  apart  from  the  body — a  wonderful  fact  this.  11.  They  live  in  earnest 
CONSCIOUSNESS.  They  remember  the  earth,  remember  the  cruelties  they  received  on 
the  earth,  and  long,  not  maliciously,  but  benevolently,  for  justice  being  done  to 
their  persecutors.  No  doubt  their  desire  was  that  God  would  strike  such  a  moral 
conviction  into  their  hearts  on  account  of  their  wickedness  that  would  lead  them  to 
repentance.  Souls  in  heaven  do  not  forget  the  past.  III.  They  live  in  holt 
GRANDEUR.  "  White  robes  were  given  to  them."  Or,  more  properly,  a  white  robe, 
emblem  of  purity  and  conquest.      {Homilist.)  How  long,  O  Lord? — Calvin 

had  this  speech  always  in  his  mouth,  breathing  out  his  holy  desires  in  the  behalf 
of  the  afflicted  Churches,  with  whose  sufferings  he  was  more  affected  than  with 
anything  that  befell  himself.      (eT".    Trapp.)  The  life  of  faith  in  death  : — I. 

John,  being  in  the  spirit,  could  see  spirits.  Men,  indeed,  clad  in  flesh,  can 
hardly  imagine  how  a  soul  can  have  existence  out  of  the  flesh.  Eagles  can  see 
that  which  owls  cannot ;  so  is  that  visible  and  credible  to  a  spiritual  man  which 
to  a  natural  is  invisible,  incredible.  And  yet  even  nature's  dim  eyes  have  been 
clear  enough  to  see  this  truth.  The  soul's  eternity  is  an  inbred  instinct  in  the  souls 
of  men.  II.  Now  if  this  much  revived  John  to  see  the  soul's  continuance  after 
death,  how  much  more  to  see  their  safety  and  rest  under  the  altar ;  that  is,  under 
Christ's  protection  and  custody.  The  phrase  alluding  to  the  altar  in  the  tabernacle, 
which  gave  the  offerings  grace  and  acceptation ;  and  partly  to  the  safety  of  such  as 
fled  from  the  avenger  to  the  altar.  III.  If  John  had  seen  souls  at  rest,  though 
in  poor  and  mean  condition,  yet  were  a  corner  of  a  house  with  peace  to  be  preferred 
to  a  wide  palace  with  disquiet.  But  behold,  he  sees  not  naked,  beggarly,  ragged 
souls,  but  adorned  with  white  robes ;  that  is,  endowed  now,  and  glorified  with 
perfect  righteousness,  purity,  clarity,  dignity,  and  festivity,  of  all  which  white  apparel 
hath  ever  been  an  emblem  and  symbol  in  Divine  and  human  heraldry,  a  clothing 
of  princes  in  their  great  solemnities  of  coronation,  triumphs  and  ovations. 
The  lilies,  and  Solomon,  in  all  their  royalties,  not  like  unto  the  meanest  of  them. 
IV.  Were  heaven  nothing  else  but  a  haven  of  rest,  we  know  how  welcome  the 
one  is  to  a  seasick  weather-beaten  traveller,  and  may  by  that  guess  how  desirable 
the  other  should  be  to  a  soul  that  long  hath  been  tossed  in  the  waves  of  this  world, 
sick  of  its  own  sinful  imaginations,  and  tired  with  external  temptations.  {T.  Adayns.) 
How  long,  0  Lord,  .  .  .  dost  Thou  not  judge  ? — How  long  ? — I.  The  words  as  from 
MAN  TO  GoD.  Looking  up  to  God,  man  breathes  the  deep-drawn  sigh,  *'  How  long  ?  " 
(Psa.  vi.  3,  xiii.  1,  xxxv.  17,  Ixxiv.  10,  Ixxix.  5,  Ixxxix.  46,  xc.  13,xciv.  4  ;  Hab.  i.  2  ; 
Eev.  vi.  10).  These  are  the  chief  passages  in  which  the  expression  occurs.  Instead 
of  dwelling  on  each  in  succession,  let  me  Cus  sum  up  and  classify  then-  different 
meanings.  It  is  the  language — 1.  Of  complaint.  The  righteous  man  feels  the 
burden  and  the  sorrow  and  the  evil  that  have  so  long  prevailed  in  this  present  evil 
world,  and  he  cries,  '•  How  long  ?  "    Have  these  not  lasted  long  enough  ?    Would 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION.  343 

that  they  were  done !  In  this  complaint  there  is  weariness,  and  sometimes  there  is 
sadness — ahnost  despair — when  unbelief  gets  the  upper  hand.  Creation  groans. 
Iniquity  overflows.  Death  reigns.  The  wicked  triumph.  2.  Submission.  While 
impatience  sometimes  rises,  yet  the  cry  does  not  mean  this.  It  is  really  a  cry  of 
submission  to  a  wise  and  sovereign  God.  It  is  the  cry  of  one  putting  all  events,  as 
well  as  all  times  and  seasons,  into  His  hands.  3.  Inquiry.  In  aU  the  passages 
there  is  an  implied  question.  It  is  not  merely,  Oh  that  the  time  would  come !  but, 
When  shall  it  come?  4.  Expectation.  It  is  the  voice  of  faith,  and  hope,  and 
longing  desire.  The  present  is  dark,  the  future  is  bright ;  God's  Word  is  sure  con- 
cerning the  coming  glory ;  and  so  we,  looking  for  and  hasting  to  that  glory,  and 
depressed  with  the  evil  here,  cry  out  day  by  day,  "  How  long  ?  "  U.  The  words  as 
FROM  God  to  man.  I  note  the  following  instances  (Exod.  x.  3,  xvi.  28 ;  Josh,  xviii.  3  ; 
1  Kings  xviii.  21 ;  Psa.  Ixxxii.  2;  Prov.  i.  22,  vi.  9;  Jer.  iv.  14).  Taking  up  these 
words  of  God  as  spoken  to  different  classes,  we  would  dwell  on  the  following  points  : 
1.  Long-suffering.  Jeremiah's  words  to  Jerusalem  are  the  words  of  a  long- 
suffering  God,  "not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to 
repentance."  2.  Expostulation.  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?  How 
long  shall  ye  be  of  deciding?  How  long  of  trusting  Me?  3.  Entreaty.  How 
long,  ye  simple  ones,  will  ye  love  simpUcity  ?  God  beseeches  man ;  He  entreats 
him  to  give  up  his  sin,  to  come  and  be  saved.  How  long  will  ye  refuse  My  love  ? 
4.  Earnestness.  God's  words  are  all  sincere.  He  means  what  He  says,  and  says 
what  He  means.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me !  "  "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy 
children !  "  "0  that  thou  hadst  known  !  "  5.  Sorrow.  Every  moment's  continu- 
ance in  unbelief  is  vexing  and  grieving  the  Spirit.  6.  Upbraiding.  There  is  the  land, 
the  kingdom,  why  do  ye  not  go  in  ?  The  door  is  open ;  the  way  is  clear.  7.  Warning. 
How  long  will  ye  persist  in  your  unrighteousness  and  unbelief  ?  The  day  of  grace 
is  ending.  The  day  of  wrath  is  coming.  Be  warned.  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  cry  for  vengeance  from  souls  under  the  altar : — First,  the 
righteous  are  taken  away,  and  no  man  regardeth  it,  as  the  prophet  says  (Isa.  Ivii.  1). 
Their  days  are  cut  short  by  violence  and  cruelty,  and  yet  their  persecutors  live  and 
are  mighty.  What  did  the  heathen  say  to  this,  who  had  good  report  for  their 
moral  conversation  ?  Is  there  no  justice  in  heaven  ?  Yes,  here  is  the  best  assurance 
that  can  be  demanded,  a  scene,  as  it  were,  acted  in  heaven,  wherein  is  represented 
that  the  wrongs  of  the  saints  are  fresh  in  memory,  and  shall  never  be  forgotten. 
The  poor  oppressed  is  more  likely  to  obtain  redress  against  his  enemy  when  he  is 
dead  than  when  he  was  alive.  His  soul  is  then  most  precious  to  the  Lord,  his 
prayer  most  fragrant,  he  is  so  near  to  Christ  that  he  is  next  to  the  altar ;  his  under- 
standing is  so  enhghtened  that  he  knows  what  to  ask  and  never  fail.  Here  you 
have  a  petition,  then,  put  up  to  a  mighty  King  by  some  persons  that  had  sustained 
injury.  First,  Consider  to  whom  the  supplication  is  preferred,  to  one  from  whom 
there  lies  no  appeal,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  And  the  words  are  so 
laid  together  that  the  souls  under  the  altar  do  beseech  Him  by  His  three  mighty 
attributes.  He  is  the  Lord,  therefore  they  implore  Him  by  that  power  which  can 
do  all  things.  He  is  holy,  therefore  they  solicit  Him  by  that  goodness  which 
detests  oppressions.  He  is  truth,  therefore  they  urge  Him  by  those  promises  made, 
which  He  cannot  but  accomplish.  It  is  the  Lord,  holy  and  true,  into  His  hands 
they  commend  their  petition.  He  that  makes  his  address  to  God,  let  him  begin 
with  His  praise,  let  him  commemorate  His  excellent  greatness,  let  him  delight  to 
rehearse  His  titles  of  Majesty.  No  man  can  speak  of  the  King  of  heaven  according 
to  His  due  honour,  but  it  will  procreate  devotion  and  reverence ;  no  man  doth 
advance  the  name  of  God  in  the  preface  of  his  prayer,  but  it  is  a  tacit  confession 
that  he  prefers  the  glory  of  his  Maker  before  his  own  necessity.  I  come  to  the 
PRATER  iTSELT :  the  souls  Under  the  altar  cry  out  unto  the  Lord  to  judge  and  avenge 
their  blood.  This  is  a  voice  which  came  not  from  earth  but  from  heaven,  and 
therefore  we  must  maintain  it.  1.  First  of  all,  vengeance  being  not  usurped  by  the 
hand  of  a  private  man,  but  prosecuted  under  the  shelter  of  lawful  authority,  like 
usque  quo  Domine.  In  this  place  it  is  not  unlawful.  It  is  a  stirring  up  of  that  part 
of  justice  which  distributes  punishments  to  them  that  deserve  them,  and  to  demand 
it  in  a  regular  way  is  in  no  wise  rugged  to  the  law  of  charity.  2.  But  it  is  a  second 
conclusion  that  the  spirits  of  good  men  departed  may  cry  out  to  have  judgment 
pass  upon  tyrants  for  the  effusion  of  their  blood,  because  they  can  ask  nothing 
inordinately ;  they  that  are  confirmed  in  grace  and  cannot  sin,  they  cannot  make  a 
petition  that  is  over-balanced  with  the  least  grain  of  rancour  or  partiaUty,  3.  The 
third  conclusion  is  so  cautious  to  give  no  scandal,  so  circumspect  noi  to  open  the 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

least  window  to  malice  and  hatred,  that  it  resents  the  word  revenge  in  this  place  to 
be  of  improper  signification  ;  and  that  which  the  souls  departed  sue  for  is  not 
revenge,  but  deliverance.     Deliverance?    Of  what?    Not  of  themselves,  who  are 
out  of  harm's  way,  but  of  their  brethren  tormented  here  beneath.    As  who  should 
say,  How  long,  0  Lord,  wilt  Thou  not  deliver  the  blood  of  our  brethren,  the  poor 
members  of  the  militant  Church,'~f rom  them  that  rage  upon  the  earth  ?     So  I  leave 
this  point  with  a  probable  assent,  but  no  more,  that  the  saints  desire  not  the 
vengeance  of  the  ungodly,  but  the  deliverance  of  the  righteous.    The  next  point  is 
almost  of  the  same  piece,  and  very  conjunct  with  the  petition  itself,  it  is  the 
MANNER  OF  PBEFERRiNG  IT  which,  to  the  greater  terror  of  them  that  live  by  wrong 
hostility,  is  done  with  all  vehemency  and  importunity,  with  a  loud  voice,  and  a 
solicitous  iteration.     The  heathen  poets  fancied  that  the  souls  in  the  Elysian  fields 
did  not  utter  their  mind  with  audible  and  vocal  sounds,  but  with  a  low  whispering, 
as  if  reeds  were  shaken  with  the  wind.     Sometimes  they  would  strive  to  speak  out, 
but  all  in  vain.     This  is  fiction,  and  not  philosophy  ;  for  separated  souls  speak  not 
with  corporeal  organs,  but  with  their  wills  and  affections.    Their  words  which  they 
utter  are  their  desires,  which  they  send  forth  ;  and  therefore  David  says,  "  Thine  ear 
hati.  beard  the  desire  of  their  heart."     Oppression  and  tyrannising  over  the  poor  and 
helpless  make  the  loudest  clamours  of  any  sins  in  the  ears  of  God.     Not  the  martyrs 
themselves,  but  the  wrongs  which  they  endured  exclaim  against  their  enemies.     {Bp. 
Hackett.)         The  recompense  of  martyrdom  : — I.  The  martyr-cry.     It  is  the  widow's 
cry,  "Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary."     "How  long,  0  Lord  (or,  0  Master),  holy 
and  true,  dost  Thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the 
earth  !  "     This  has  been  that  long  and  bitter  cry  of  the  ages.    It  may  seem  "  narrow," 
or  worse  than  narrow — it  may  be  called   bigotry,  or   worse   than    bigotry — to 
sympathise  with  such  sentiments ;  but  these  words  stand.    Let   modern    senti- 
mentalists tell  us  what  they  mean,  or  else  boldly  proclaim  them  false  and  cruel. 
II.  The  martyr-honour.     "White  robes  were  given  them."    What  a  contrast  to 
the  poverty  of  their  raiment  here,  as  they  came  out  of  prison ;  to  the  blood-stains 
and  filth  upon  their  earthly  apparel !    III.  The  martyr-rest.    They  get  immediate 
rest  as  well  as  honour.     "  To  you  who  are  troubled,"  the  apostle  says,  "  God  wiU 
recompense  rest  with  us  "  (2  Thess.  i.  7).     The  fulness  of  the  rest — the  Sabbatism 
(Heb.  iv.  9) — is  in  reserve  for  the  Lord's  revelation  from  heaven ;  but  rest,  mean- 
while, is  theirs ;  rest,  how  sweet  after  the  torture  and  toil  of  earth  !    It  may  be 
that  there  is  peculiar  rest  for  the  martyr-band  ;  and  yet  there  is  rest  for  all  who 
are  the  Lord's,  even  though  they  may  not  have  passed  to  it  through  the  flames. 
IV.  The  martyr-hope.    It  is  not  expressly  mentioned  here.    It  is  something  which 
shall  be  given  when  the  whole  band  is  gathered  ;  the  whole  martyr-band  from  the 
beginning.     The  seven  epistles  reveal  ihat  hope  ;  and  the  three  closing  chapters  of 
this  book  unfold  it  more  fully.    It  is  the  hope  of  the  first  resurrection  ;  of  reigning 
with  Christ ;  of  entry  into  the  celestial  city  ;  of  the  crown  of  life ;  of  the  inheritance 
of  all  things.     {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)        The  cry  for  vengeance  : — It  is  their  blood  that 
cries ;  it  is  the  wrong  done  to  them  that  demands  reparation.  In  so  far  as  they  may 
be  supposed  to  cry,  they  have  in  view,  not  their  enemies  as  persons,  but  the 
evil  that  is  in  them,  and  that  manifests  itself  through  them.    At  first  it  may 
seem  difficult  to  draw  the  distinction;  but  if  we  pause  over  the  matter  for  a 
little,  the  difficulty  will  disappear.    Never  do  we  pity  the  sinner  more,  or  feel  for 
him  with  a  keener  sympathy,  than  when  we  are  most  indignant  at  sin  and  most 
earnest  in  prayer  and  effort  for  its  destruction.    The  more  anxious  we  are  for  the 
latter,  the  more  must  we  compassionate  the  man  who  is  enveloped  in  sin's  fatal 
toils.     When  we  long,  therefore,  for  the  hour  at  which  sin  shall  be  overtaken  by  the 
just  judgment  of  God,  we  long  only  for  the  establishment  of  that  righteous  and 
holy  kingdom  which  is  inseparably  bound  up  with  the   glory  of   God  and  the 
happiness  of  the  world.     {W.  Milligan,  D.D.)        White  robes  were  g^ven  unto 
every  one    of  them. — White  robes : — I.  White  robes  remind  us    of    innocence. 
It  is  a  grand  thing  to  be  innocent;  it  is  more  glorious  to  be  virtuous.    Each 
part  of  yonder  powerful  locomotive  and  of  that  stupendous  tubular  bridge  has 
been  tried  by  great  pressure,  and  stood  the  test.     So  a  man  who  has  been  tried 
by  the  pressure  of  temptation,  and  has  stood  the  test,  is  virtuous.     Never  blame 
any  human  bridge  or  broken  human  engine  unless  you  have  been  tested  with  a 
similar  pressure.    But  what  a  blessing  to  know  that  though  a  man  has  fallen, 
God  does  not  lay  him  aside  as  useless  !     The  glory  of  the  gospel  is  that  it  offers 
the  white  robes  of   innocence  to  guilty  men  and  women.    The  sinner  is   not 
only  forgiven,  but  transformed.    His  second  nature  is  of  a  higher  kind  than  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION.  345 

first,  n.  White  robes  also  remind  us  of  success.  It  is  only  the  few  who  seem  to 
succeed  in  this  world.  Carlyle  speaks  of  men  as  being  "  mostly  fools,"  while 
another  writer  describes  the  world  as  being  "  strewn  with  human  wrecks."  As  a 
rule,  a  successful  man  possesses  genius  and  enthusiasm.  How  seldom  one  sees  a 
perfect  man  or  a  perfect  work  I  How  grand  to  be  successful  as  a  man,  a  father, 
a  brother,  a  friend !  Alas  1  how  few  are  really  successful !  You  set  forth  to  be  a 
pure  and  honourable  man ;  as  such,  have  you  been  a  success  ?  Are  you  a  failure  ? 
Alas !  it  is  true  ;  the  world  is  strewn  with  the  wrecks  of  human  resolves  and  aims. 
But  the  white  robe  of  success  is  placed  once  more  within  your  reach.  The  Lord, 
will  work  in  you  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure,  and  you  shall  be  successful 
as  a  Christian.    III.  White  robes  also  remind  us  of  beauty.     {W.  Birch.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us. — The  last  great  prayer  meeting : — ^It  i» 
generally  thought  that  none  but  the  penitent  really  pray.  And  yet  the  day  is 
coming  when  even  impenitent  people  will  throng  together  and  hold  a  prayer  meet- 
ing, and  perhaps  the  most  intensely  earnest  one  ever  upon  record.  Notice  the  time. 
It  is  future.  It  will  be  after  the  day  of  grace  has  passed,  after  the  privilege  for 
Christian  prayer  has  ceased,  and  after  human  probation  has  been  completed.  Yes, 
when  the  righteous  have  ceased  to  pray,  and  are  changing  prayers  on  earth  to 
praises  in  heaven,  the  impenitent  will  begin  to  pray  as  if  they  thought  of  it  for  the 
first  time  in  their  lives.  It  will  be  when  Divine  judgments  are  falling  upon  the 
earth.  Where?  In  their  homes?  No,  those  prayerless  houses  will  be  shaking 
into  ruins  by  an  earthquake.  In  the  churches?  The  day  for  churches  will  be 
gone.  Why  did  they  not  hasten  to  them  in  the  time  of  mercy  ?  They  will  meet 
in  the  dens  and  caves,  and  among  the  rocks  of  the  mountains.  Who  will  be  there? 
In  ages  when  God's  children  were  hunted  down  by  foes,  chiefly  the  lowly,  the  poor, 
met  in  such  difl&cult  retreats,  but  to  this  last  prayer  meeting  kings  will  run,  noble- 
men will  hasten,  courtiers  and  statesmen  will  speed,  rich  men  and  great  captains 
will  rush,  and  all  who  thought  they  could  trust  in  the  permanence  of  earthly  things. 
No  real  Christians  will  be  there.  Mere  professors  and  pretenders,  deceived  in  heart 
or  deceiving  the  very  elect,  and  prayerless  in  their  lives,  may  be  expected ;  and 
when  there  they  will  contribute  their  part  for  the  first  time  to  the  interest  of  a  meet- 
ing, for  they  will  pray  voluntarily  and  with  an  earnestness  they  never  knew  before. 
What  are  to  be  the  exercises,  the  services  ?  No  reading  of  the  Word  of  God.  None 
in  that  assembly  will  wish  to  hear  it  read  or  explained.  They  disowned  it  once, 
they  dislike  it  still,  for  it  must  expose  their  sins  and  neglects.  No  preaching, 
because  the  day  for  that  has  passed.  No  psalms  nor  spiritual  songs.  To  what  wUl 
they  pray?  Not  to  God.  At  sea,  when  the  tempest  is  raging,  and  all  human 
control  of  the  ship  is  lost,  when  the  masts  are  torn  away  and  the  next  wave  that 
sweeps  the  deck  may  bury  the  company  in  the  deep,  the  passengers  and  crew  lift 
their  entreaties,  not  to  the  storm,  not  to  the  waves,  but  to  God,  their  only  resort  and 
refuge.  But  the  prayer  at  this  last  meeting  is  not  to  God,  nor  is  it  to  men.  In 
their  fears  they  call  upon  the  mountains.  Unwilling  to  call  upon  God  in  the  day  of 
prosperity,  and  disliking  to  have  friends  pray  for  them,  their  aversion  clings  to  them 
as  a  fixed  habit,  and  they  are  still  determined  not  to  cry  unto  the  Lord.  Nothing 
could  once  persuade  them  to  do  it,  and  now  nothing  can  force  them,  for  the  human 
will  is  not  converted  by  force.  Rather  than  submit  to  God's  way,  they  call  upon 
everything  else,  idolising  the  deaf  rocks  and  the  dead  mountains.  These  are  their 
gods.  Can  anything  else  so  portray  impenitence  and  stubbornness  of  will  ?  And 
why  such  a  prayer  for  destruction  ?  There  are  three  reasons  here  given.  I.  Theib 
DREAD  OF  SEEING  THE  FACE  OF  GoD.  Oucc  that  face  was  radiant  with  mercy.  They 
might  have  been  forgiven,  but  they  would  not  seek  His  pardon.  Oh,  the  lost  oppor- 
tunities, the  rejected  mercies !  All  gone  for  ever.  They  cannot  bear  the  sight  of 
Him  whose  offers  of  grace  they  so  wilfully  refused,  and  they  ask  the  rocks  to  confer 
on  them  a  merciless  burial.  II.  A  fear  op  the  justice  of  Christ.  Once  He  was 
the  Lamb  of  sacrifice,  the  atoning  Redeemer,  the  entreating  Saviour,  ready  to  save 
all  that  would  call  upon  Him  for  salvation.  But  they  would  not  call.  Their  day 
of  redemption  is  past,  and  Christ  is  coming  as  their  Judge.  They  see  punishment 
awaiting  them,  and  perdition  before  them  as  the  just  desert  of  their  treatment  of 
Christ,  in.  The  knowledge  that  they  are  without  excuse.  There  is  for  them 
no  apology,  no  availing  plea,  no  justification,  no  righteousness,  no  hope  of  future 
grace.  {W.  M.  Blackburn,  D.D.)  The  last  great  prayer  meeting  : — The  first 
thing  that  strikes  us  about  it  is  that  this  last  great  prayer  meeting  will  be  attended 
by  a  vaster  assemblage  of  human  beings  than  it  is  even  possible  for  us  to  conceive. 


S46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Every  grade  of  society  has  its  representative  there — men  and  women,  young  and 
old,  the  child  and  the  hoary-headed,  the  lofty  and  the  mean.     They  have  come 
from  every  land.     In  a  strange  unity  of  woe  the  attendants  at  this  last  great  prayer 
meeting  are  to  be  gathered  together  into  one  common  centre.   Again,  this  last  great 
prayer  meeting  is  to  be,  in  the  fullest  and  widest  sense  of  the  word,  a  united  prayer 
meeting.     There  is  a  unity  of  sin,  as  well  as  a  unity  of  holiness,  and  the  attendants 
at  this  last  strange  audience  are  all  thus  bound  together.    Not  that  it  is  a  real 
unity.    There  seems  to  be  very  little  of  anything  like  a  corporate  feeling  in  this  last 
great  gathering.    Every  man  is  engaged  with  his  own  thoughts,  offering  his  own 
prayer,  yet  are  they  all  brought  together  to  one  point,  and  aU  induced  to  address 
a  certain  particular  class  of  objects,  and  to  offer  a  certain  particular  kind  of  prayer 
by  one  vast,  common,  overwhelming  necessity,  which  spreads  its  fearful  influence 
over  them  all.    It  is  a  united  prayer  meeting ;  and  as  I  contemplate  that  vast 
gathering,  I  find  all  earthly  distinctions  have  vanished.     Social  distinctions  have 
passed  away.     The  prince  kneels  beside  the  peasant.     Again,  I  observe  that  all 
ecclesiastical  distinctions  have  vanished.    Yet,  again,  I  notice  that  in  this  prayer 
meeting  every  man  is  thoroughly  in  earnest.    I  wish  I  could  say  as  much  of  the 
prayer  meetings  held  here  on  earth  in  our  day.    Yet,  again,  I  observe  that  these 
men  who  pray  so  well  and  so  earnestly  are  precisely  the  people  who  were  least  given 
to  that  pursuit  while  on  earth  :  the  people  we  very  seldom  see  at  prayer  meetings 
here.     Yet,  again,  it  is  a  meeting  at  which  every  man  prays  with  a  very  defimte 
purpose.    If  I  were  asked,  What  is  the  particular  fault  of  our  modern  prayer  meet- 
ings?  I  should  say — Indefiniteness.    Yet,  again,  I  notice  in  this  prayer  meeting 
a  peculiarity  that  we  do  not  frequently  observe  in  our  gatherings  for  prayer.    I  find 
that  every  man  prays  for  himself.    Now  I  do  not  think  we  ought  to  confine  our 
prayers  to  ourselves,  but  we  should  pray  to  a  far  better  purpose  if  we  sometimes 
prayed  out  of  our  own  hearts,  and  asked  for  the  things  we  ourselves  need.    People 
seem  rather  to  aim  at  employing  vague  expressions  than  making  their  wants  known 
in  a  spirit  of  believing  supplication  to  God.    And  now  we  come  to  consider  the 
strangest  feature  of  all.    While  there  are  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  voices,  it 
may  be,  lifted  up  in  supplication,  yet  we  are  astonished  at  observing  that  of  all  these 
prayers  that  go  ringing  around  a  startled  world  there  is  not  so  much  as  one  single 
petition  that  is  offered  to  Almighty  God — not  one.     When  these  praying  men  were 
down  here  on  earth  they  were  always  flying  away  from  God  ;  they  did  not  want  to 
have  anything  to  do  with  Him ;  they  could  get  on  very  well  without  Him ;  they 
were  worshippers  of  nature ;  they  were  believers  in  second  causes — not  that  they 
were  all  such  by  profession,  but  they  were  so  practically.     These  men  have  made 
earth  their  God :  they  have  bowed  down  before  the  spirit  of  this  world  :  they  have 
enthroned  that  subtle  intelligence  of  evil  who  has  usurped  the  sovereignty  of  this 
fallen  world  wiiiiin  their  hearts.     They  have  practically  made  him  the  lord  of  their 
wiU,  and  submitted  their  nature  to  his  control ;  and  now,  when  the  last  terrible 
moment  comes,  and  these  men  are  gathered  together  for  their  last  great  prayer 
meeting,  not  one  of  them  prays  to  God.    Why  ?    Because  the  Nemesis  of  their  own 
sin  has  come  upon  them.     What  is  it  ?    Before  they  would  not  pray  to  God,  and 
now  they  dare  not.    Where  is  the  answer  to  come  from  ?     These  prayers  are  not 
addressed  to  God :  they  do  not  reach  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelleth :  they 
dare  not  hope  that  they  will  penetrate  into  His  ears  and  reach  His  heart.    No : 
their  own  consciences  forbid  such  an  expectation.     Such  will  be  the  last  prayer 
meeting.    And  now  I  want  to  ask  a  question,  Are  any  of  you  ambitious  to  bear 
a  part   in   it?     {W.  H.   M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Terrified  sinners  in  the  last 

earthly  scene : — 1.  We  have  here  a  ghmpse  of  the  constitution  and  general 
condition  of  society  at  the  time  these  prodigies  befall  the  world.  Suppose 
that  the  sixth  seal  were  to  be  opened  to-night,  what  would  it  find?  Kings 
and  emperors  on  their  thrones ;  princes,  nobles,  dukes,  and  lords  securely 
priding  themselves  in  the  prerogatives  of  their  caste  and  station;  rich  people 
wallowing  in  wealth  and  luxury ;  men  and  women  in  high  places  and  in  low 
working  the  wires  that  fashion  events ;  slaves  toiling  at  their  tasks  and  freedmen 
just  out  of  their  bondage  ;  and  evidences  everywhere  of  a  depraved  and  disordered 
state  of  things.  This  is  what  the  judgment  would  find  if  it  came  to-night.  And 
this,  John  tells  us,  is  what  it  finds  when  it  does  come  in  reality.  2.  There  is  one 
thing,  however,  which  shall  be  very  different  under  the  opening  of  the  sixth  seal 
from  what  it  is  now.  The  self -security  and  composure  with  which  godless  people 
live  will  then  be  driven  to  the  winds.  Though  all  the  judgments  under  preceding 
seals  may  have  failed  to  appal  or  arouse  them,  they  will  not  be  able  to  maintain 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION.  347 

their  equanimity  under  what  this  shall  bring  forth.     Self-possession,  unshaken 
courage,  dignified  composure,  philosophic  thinking,  hopefulness,  assurance,  and  the 
last  remains  of  the  stern  intrepidity  and  statue-like  imperturbability  which  charac- 
terise some  men  now,  will  then  have  vanished  from  humanity.     That  day  will 
destroy  them  utterly.     3.  We  notice  also  the  correct  interpretation  which  mankind 
will  then  put  upon  the  terrific  disturbances  of  nature  around  them.     Storms,  earth- 
quakes, eclipses,  and  unusual  phenomena  in  the  heavens,  are  natural  symbols  of 
Divine  wrath.     Modern  science  calls  it  superstition.     But  when  the  vision  of  the 
text  comes  to  be  realised,  woe  to  the  materialistic,  pantheistic,  and  atheistic 
philosophies  with  which  men  suppose  they  have  rid  themselves  of  the  superstitions 
of  antiquity !     One  flash  from  the  judgment  throne  will  confound  them  utterly.     4. 
Nor  is  it  so  much  the  physical  prodigies  as  what  they  argue  that  renders  the  dismay 
so  unsupportable.     It  is  not  the  shaking,  the  obscured  sun,  the  falling  stars,  the 
recoiling  heavens,  the  moving  mountains,  so  much  as  the  moral  truths  they  flash 
into  the  spirit,  to  wit,  that  God  is  on  the  throne,  that  sin  is  a  reality,  that  judgment 
is  come,  and  that  every  guilty  one  must  now  face  an  angry  Creator.     It  is  not 
nature's  bewildering  commotions,  for  they  would  willingly  have  the  falling  mountains 
cover  them  if  that  would  shelter  them  from  what  is  much  more  in  their  view,  and 
far  more  dreadful  to  them.     What  they  speak  of  is,  God  upon  the  throne,  the  fear 
of  His  face,  the  day  of  reckoning,  and  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.     These  are  more 
than  all  the  horrors  of  a  universe  in  convulsions.    5.  And  how  pitiable  and  absurd 
the  expedients  to  which  they  are  driven !     Oh,  imbecile  people  1     When  prayer 
would  have  been  availing,  they  scorned  and  detested  it  as  mean  and  useless ;  and 
now  that  it  is  futile,  they  go  at  it  with  a  will.     Still  more  absurd  is  the  direction  in 
which  they  address  their  prayers.     Once  they  considered  it  folly  that  man  should 
call  on  the  living  God  ;  but  now  they  pray  to  dead  rocks !     Once  they  thought  i1 
philosophic  to  deny  that  He  who  made  the  ear  could  hear  prayers,  or  that  He  with 
whom  is  the  Spirit,  and  whose  is  the  power,  could  answer  them ;  but  now  they 
supplicate  the  deaf  and  helpless  mountains !    And  yet  weaker  and  more  insane  is 
the  import  of  their  prayers  and  efforts.     Omniscience  and  omnipresence  are  among 
'  the  natural  attributes  of  God.    The  very  things  before  these  people's  eyes  should 
have  been  enough  to  teach  them  this.     And  yet,  philosophers  as  they  are,  their  pro- 
posal is  to  conceal  themselves  from  the  Almighty,  and  so  elude  His  wrath  !     Often 
had  shelter  and  peaceful  security  been  offered  them  in  the  mercies  of  the  loving 
Saviour,  and  as  often  had  they  despised  and  rejected  them ;  but  now  the  silly  souls 
would  take  the  miserable  rocks  for  saviours  !     Oh,  the  foolishness  of  men  who  think 
it  folly  to  serve  God !     {J.  A.  Seiss,  B.I).)        Presumption  running  into  despair  : — 
I.  The  horror  of  the  reprobates.     1.  The  persons  thus  amazed  with  terror  are 
described  in  the  precedent  verse,  "  The  kings  of  the  earth,"  &c.    The  greatness  of 
man,  when  it  comes  to  encounter  with  God,  is  weakness  and  vanity.     Is  he  great? 
Be  he  never  so  high,  there  is  One  *'  higher  than  he,  and  the  Highest  of  all  regardeth 
it"  (Eccles.  viii.  5),  and  will  subject  it.    Is  he  rich?    Were  he  the  eldest  son  of 
Mammon,  and  sole  heir  to  all  the  usurers  in  the  world,  can  his  gold  save  him  ?    Is 
vengeance  afraid  to  strike  his  vessel  because  his  sails  be  of  silk  and  it  is  ballasted 
with  refined  ore  ?     Shall  he  buy  out  his  damnation  with  coin  ?    No,  heaven  will 
never  take  bribes.    Is  he  a  chief  captain  ?    Be  his  looks  never  so  stern,  his  speech 
never  so  imperious,  impetuous,  he  may  command  here  and  go  without.     "  Man  is 
not  saved  by  the  multitude  of  an  host."    2.  "  They  said."    They  open  then-  lips  to 
confess  the  invincible  and  inevitable  power  of  Christ.     (1)  The  sense  of  present 
misery  takes  away  atheism.    The  day  of  judgment,  when  it  comes,  shall  find  no 
atheist.     (2)  The  saying  that  comes  from  them  is  desperate  ;  whence  note  that,  in 
God's  just  punishment,  desperation  is  the  reward  of  presumption.    They  that  erst 
feared  too  little  shall  now  fear  too  much.    Before  they  thought  not  of  God's  justice, 
now  they  shall  not  conceive  His  mercy.    3.  These  necessary  occurrences  thus  con- 
sidered, let  us  pass  to  their  invocation,  wherein  is  exemplified  their  error.    Here  we 
must  observe.  To  what ;  For  what  they  call.     (1)  To  what.    They  are  mountains 
and  rocks,  unreasonable,  yea,  insensible  creatures,     (a)  Negatively,  it  is  clear  that 
they  have  no  acquaintance  with  God,  therefore  know  not  how  to  direct  their  prayers 
unto  Him.    (6)  Aifirmatively,  this  presents  a  soul  amazed  with  fear  and  folly.    They 
call  to  the  mountains  that  can  neither  hear  nor  answer.    (2)  For  what.    The  benefit 
that  they  would  have  the  rocks  and  the  mountains  do  them  is  to  fall  on  them  and 
hide  them,     (a)  Despair  is  ever  wishing  for  death,  often  impatiently  snatching  at  it 
in  this  world ;  but  when  the  last  day  comes,  so  greedily  longing  for  it,  that  to  be 
sure  of  it,  they  desire  the  mountains  to  dispatch  them.    (6)  Observe  that  rocks  and 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

mountains  are  far  lighter  than  sin.  Such  a  weight  bore  our  Saviour  that  He 
groaned  under  it.  (c)  Observe  that  before  these  wicked  were  lords  of  nations  and 
countries ;  now  they  would  be  glad  of  one  hole  to  hide  them.  Of  all  their  dominions 
they  beg  but  the  barrenest  parcel,  a  rock  or  mountain  ;  and  that  to  do  them  a  poor 
office,  to  conceal  them.  How  much  doth  man's  avarice  and  ambition  covet  here, 
how  little  contents  him  hereafter  !  Nothing  helps  when  God  will  smite ;  mountains 
and  rocks  are  no  defence  when  God  pursues  (Jer.  xxii.  15).  God  hath  a  hand  that 
can  strike  through  forts,  rocks,  and  bulwarks.  The  heavens  "  melt  at  the  presence 
of  the  Lord  ;  if  He  touch  the  mountains,  they  smoke  "  for  it.  II.  The  Judge,  from 
WHOM  THEY  DESIRE  TO  BE  HIDDEN.  1.  "  From  the  facc."  It  was  ever  the  fashion  of 
guiltiness  to  fly  from  the  presence  of  God.  Adam  had  no  sooner  sinned,  but  he 
thrusts  his  head  in  a  bush.  Sin's  inevitable  effect  is  shame.  "  Of  Him  that 
sitteth."  Christ  now  sits  in  glory.  While  He  was  on  earth  how  little  rested  He ! 
Hast  thou  laboured  ?  thou  shalt  have  ease :  hast  thou  travelled  in  the  ways  of 
grace  ?  thou  shalt  sit  on  the  seat  of  glory.  "  On  the  throne."  Christ  at  this  day 
shall  appear  in  His  true  majesty.  2.  "From  the  wrath."  The  wrath  of  Christ  in 
His  justice.  (T.  Adams.)  From  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb. — The  wrath  of  the 
Lamb  : — I.  Its  unexampled  strangeness.  Who  ever  saw  a  lamb  in  a  rage  ?  The 
more  difficulty  you  have  in  exciting  wrath,  the  more  terrible  it  is  when  it  appears. 
U.  Its  infinite  purity.  "  The  Lamb  "  is  the  emblem  of  innocence.  This  wrath 
of  the  "  Lamb  "  is  not  a  passion,  but  a  principle.  It  is  not  malign,  but  benevolent. 
It  is  not  against  existence,  but  against  its  sins  and  its  crimes.  Conclusion :  Learn 
from  this  that  we  turn  our  greatest  blessing  into  the  greatest  curse.  Our  optic  and 
auricular  organs  may  become  so  diseased  as  to  give  to  the  most  beautiful  objects 
and  melodious  sounds  in  nature  a  power  to  convey  into  us  the  most  poignant 
anguish,  and  so  our  moral  nature  may  become  so  corrupt  as  to  turn  love  into  wrath, 
and  blessedness  into  misery.  (Homilist.)  The  wrath  of  the  lamb: — The  first 
thing  which  strikes  us  about  the  expression  is  its  extreme  dramatism.  There 
is  nothing  so  dramatic,  in  my  opinion,  as  the  sight  of  an  emotion  contrary 
to  the  nature.  When  a  man  who  has  always  hid  his  griefs  bursts  into  tears, 
when  a  man,  like  Arnold,  who  has  always  veiled  his  anger,  gives  way  for 
once  to  passion,  we  are  impressed  with  something  like  a  sense  of  tragedy ;  it  is 
a  bitter  day  in  summer ;  it  is  a  storm  upon  a  lake.  How  can  we  tMnk  of  the 
love  of  God  as  interrupted  even  for  a  moment  by  a  thing  called  wrath  ?  Can  we 
any  more  conceive  a  limit  to  the  love  of  God  than  we  can  conceive  a  limit  to  the 
power  of  God  ?  The  state  of  mind  he  is  describing  is  the  wrath  of  a  lamb — a 
particular  kind  of  wrath.  He  is  considering  a  mode  of  anger  which  is  not  an 
interruption  of  love,  but  itself  a  phase  of  love.  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb  is  the 
wrath  of  love  itself.  It  is  no  more  an  interruption  to  Divine  love  than  the 
haze  is  an  interruption  to  the  heat  of  the  morning.  The  wrath  clouds  the 
love ;  the  haze  clouds  the  morning ;  but  both  the  one  and  the  other  have 
grown  out  of  the  very  thing  they  obscure.  There  is  an  anger  which  is  incompatible 
with  the  absence  of  love,  which  could  not  exist  unless  love  existed  before  it. 
Here,  then,  is  the  subject  which  rises  before  us — the  difference  between  the  wrath 
of  the  Lamb  and  the  wrath  of  the  lion,  between  the  anger  of  love  and  the  anger  of 
nature.  Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  are  three  distinct  points  of  difference 
between  them.  1.  And  first,  I  would  observe  that  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,  or 
sacrificial  spirit,  differs  from  the  wrath  of  the  lion  in  being  purely  impersonal. 
The  wrath  of  the  lion  says,  "  I,  king  of  the  forest,  have  received  an  affront ;  some 
one  has  presumed  to  do  an  unkindness  to  me."  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb  says,  "  An 
unkind  thing  has  been  done."  It  keeps  the  "  me  "  out  of  the  question  altogether. 
It  looks  at  the  deed  in  itself.  It  refuses  to  consider  the  sense  of  personal  injury  as 
a  main  feature  of  the  case.  You  have  a  son  who  has  defied  your  authority,  spent 
his  substance  in  riotous  living.  You  are  incensed  at  this  act  of  individual  dis- 
respect. You  resolve  to  bring  him  to  his  senses ;  you  say,  "  We  shall  see  whether 
he  or  I  shall  be  master  here."  Now,  that  is  quite  a  legitimate  mode  of  anger,  and 
quite  a  legitimate  ground  for  it ;  but  it  is  not  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.  It  is  neither 
good  nor  bad.  It  is  simply  an  appetite  of  nature  like  any  other  appetite — like 
hunger.  But  it  is  possible  for  a  father  in  these  circumstances  to  be  filled  with 
indignation  on  a  different  ground  altogether.  It  is  possible  for  him  to  see  in  his 
son's  delinquency,  not  an  act,  but  a  principle.  It  is  possible  for  him  to  feel,  not 
that  an  insult  has  been  offered  to  his  pride,  but  that  an  injury  had  been  done  to  the 
universe.  It  is  possible  for  him  to  experience,  not  the  sense  of  a  wounded  self- 
love,  but  an  anger  from  the  fact  that  love  itself  has  been  violated.    This  is  the 


CflAP.  Yi.]  REVELATION.  849 

wrath  of  the  Lamb.  The  Son  of  Man  has  reached  a  splendid  impersonality  in  His 
judgment  of  the  world.  Though  Himself  at  once  the  greatest  and  the  most 
wronged  of  all,  He  refuses  to  measure  the  wrong  by  His  own  feeling  of  pain.  He 
throws  Himself  into  the  position  of  the  meanest,  the  lowliest.  I  pass  to  a  second 
point  of  difference  between  the  wrath  of  love  and  the  wrath  of  mere  nature.  2. 
And  it  is  this  :  The  wrath  of  nature  must  begin  by  tearing  out  pity ;  the  wrath  of 
love  is  a  wrath  created  by  pity.  In  the  former  case  our  indignation  is  stimulated 
by  hiding  the  prospective  photograph — by  shutting  our  eyes  to  the  possible 
goodness  which  the  bad  man  may  yet  attain.  In  the  latter  case  the  indignation  is 
stimulated  by  exactly  the  opposite  process — by  bringing  out  the  prospective 
photograph,  and  considering  what  the  man  might  be  made  to  become.  This  brings 
me  to  a  third  point  of  difference  between  the  two  kinds  of  wrath.  3.  They  express 
their  feeling  in  a  different  formula.  The  wrath  of  the  lion  says,  "I  must  have 
satisfaction  "  ;  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  says,  "  Justice  must  be  satisfied."  There  is 
all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  giving  me  satisfaction  in  a  quarrel  and 
satisfying  my  justice  in  a  wrong.  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb  is  always  a  redemptive 
wrath.  Its  first  impulse  is  to  buy  back  what  has  been  enslaved,  to  restore  what  has 
been  wrongfully  taken,  tp  set  at  Uberty  what  has  been  bruised.  The  wrath  of  the 
lion  will  be  satisfied  if  the  delinquent  is  dead ;  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  pauses  not 
until  it  learns  that  the  delinquency  itself  has  been  wiped  away.  And  this  renders 
powerfully  suggestive  that  theological  epigram  which  represents  Christ  as  paying 
the  debts  of  humanity.  Nothing  in  a  short  compass  could  more  completely 
describe  the  facts  of  thecase.  {G.  Matheson,  D-D.)"  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb  : — There 
is  something  of  appalling  significance  in  so  paradoxical  an  expression  as  this,  of  the 
"  Wrath  of  the  Lamb."  It  makes  the  wrath  trebly  potent  that  it  should  be  wrath, 
long  suppressed,  but  at  length  discharged,  of  a  nature  essentially  and  exceptionally 
meek,  patient,  long-suffering,  easy  to  be  entreated,  hard  to  be  angered.  Furor  Jit 
lasd  scepius  patientid,  says  the  Latin  proverb  :  patience,  trespassed  upon  too  often, 
is  converted  into  wrath.  And  if,  0  patience,  the  long-suffering  that  is  in  thee 
becomes  wrath,  how  great  is  that  wrath !  Plutarch  says  of  the  Koman  populace,  on 
the  occasion  of  a  certain  tumult,  "  they  thought  that  the  wrath  of  Fabius  now  pro- 
voked, albeit  he  was  naturally  so  mild  and  patient,  would  prove  heavy  and  im- 
placable " — all  the  more  so,  indeed,  because  of  that  natural  disposition  now  abused 
and  overstrained.  An  eminent  critic  observes,  in  arguing  that  all  great  effects  are 
produced  by  contrast,  that  anger  is  never  so  noble  as  when  it  breaks  out  of  a  com- 
parative continence  of  aspect;  it  is  the  earthquake  bursting  from  the  repose  of 
nature.  Charlevoix,  in  his  "  Histoire  de  St.  Domingo,"  remarks  of  the  sea  of  the 
Antilles  and  neighbouring  isles  that  it  is  commonly  more  tranquil  than 
ours ;  "  but,  like  certain  people  who  are  excited  with  difficulty,  and 
whose  transports  of  passion  are  as  violent  as  they  are  rare,  so  when 
the  sea  becomes  irritated,  it  is  terrific."  {Francis  Jacox,  B.A.)  The  wrath 
of  the  Lamb : — The  lamb  is  the  most  simply  innocent  of  all  animals.  His- 
torically, also,  it  had  become  a  name  for  sacrifice.  Under  this  twofold  reason 
Christ  is  set  forth  as  the  Lamb.  The  lamb  is  but  the  complemental  gentleness  of 
God's  judicial  vigour.  We  must  have  the  right  to  believe  in  the  real  Christ,  and 
not  that  theologic  Christ  which  has  so  long  been  praised,  as  it  were,  into  weakness, 
by  the  showing  that  separates  Him  from  all  God's  decisive  energies  and  fires  of 
combustion,  and  puts  Him  over  against  them,  to  be  only  a  pacifier  of  them  by  His 
suffering  goodness.  Our  Christ  must  be  the  real  King — Messiah — and  no  mere 
victim ;  He  must  govern,  have  His  indignations,  take  the  regal  way  in  His  salva- 
tion. His  goodness  must  have  fire  and  fibre  enough  to  make  it  Divine.  Wrath 
must  be  kept  as  a  moral,  not  merely  animal,  passion,  or  it  will  connect  associations 
of  unregulated  temper  that  are  wholly  unsuitable.  We  understand  by  wrath,  as 
applied  to  God  and  to  Christ,  a  certain  principled  heat  of  resentment  towards  evil- 
doing  and  evil-doers,  such  as  arms  the  good  to  inflictions  of  pain  or  just  retribu- 
tion upon  them.  It  is  not  the  heat  of  revenge.  It  is  that  holy  heat  which 
kindles  about  order  and  law,  and  truth  and  light,  going  in,  as  it  were,  spon- 
taneously to  redress  their  wrongs,  and  chastise  the  injuries  they  have  suffered. 
Is  it,  then,  a  fact  that  Christ,  as  the  incarnate  Word  of  God,  embodies  and  reveals 
the  wrath-principle  of  God,  even  as  He  does  the  patience,  or  love-principle,  and 
as  much  more  intensely?  On  this  point  we  have  many  distinct  evidences.  1. 
Christ  cannot  be  a  true  manifestation  of  God  when  He  comes  in  half  the  character 
of  God,  to  act  upon,  or  qualify,  or  pacify,  the  other  half.  If  only  God's 
affectional  nature  is  represented  in  Him,  then  He  is  but  a  half  manifestation.    If 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {chap.  vi. 

the  purposes  of  God,  the  justice  of  God,  the  indignations  of  God,  are  not  in  Him — 
if  anything  is  shut  away,  or  let  down,  or  covered  over — then  He  is  not  in  God's 
proportions,  and  does  not  incarnate  His  character.  2.  Christ  can  be  the  manifested 
wrath  of  God  without  being  any  the  less  tender  in  His  feeling  or  gentle  in  His 
patience.  In  the  history  of  Jesus  we  see  occasions  in  which  He  actually  displays 
the  judicial  and  the  tender,  most  affectingly,  together  and  in  the  very  same  scene, 
as  in  His  denouncing  and  weeping  over  Jerusalem.  3.  God,  without  the  wrath- 
principle,  never  was,  and  Christ  never  can  be,  a  complete  character.  This  element 
belongs  inherently  to  every  moral  nature.  God  is  no  God  without  it ;  man  is  no 
man  without  it.  It  is  this  principled  wrath,  in  one  view,  that  gives  staminal  force 
and  majesty  to  character.  4.  It  is  a  conceded  principle  of  justice  that  wrong-doers 
are  to  suffer  just  according  to  what  they  deserve.  In  Christianity  God  is  not  less 
just  or  more  merciful,  but  He  is  more  fitly  and  proportionately  expressed.  5.  One 
of  the  things  most  needed  in  the  recovery  of  men  to  God  in  this  very  thing — a 
more  decisive  manifestation  of  the  wrath-principle  and  justice  of  God.  Intimi- 
dation is  the  first  means  of  grace.  6.  We  can  see  for  ourselves  that  the  more 
impressive  revelation  of  wrath,  which  appears  to  be  wanted,  is  actually  made  in  the 
person  of  Christ,  as  in  His  driving  out  the  money-changers  and  denouncing  the 
hypocritical  Pharisees.  7.  Christ  is  appointed  and  publicly  undertakes  to  maintain 
the  wrath-principle  officially,  as  the  Judge  of  the  world,  even  as  He  maintains  the 
love-principle  officially,  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  He  even  declares  that 
authority  is  given  Him  to  execute  judgment,  because  He  is  the  Son  of  man.  But 
the  wrath-principle  in  Christ  is  only  that  judicial  impulse  that  backs  Him  in 
the  infliction  of  justice  whenever  justice  requires  to  be  inflicted.  And  it  does 
not  require  to  be  inflicted  always ;  it  never  ought  to  be  when  there  is  anything 
better  that  is  possible.  Put  it  down,  then,  first  of  all,  at  the  close  of  this 
great  subject,  that  the  New  Testament  gives  us  no  new  God,  or  better  God,  or 
less  just  God,  than  we  had  before.  He  is  the  I  AM  of  all  ages,  the  I  AM  that 
was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come ;  the  same  that  was  declared  from  the  beginning — 
"The  Lord  God,  gracious  and  merciful,  forgiving  iniquity,  transgressions,  and 
sin,  and  that  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  The  g^reat 
day    of   His  wraXh.— The  wrath  of    God    and    the    Lamb: — I.   Who    ake    the 

PERSONS   WHOSE   ASPECT   AND   APPEARANCE    SHALL   THEN  BE    80   DBEADFUL   TO   SINNERS? 

It  is  God,  the  Father  of  all,  and  the  Lamb  of  God.  II.  How  comes  the  wrath  op 
THAT  GREAT  DAY  TO  BE  80  TERRIBLE  ?  1.  It  is  wrath  that  ariscth  from  the  clearest 
discoveries  of  the  love  of  God  neglected.  2.  It  is  wrath  that  is  awakened  by  the  ex- 
pensive methods  of  salvation  being  slighted  (Isa.  v.  4;  Iv.  1).  3.  It  is  wrath  that 
must  avenge  the  affronts  done  to  the  chief  messenger  of  God's  mercy.  4.  It  is  such 
wrath  as  ariseth  from  the  patience  of  God,  tired  and  worn  out  by  the  boldest 
iniquities  of  men.   5.  It  is  such  wrath  as  shall  be  executed  immediately  and  eternally. 

III.  How  VAIN  ALL  the  REFUGES  AND  HOPES  OF  SINNERS  WILL  BE  FOUND  IN  THAT 
DREADFUL   DAY,   TO   AVOID   THIS   WRATH   AND  VENGEANCE  1        1.    Eocks   and    mOUUtainS, 

whose  aid  is  sought  in  the  last  extremity  of  distress,  will  be  but  as  spiders'  webs. 
What  folly  to  call  upon  creatures  to  help  them  against  their  Creator  !  (Prov.  ix.  21). 

2.  Kocks  and  mountains,  though  places  of  secrecy  and  concealment,  cannot  hide 
them  from  the  eyes  of  God  (Prov.  xv.  3  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  24).  3.  Kocks  and  mountains, 
though  bulwarks  of  defence  and  places  of  security,  cannot  stand  before  the  indigna- 
tion of  the  Almighty  (Nah.  i.  2,  6).  4.  Rocks  and  mountains  falling  upon  us  are 
instruments  of  sudden  death.  To  conclude.  1.  What  a  wretched  mistake  it  is  to 
imagine  that  God  is  all  mercy,  and  Jesus  Christ  nothing  else  but  love  and  salva- 
tion 1  2.  The  day  of  Christ's  patience  makes  haste  to  an  end  (Psa.  ii.  12).  3.  How 
very  different  will  the  thoughts  of  sinners  be  in  that  day !  (Isa.  ii.  10,  21).  4.  What 
hideous  and  everlasting  mischief  is  contained  in  rejecting  the  gospel  of  Christ!  5. 
Sinners,  consider  your  ways,  the  danger  you  are  in,  and  the  need  you  have  of  a 
Saviour  (Psa.  Ixi.  2).  6.  You,  whose  defence  is  the  Eock  of  Ages,  continue  in  Him 
(Eev.  ii.  10).  (T.  Hannam.)  The  wrath  of  God  : — And  this  wrath  impends  over 
every  impenitent  and  unf  orgiven  sinner.  I.  It  is  sure  to  fall  upon  him  in  due 
TIME.  It  is  not  a  simple  possibility.  It  is  not  merely  a  threat  to  terrify  him. 
It  is  as  sure  in  the  future  as  God  Almighty's  Word  and  throne.  1.  Eternal  and 
Omnipotent  Justice  has  decreed  it.     2,  Eevelation  declares  it  on  almost  every  page. 

3.  The  providence  of  God  illustrates  and  confirms  His  Word.     II.  It  is  sure,  in 

DUE   TIME,   TO   FALL   UPON   THE  SINNER   IN   ALL   THE    TERRIBLENESS   OF   ITS  POWER  AND 

SEVERITY.  1.  Here  mercy  tempers  justice.  Here  wrath  is  restrained  and  grace 
works.     Here  the  blood  and  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  tears  and  prayers 


CHAP.  VI.]  REVELATION.  35X 

of  the  Church,  prevail  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  God's  anger.    2.  This  is  the  world 
of  probation,  not  of  final  award.     3.  The  day  of  reckoning  is  appointed  after  death. 
4.  "  The  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  will  not  break  forth  till  the  great  day  of  assize  shall 
have  come.     So  that  all  we  know  and  see  of  the  Divine  wrath  against  sin  and  in- 
corrigible sinners,  in  this  life,  is  only  an  "  earnest "  of  that  awful  tempest  that  will 
burst  in  fury  upon  the  ungodly  when  *'  the  great  day  of  His  wrath  "  shall  have  come. 
III.  This  wrath  will  be  justly  deserved.      It  might  have  been  turned  aside; 
voluntary  sin,  and  the  persistent  refusal  of  mercy  and  grace,  will  have  provoked  it. 
It  is  not  simply  the  wrath  of  a  God  of  eternal  righteousness,  hating  all  iniquity  and 
bound  to  vindicate  outraged  justice  in  the  interest  of  good  government ;  but  it  is 
also  •'  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,"  kindled  by  slighted  love,  by  rejected  mercy,  by  the 
blood  of  the  covenant  counted  an  unholy  thing,  by  all  His  bloody  sweat  and  agony 
and  intercession  despised !     {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)       The  great  day  and  the  great 
question: — I.  Why  it  is  here  called  "the  great  day  op  wrath."    1.  It  may  be 
called  the  great  day  of  wrath  inasmuch  as  no  other  preceding  day  of  wrath  ever 
equalled  it.     If  all  the  tempests  that  ever  roared,  and  all  the  vivid  flashes  of  light- 
ning that  were  ever  seen,  and  all  the  hoarse  thunders  that  have  ever  rolled,  and  all 
the  roaring  of  the  sea  and  every  noise  that  has  taken  place,  were  all  united  together 
in  one  great  swell,  it  would  be  nothing  to  the  confusion  of  that  great  day.     "  The 
heaven  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise."    We  are  told  that  if  you  put  one  drop 
of  water  upon  an  anvil,  and  some  heated  iron  over  it,  and  strike  the  iron,  that  drop 
of  water  wiU  explode,  and  make  a  sound  equal  to  that  attending  the  discharge  of  a 
musket.     If  one  drop  of  water  will  produce  such  a  sound,  what  will  it  be  when  all 
the  watery  vapours  surcharged  with  fire  shall  burst  in  one  mighty  and  terrible 
crash  ?   2.  It  may  be  called  so  if  we  remember  that  it  will  be  the  last  day.    The  sun 
will  shine,  on  the  morning  of  that  day,  for  the  last  time.     All  the  wheels  of  nature 
will  come  to  a  standstill ;  all  the  mysterious  and  intricate  movements  of  time  will 
cease.     3.  But  we  may  call  it  a  great  day  of  wrath,  more  particularly,  if  we  re- 
member that  it  will  be  the  judgment  day.     4.  It  will  be  a  great  day  of  wrath  if  we 
consider,  moreover,  the  Judge  who  will  preside  on  that  day,  and  His  character. 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  will  be  the  Judge — very  consoling  to  the  believer,  because  the 
Judge  will  be  his  best  Friend ;  exceedingly  annoying  to  the  sinner,  for  he  will  have 
sins  revealed  that  he  would  not  have  known  for  ten  thousand  worlds.     Jesus  Him- 
self, who  is  impartial,  who  will  then  be  inexorable — He  wUl  be  the  Judge.    Ah,  now 
is  the  time.     The  Saviour  will  Usten  to  your  cry  this  night.     Therefore,  when  we 
consider  who  is  the  Judge,  that  He  wiU  be  inexorable,  and  will  not  be  then  en- 
treated, we  may  say  that  it  is  a  great  day  of  wrath.     U.  "  Who  shall  be  able  to 
stand  ?  "    A  safe  and  Scriptural  answer  to  this  question  is,  indeed,  very  important. 
1.  "  Who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  "    Not  the  swearer :  he  has  asked  God  to  destroy 
his  soul  and  body,  and  now  all  his  prayers  shall  be  answered.    Not  the  liar :  aU 
liars  shall  have  their  part  in  *'  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone."    Not 
the  drunkard :  he  will  receive  something  now  more  hot  than  alcohol.    Not  the 
hypocrite :  the  mask  will  fall  off.    Not  the  formalist.    Not  the  backslider.    And 
thus  we  may  go  on  answering  the  question  in  a  negative  way.     2.  I  fancy  I  hear  a 
voice  coming  from  some  one  in  this  audience — "  Well,  I  am  very  glad  that  you  have 
made  an  exception  of  me  :  I  am  sure  that  I  do  not  belong  to  the  bundle  of  swearers," 
•&c.     Stop,  friend,  there  is  one  bundle  yet;  if  you  are  not  there,  well,  then,  we 
must  put  you  aside.    Where  is  that  large  bundle  of  gospel  hearers — men  and  women 
who  have  heard  the  Word  and  have  not  obeyed  it  ?    You  are  there.     3.  Those,  and 
those  alone,  will  stand  in  the  great  day  of  wrath,  who  are  resting  entirely  upon  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus   Christ.     (1)  They  will  have  their 
characters  publicly  vindicated.     (2)  They  will  gather  in  the  fruit  of  their  labours. 
{J.  D.  Smith.)       Safety  in  the  day  of  wrath  : — I.  Whose  is  the  wrath  here  spoken 
OP  ?    As  a  Lamb  the  Saviour  stands  on  Mount  Zion,  surrounded  by  a  thousand 
hosts  of  His  redeemed ;  as  a  Lamb  He  appears  before  the  throne,  receiving  the 
prostrate  adoration  of  the  elders  ;  as  a  Lamb  He  appears  as  a  Bridegroom  waiting 
for  the  New  Jerusalem,  "  adorned  as  a  bride  prepared  for  her  husband  "  ;  and  as  a 
Lamb  He  is  represented  as  standing  in  the  very  midst  of  the  throne,  with  His 
wounds  all  fresh,  intimating  to  us  that  He  is  still  sustaining  to  His  Church  the 
functions  of  a  prevailing,  unchangeable,  everlasting  priesthood.    And  this  image  is 
manifestly  designed  to  set  before  us  various  attributes  in  the  character  of  our  Ke- 
deemer.    First,  no  doubt  it  is  designed  to  endear  to  us  the  mild  and  gentle  attributes 
of  His  nature ;  to  show  to  us  how  patient  He  is  to  forgive  injuries,  how  long  He  will 
bear  with  the  sinner's  affronts,  how  hard  it  is  to  arouse  Him  from  the  serene  calm 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

of  His  holy  nature,  what  a  "  strange  work  "  it  is  with  Him  to  punish  and  destroy. 
But  in  the  text  there  is  an  adjunct  to  this  image,  which  at  first  seems  to  take  away 
from  its  fitness  and  propriety ;  it  would  seem  to  suggest  to  us  attributes  of  an  oppo- 
site and  conflicting  kind  ;  for  who  ever  heard  of  "  the  wrath  "  of  a  lamb  ?  Why  is 
it  that,  on  this  occasion,  the  Saviour  appears  not  under  one  of  His  more  majestic 
titles — as  "  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,"  tearing  the  seed  of  the  rebellious  to 
pieces  ?  This  title  is  retained  even  in  describing  the  solemn  day  of  Christ's  ap- 
pearing as  a  witness,  as  a  warning,  as  a  setting  forth  of  the  aggravated  character  of 
man's  disobedience,  and  the  utter  exclusiveness  of  a  despised  salvation.     II.  What 

IT   IS   IN   THAT   DAY   THAT   WILL   MAKE    "  THE   WRATH  OF   THE   LaUB  "    SO   TERRIBLE.     1. 

First,  it  will  be  because  then  this  "  wrath  "  will  be  felt  to  have  been  deserved.  Well 
may  the  Lamb  say  to  those  who  have  refused  Him  on  that  day,  "  What  more  could 
I  have  done  for  you  that  I  have  not  done  ?  I  gave  Myself  to  the  insults  of  men,  to 
the  buffetings  of  Satan,  to  the  piercing  of  the  sword  of  justice,  to  the  degradation 
and  shame  of  the  Cross."  2.  Again :  the  "  wrath  "  will  be  felt  to  have  been  de- 
served on  account  of  the  light  we  enjoy,  and  the  means  used  by  the  offended  Man  to 
bring  us  to  a  knowledge  of  Himself,  and  to  constrain  us  to  embrace  the  offers  of  His 
love.  3.  Then  another  consideration  which  will  make  this  wrath  so  terrible  will  be 
its  utter  implacableness,  the  awful  consciousness  that  it  can  never  change  through 
the  ages  of  eternity,  that  the  Lamb  will  never  put  on  those  aspects  of  gentleness,  and 
pity,  which  were  turned  towards  uS  in  the  day  of  our  probation  and  our  hope. 

III.     Who     ABE     THEY    THAT     *'  SHALL     BE    ABLE   TO   STAND  "  ?        Of    COUrSC    the    first 

answer  to  this  is,  they  are  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  Who  are  they  that  shall 
stand  ?  Why,  they  are  those  who  feel  that  they  have  made  Christ  their  one  entire 
sole  dependence :  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on 
Thee."  "  Trust  in  the  Lord ;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength."  "  0 
Lord,  our  Lord,  other  gods  besides  Thee  have  had  dominion  over  us  ;  but  by  Thee 
only  will  we  make  mention  of  Thy  name."  Then,  once  more  :  there  is  good  hope 
that  we  shall  be  able  to  stand  in  the  day  of  Christ  if  we  are  of  those  who  are  waiting 
for,  and  hastening  to,  and  desiring  His  appearing.  (Z).  Moore,  M.A.)  Who  shall 
be  able  to  stand  in  the  last  judgment  ? — There  will  assuredly  come  a  day  of  judg- 
ment. The  material  universe  symbolically  prophecies  some  such  a  moral  crisis  in 
the  history  of  man.  The  flowing  river,  the  growing  plants,  the  breathing  tribes,  the 
planetary  systems,  all  tend  to  a  crisis.  The  unremitting  increase  from  age  to  age 
in  the  human  family,  viewed  in  connection  with  the  limited  capacity  of  this  planet 
to  sustain  animal  existence,  irresistibly  indicates  some  such  a  turning  point  in  hu- 
man history.  The  universal  and  concurrent  references  of  the  human  conscience 
through  all  ages  and  lands,  give  a  high  probability  to  the  dawn  of  such  a  moral 
juncture.  The  Bible  settles  the  question.  The  sentence  preceding  the  text  calls  it 
a  great  day.  It  will  be  "great,"  on  account  of  the  number  and  variety  of  the 
moral  beings  that  will  be  assembled  together ;  great,  on  account  of  the  results  which 
will  then  be  effected — redemptive  providences  ended,  and  the  agencies  of  a  righteous 
retribution  brought  into  full  play ;  great,  on  account  of  the  thrilling  interest  it  will 
awake  through  all  the  realms  of  moral  existence  the  universe  over ;  great,  on 
account  of  the  Divine  glories  that  will  then  be  displayed.  But  our  point  now  is — 
Who  shaU  be  able  to  stand  on  that  day  ?  In  order  to  illustrate  this  solemn  question 
I  shall  suppose  a  case.  What  under  a  legal  charge  could  enable  you  to  look  calmly 
forward  to  the  coming  day  of  trial,  feeling  that  you  could  stand  ?  We  can  only  con- 
ceive of  seven  things  which  would  answer  this  purpose.    I.  A  consciousness  or  in- 

KOCENCE  AND  THE  POWER  OF  SHOWING  THAT  THE  CHARGE  HAS  NO  FOUNDATION.  II. 
An   ASSURANCE   THAT  THE   EVIDENCE   WILL  BE  FOUND  INSUFFICIENT  TO  CONVICT.      There 

will  be — 1.  The  omniscient  Judge.  He  knows  everything  about  you.  2.  There  will 
be  present  the  persons  to  whom  and  through  whom  you  have  sinned.  3.  Then 
there  will  be  conscience  within  you  bearing  the  strongest  testimony  against  you. 

UI.  A  FEELING  THAT  THE  CRIME  WITH  WHICH  YOU  ABE  CHARGED  IS  VERY  INSIGNIFI- 
CANT. No.  Sin,  believe  me,  is  no  trifling  matter.  1.  Think  of  it  in  its  relation  to 
God.  It  is  a  violation  of  the  most  righteous  laws,  for  He  is  your  Sovereign.  It  is  a 
violation  of  the  highest  trust ;  for  He  is  your  Proprietor,  and  you  are  His  stewards. 
It  is  a  violation  of  the  most  wonderful  love.  He  is  your  loving  Father — your 
merciful  Eedeemer.  2.  Think  of  it  in  its  bearing  on  yourself  and  on  the  universe. 
"  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."  This  then  will  not  serve  you,  will  not  enable 
you  to  stand  in  the  judgment.  Another  thing  that  might  answer  the  purpose  in  the 
supposed  case  is  >^IV.  A  felt  capability  of  proving  that  the  crime  was  com- 
mitted ACCIDENTALLY,  NOT  BY  PURPOSE.      V.  FaITH  IN  THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  WHOLE 


CHAP.  VII.]  REVELATION.  353 

COURT  IN  TOUR  TAVOUR.  VI.  An  ABILITY  TO  PROVE  THAT  YOU  HAVE  RENDERED  SIGNAL 
SERVICE  TO  THE  STATE.  VII.  ThE  ASSURANCE  THAT  SOME  ONE  HAS  SUCCESSFULLY 
INTERPOSED  BETWEEN  YOU  AND   THE  SUPERIOR  AUTHORITY.        On  the  pageS  of   the  Bible 

I  find  written  in  sunbeams,  that  in  consequence  of  what  Christ  has  done,  and  is 
willing  to  do,  for  us  as  sinners,  we  may  escape  the  sad  consequences  of  our  sins, 
and  stand  triumphantly  in  the  Day  of  Judgment.    (Homilist.) 


CHAPTEB  Vn. 


Vers.  1-8.  Four  angels  .  :  ,  holdingr  the  four  wiads.— The  four  winds  : — I.  Thb 
EVENTS  FiauRATivELY  REPRESENTED  BY  THE  FOUR  WINDS.  Different  Opinions  have 
been  expressed  respecting  these  winds.  Bishop  Newton  and  other  writers  under- 
stand by  them  those  Pagan  persecutions  which  assailed  the  Christian  Church  prior 
to  the  time  of  Constantine,  and  which  were  removed  when  he  took  the  Christian 
religion  under  his  protection.  The  text  evidently  includes  all  winds  that  injure  the 
Christian  Church  and  impede  true  religion  in  the  world ;  but  Constantine  only 
suspended  one  wind  to  let  loose  another,  equally,  if  not  more,  injurious  than  the 
wind  of  persecution ;  I  mean  the  winds  of  error,  formality,  earthly-mindedness,  and 
general  corruption.  Mr.  Jones,  author  of  the  hiitory  of  the  Waldenses,  makes 
these  winds  to  mean  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which,  he  says,  were  with- 
held from  the  Church  when  she  became  the  favourite  of  the  state  under  Constantine. 
It  is  quite  true  that  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  frequently  represented  in 
Scripture  by  the  figurative  term  •'  winds."  Still  this  cannot  be  the  true  meaning  of 
the  term  "  winds  "  in  this  passage,  for  this  reason,  the  four  angels  are  commanded  to 
restrain  these  winds  till  the  servants  of  God  are  sealed ;  whereas  this  sealing  cannot 
be  effected  without  the  influences  of  the  Spirit.  What,  then,  are  we  to  understand 
by  the  winds  mentioned  ?  I  answer,  two  things :  1.  Divine  judgments.  Wars, 
famine,  pestilence,  the  overthrow  of  kingdoms,  and  the  universal  wreck  of  all 
earthly  things.  The  particular  judgments  to  which  these  winds  refer  are,  I  think, 
those  mentioned  in  the  sixth  seal,  at  the  close  of  the  sixth  chapter,  and  whose 
fearful  operations  are  represented  by  the  seven  trumpets  in  the  eighth  chapter.  2. 
All  events  and  influences  unfavourable  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  The  wind  of  perse- 
cution ;  the  wind  of  false  doctrine  ;  the  wind  of  delusion  and  wild  fanaticism ;  the 
wind  of  temptation ;  the  wind  of  infidelity ;  the  wind  of  open  profanity  and 
blasphemy;  the  winds  of  affliction,  adversity,  and  distress;  by  all  of  which  the 
Church  is  frequently  assailed.  These  things  are,  called  "  winds,"  because  they 
produce  agitation  and  commotion — breaking  the  branches,  blasting  the  fruits,  and 
uprooting  the  trees  of  God's  spiritual  vineyard.  They  are  called  "  four"  winds,  to 
show  their  universality,  their  wide-spreading  desolation.  They  are  called  winds  of 
the  "  earth,"  because  earth  is  the  scene  of  their  operation — they  are  for  ever  excluded 
from  heaven;  their  coming  from  the  four  cardinal  points  at  once  shows  their 
violence,  rage,  and  fury.  U.  The  agents  to  whom  they  are  committed.  This 
notion  of  angels  ruling  the  winds  is  very  ancient.  Herodotus  says  it  was  held  by 
the  Persians  ;  Eusebius  says  it  was  held  by  the  Phoenicians ;  Pausanias  says  it  was 
held  by  the  Greeks  ;  Tertullian  says  it  was  held  by  the  Romans ;  Seneca  and  Virgil 
say  it  was  held  by  the  Gauls ;  and  most  of  these  people  worshipped  these  ruling 
spirits.  Some  understand  by  the  four  angels  four  monarchies,  the  Babylonian,  the 
Grecian,  the  Persian,  and  the  Roman ;  but  this  cannot  be,  for  at  the  time  to  which 
this  passage  refers,  the  monarchies  will  have  long  been  forgotten :  while  existing 
monarchies  will  be  the  objects  of  this  vengeance,  and  not  the  executioners  of  it. 
Others  understand  by  these  four  angels  four  emperors,  Maximinus,  Galerius, 
Maxentius,  and  Licinius,  or  their  preetorian  prefects ;  but  the  same  objections  stand 
against  them  as  against  the  monarchies.  Others  think  that  four  persecuting 
powers  are  meant.  Others  think  four  evil  angels,  or  demons,  are  meant,  who  hold 
back  the  winds  of  the  Spirit  from  blowing  upon  this  valley  of  death,  that  the  dry 
bones  might  live  ;  or  who  are  charged  with  destructive  powers,  as  the  messengers 
of  an  angry  God  ;  but  as  their  work  is  first  to  restrain  all  antagonistic  influences  to 
the  gospel,  while  it  effects  the  high  purposes  of  God,  and  then  to  execute  the  Divine 
vengeance  at  the  day  of  Christ ;  and  as  these  employments  are  nowhere  ascribed  to 
wicked  angels,  this  cannot  be  the  real  meaning.     These  are  four  good  angels. 

23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

This  appears  first,  from  the  fact  that  they  are  here  represented  as  taking  a  part 
with  the  fifth  angel  in  sealing  the  servants  of  God ;  also  from  their  being  entrusted 
with  such  an  important  post — restraining  wicked  spirits,  persecuting  men,  antagonist 
influences,  and  Divine  judgments,  till  grace  has  worked  out  its  wonders.  Then 
their  attitude — standing — signifies  that  they  have  no  settled  dominion  ;  that  they 
are  the  movable  ministers  of  God ;  that  they  are  ready  to  do  His  pleasure.  III. 
The  gbeat  Being  who  commands  their  postponement  ob  suspension.  1.  Bishop 
Newton,  and  several  other  writers  both  before  and  since  his  day,  tell  us  that  this 
angel  was  Constantine  the  Great,  who,  they  say,  brought  light,  protection,  and 
deliverance  to  the  Christian  Church  that  had  been  greatly  afflicted  under  the 
persecuting  tyranny  of  the  Pagan  Koman  emperors.  As  far  as  I  can  judge,  there 
is  not  even  the  shadow  of  a  reason  for  thinking  that  this  angel  was  Constantine. 
(1)  The  language  applied  to  this  angel  is  too  sublime  to  refer  to  a  fallen  creature 
like  Constantine.  (2)  The  events  which  this  angel  is  said  to  control,  and  the 
magnificent  work  he  is  said  to  accomplish,  are  not  the  narrow  and  limited  circum- 
stances of  one  man's  life,  but  they  stretch  through  ages ;  spread  over  kingdoms, 
continents,  sea,  and  land.  (3)  The  character  of  Constantine  differs  widely  from 
what  we  must  believe  was  the  real  character  of  the  angel  referred  to  in  this  passage. 
(4)  The  influences  on  true  religion,  which  followed  Constantine's  interference,  were, 
in  many  respects,  just  the  opposite  to  those  which  the  angel  in  the  text  is  said  to 
produce.  This  angel  not  only  suspends  persecution  and  postpones  judgments,  but 
vital  godliness  greatly  prospers,  as  is  evident  from  the  number  that  are  said  to  be 
sealed.  Besides,  this  prosperity  of  genuine  religion  is  not  for  a  brief  period,  but  it 
appears  to  extend  through  centuries.  Now,  is  there  anything  analogous  to  this, 
which  may  be  regarded  as  the  result  of  Constantine's  interference  ?  That  some 
good  resulted  to  the  then  existing  and  persecuted  Church,  from  this  interferisnce, 
we  do  not  deny.  Persecution  was  suspended.  Still  we  maintain  that  the  evil 
accruing  from  this  change  preponderates ;  it  brought  her  in  contact  with  a 
secular  power  that  tarnished  her  purity,  beclouded  her  glory,  enervated  her  native 
power.  2.  Well,  who  is  this  Angel  ?  Why,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  uncreated 
Angel  of  the  Covenant,  to  whom  the  figurative  language  of  the  text  applies  to  the 
very  letter.  This  Angel  is  described — (1)  By  the  point  of  His  ascension.  "  And  I 
saw  another  Angel  ascending  from  the  east."  This  was  literally  true  of  Christ ; 
He  came  from  the  east,  and  hence  He  is  called  the  East,  or,  as  it  is  commonly 
rendered,  "  the  Day-spring  from  on  high."  But  His  ascending  from  the  east 
shows  the  favourable  nature  of  His  mission  and  character.  The  east  is  the  great 
fountain  of  light,  life,  fruitfulness,  purity,  and  joy  ;  so  this  Angel,  Christ,  is  called 
the  Sun  of  Kighteousness,  that  visits  our  world  with  healing  beneath  His  wings. 
He  is  that  bright,  shining  Sun,  that  never  sets,  but  whose  heavenly  radiance  always 
beams  upon  His  Church,  giving  salvation,  light,  beauty,  and  joy.  (2)  By  credentials 
He  bears.  "  Having  the  seal  of  the  living  God  "  ;  which  refers,  first,  to  His  office 
as  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  This  refers  to  a  custom  among  the  kings  of 
the  earth,  who  have  their  own  confidential  servants  to  whom  they  deliver  certain 
seals  of  office.  These  seals  of  office  are  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  without 
measure ;  authority  to  bestow  them,  procured  by  virtue  of  His  atonement ;  energy, 
to  carry  all  His  plans  into  successful  operation ;  and  all  power,  both  in  heaven  and 
in  earth,  to  render  all  things,  creatures,  and  events,  subservient  to  His  designs. 
But  His  having  the  seal  of  the  living  God  goes  further  still.  It  refers  to  the  dignity 
of  His  person,  as  the  Son  of  God,  as  well  as  to  the  glory  and  credentials  of  His 
office,  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Having  the  seal  of  the  living  God — that  is, 
having  in  His  own  nature  the  visible  impress  of  deity,  the  authentic  testimony, 
proof,  and  demonstration  that  He  Himself  was  the  living  God,  the  brightness  of 
His  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person.  (3)  By  the  supreme 
authority  He  assumes.  "  He  cried  with  a  loud  voice,"  the  emblem  of  supreme 
authority  and  power  ;  He  commands  or  forbids  as  He  pleases,  and  whatsoever  He 
wills  is  done.  (4)  By  the  command  He  gives.  "  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the 
sea  nor  the  trees."  No  devastating  wars,  no  raging  persecutions,  no  fearful  and 
wide-spreading  judgments,  must  be  permitted  to  hinder  the  cause  of  Christ.  The 
contrary  winds  must  sleep  at  the  feet  of  their  presiding  angels,  till  the  ark  of 
salvation  is  filled  with  the  whole  family  of  God  and  safely  moored  in  the  peaceful 
bay  of  heaven.  IV.  The  reason  assigned  for  their  suspension.  "  TiU  we  have 
sealed  the  servants  of  our  God  in  their  foreheads."  1.  The  nature  of  it.  To  seal 
a  person  or  thing  is  to  set  a  mark  upon  it  for  a  specific  purpose.  The  term  is 
frequently  employed  in  the  Scriptures  to  express  the  operations  of  grace,  by  which 


CHAP.  VII.]  REVELATION.  355 

believers  are  separated  from  the  world  and  made  meet  for  heaven.  2.  The  agents 
of  it.  "We."  The  work  of  salvation  is  of  Christ  from  first  to  last.  3.  The 
subjects  of  it.  "  Servants  of  God,"  that  is,  true  believers,  those  who  serve  God  by 
obeying  His  commands  and  seeking  His  glory.  They  are  sealed  to  serve  Him  here 
and  to  enjoy  Him  hereafter.  4.  Visibility  of  it.  "  In  their  foreheads."  5.  The 
chief  design  of  it.  That  believers  should  not  be  •'  hurt  "  by  the  fearful  calamities 
that  are  predicted  in  the  sixth  seal,  as  speedily  to  fall  upon  the  wicked.  God  marks 
them  as  His  special  property ;  and  being  thus  sealed,  they  live  under  the  special 
protection  of  His  providence  while  here,  and  will  meet  with  an  effectual  shelter  in 
the  great  day  of  His  wrath.  6.  The  extent  of  it.  The  question  was  once  put  to 
Christ,  '*  Lord,  are  there  few  that  shall  be  saved  ?  "  Here  the  question  receives  an 
answer  which  shows  that  there  will  be  many,  so  that  in  this,  as  well  as  in  all  other 
things,  Christ  will  have  the  pre-eminence.  (1)  We  have  a  specific  number.  Twelve 
thousand  out  of  each  tribe  were  sealed,  making  one  hundred  and  forty-four 
thousand  in  the  whole,  which  in  prophetic  language  signifies  completion  and 
perfection.  (2)  We  have  a  general  number.  The  whole  assembly  of  the  redeemed, 
including  Jews  and  Gentiles,  rises  in  splendid  array  to  the  apostle's  view.  7.  The 
ultimate  glory  of  it.  "  They  stand  before  the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb." 
{Wm.  Gregory.)         God's  government  of  the  world : — I.  God  employs  the  highest 

ORDER  of  celestial  INTELLIGENCES  IN   THE   CONDUCT   OF   HiS  GOVERNMENT.      NowhcrS 

throughout  immensity  does  He  appear  to  act  directly  on  matter  and  mind  at  all 
(Hos.  ii.  21,  22).  The  mere  scientist  accounts  for  the  various  objects  and  phenomena 
of  the  material  world  by  what  he  calls  blind  forces  or  natural  laws  ;  I  prefer  ascrib- 
ing all  under  God  to  the  "  angels  standing  on  the  four  corners,"  &c.  A  wonderful 
view  of  the  universe,  truly,  we  have  here.  True,  a  telescope  opens  to  my  vision 
world  upon  world  and  system  upon  system,  until  imagination  reels  at  the  prospect, 
and  my  spirit  seems  crushed  with  a  sense  of  its  own  insignificance ;  but  in  these 
words  I  have  a  telescope  by  which  I  see  the  wide  fields  of  air,  the  rolling  planets, 
the  minute  and  the  vast,  the  proximate  and  the  remote  peopled  and  working, 
reaching  in  regular  gradation  from  my  little  being  up  to  the  ineffable  throne,  and 
all  under  God.    II.  God,  in  employing  these  agencies,  enjoins  on  them  a  special 

REGARD  FOR  THE  INTERESTS   OF   REDEEMED   MEN   IN   THE  WORLD  (vCrS.  2,  3).       1.    There 

is  some  method  by  which  angels  can  aid  man.  2.  Man's  salvation  is  of  paramount 
importance.  3.  Service  to  the  lowest  is  consonant  with  the  highest  greatness.  4. 
Man's  obligation  is  to  seek  the  spiritual  good  of  his  fellows.  (D,  Thomas,  D.D.)  A 
sketch  of  an  impending  judgment : — I.  The  world  exposed  to  judgment.  Winds 
are  the  symbols  of  judgment  (Jer.  xlix.  36,  37 ;  Dan.  vii.  2).  The  four  winds 
indicate  the  universality  of  the  judgment.  Conscience,  Providence,  and  the  Bible 
all  point  to  this  universal  judgment.  II.  The  judgment  entrusted  to  angels. 
Angels  are  the  ministers  of  God.  He  employs  them  to  execute  His  judgments.  1. 
They  appeared  amidst  the  terrors  of  Mount  Sinai  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2).  2.  They 
appeared  with  our  Saviour  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (Matt.  xxiv.  30,  31).  3. 
Angels  have  been  frequently  engaged  in  executing  Divine  judgment  on  this  earth 
(Exod.  xii.  22 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16,  17  ;  2  Kings  xix.  35).  4.  Angels  are  represented 
as  active  in  the  final  day  of  retribution  (Matt,  xiii.  39,  41,  xxv.  31 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16). 
The  Eternal  Judge  then,  as  now,  will  work  through  others.  HI.  The  angels 
eestrained  by  a  Mediator.  Who  is  this  angel  ?  Who  is  represented  in  this 
particular  case  I  know  not.  But  I  know  that  the  Great  Angel  of  the  Covenant 
answers  weU  this  description.  He  came  from  the  orient  depths  of  glory  with 
Divine  credentials  and  with  great  earnestness,  in  order  to  stay  the  angels  of 
retribution  from  executing  their  terrible  commission.  Our  great  Kedeemer  holds 
back  the  hand  of  the  destroying  angel,  ajid  the  burden  of  His  intercession  is, 
•'  Hurt  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea,"  &c.  To  Christ  we  owe  the  postponement  of 
the  judgment.  IV.  The  Mediator  restraining  because  His  work  is  unfinished. 
1.  There  are  men  who  are  yet  to  receive  the  seal  of  God.  2.  That  the  judgment  is 
delayed  untU  the  number  of  the  sealed  ones  is  completed.  {Homilist.)  The  seal 
of  the  living  God. — The  angeVs  seal,  set  upon  God's  faithful  servants,  when  hurtful 
winds  are  blowing  in  the  Church  militant : — I.  Notice  some  of  those  pernicious 

WINDS   wherewith   THE    ChURCH   OF    ChRIST   IS   INFESTED   WHILE    HERE    IN  A  MILITANT 

STATE.  1.  There  is  the  wind  of  open  violence,  persecution,  and  bloodshed.  2. 
Sometimes,  and  very  frequently,  the  hurtful  wind  of  error  in  doctrine  is  suffered 
to  blow  in  the  barn  or  field  of  the  visible  Church.  3.  Another  hurtful  wind  is  the 
wind  of  strong  delusions  as  to  everlasting  soul  concerns  ;  and  this  is  consequential 
unto  the  former.    4.  There  is  the  wind  of  temptation  that  blows  in  the  visible 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

Church.  This  was  a  wind  that  blew  hard  on  the  glorious  Head  and  Captain  of  our 
salvation  (Matt.  iv.).  5,  Another  hurtful  wii^|^  is  the  wind  of  profanity  and  open 
ungodliness.  6.  All  these  winds  are  commonly  followed  with  the  winds  of  desolating 
judgments,  such  as  sword,  famine,  and  pestilence,  whereby  the  wicked  are  turned 
ofE  the  stage  of  time  into   a  miserable  eternity.    II.  Inquire   who   ake  those 

SERVANTS  OF  GoD  FOR  WHOSE  SAKE  THE  HURTFUL  WINDS  ARE  RESTRAINED,  THAT 
PROVISION   MAY   BE    MADE     FOR     THEIR     SAFETY    WHEN    THEY    DO     ACTUALLY   BLOW,         1. 

The  servants  of  God  are  such  as  "  keep  the  commandments  of  God,"  i,e. — (1)  They 
are  holy  persons ;  the  "  sanctified  and  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus."  Or — (2)  As 
Durham  observes,  they  "  keep  the  commandments  of  God,"  it  is  to  be  understood 
of  a  keeping  the  laws,  ordinances,  and  institutions  of  Christ,  in  opposition  to  a  set 
of  men  in  the  Anticbiristian  Church,  who,  through  their  traditions,  were  making 
void  the  commandments  of  God.  2.  The  faithful  servants  of  God  are  said  to  be 
such  as  "  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus."  By  the  testimony  of  Jesus  we  are  to 
understand  the  gospel  of  Christ,  or  the  doctrine  of  faith  in  its  purity,  which  only  is 
"  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  "  (Eom.  i.  16).  III.  Speak  a  little  of  the  seal 
THAT  IS  SET  UPON  THE  SERVANTS  OF  GoD.  1.  Who  is  He  that  scals  them?  It  is 
Christ,  the  Great  Angel  that  hath  the  seal  of  the  living  God.  2.  What  is  implied 
in  the  sealing  them  ?  (1)  That  He  is  their  great  owner  and  proprietor  ;  for  a  man 
seals  his  own  goods,  that  it  may  be  known  they  are  his.  (2)  A  seal  is  for  distinction, 
to  distinguish  one  man's  goods  from  another.  (3)  A  seal  is  for  confirmation.  The 
king's  seal  appended  unto  a  charter  establishes  and  confirms  it.  (4)  A  seal  is 
sometimes  for  secrecy.  We  read  of  a  book  (chap.  v.  1)  which  was  sealed  with  seven 
seals  because  of  the  great  secrets  and  hid  mysteries  contained  in  it.  And  so  it  may 
import  that  God's  people  are  His  hidden  ones,  and  that  His  secrets  are  imparted  to  i 
them,  and  not  to  others.  (5)  A  seal  is  a  badge  of  honour,  love,  and  esteem.  And 
so  it  implies  that  His  servants  are  honourable  persons,  precious  in  His  sight  (Isa. 
xliii.  4).  (6)  A  seal  is  for  custody  and  preservation.  So  the  saints  and  servants  of 
God,  tney  are  "  the  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation."  3.  When  and  how  are  they  sealed?  (1)  From  aU  eternity 
they  were  sealed  with  His  electing  and  everlasting  love.  (2)  In  their  conversion 
and  effectual  calling  they  are  sealed  in  their  own  persons  with  the  image  of  the 
second  Adam.  (3)  They  have  a  seal  of  blood  set  upon  them  in  their  redemption 
and  justification ;  for,  as  you  see  (ver.  14  of  this  chapter),  "  they  have  their 
garments  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  (4)  They  have  the 
seal  of  the  Spirit  of  promise  set  upon  them  (Eph.  i.  13).  4.  But  why  are  they  said 
to  be  sealed  in  their  foreheads  ?  This  may  import  two  things.  (1)  Their  visible 
profession  of  Christ  and  their  open  owning  of  the  Lord,  and  His  way  and  cause  in 
the  time  of  the  greatest  opposition,  when  error  and  delusion  and  persecution  was 
most  rampant  in  the  visible  Church.  (2)  Their  being  marked  or  sealed  in  the 
forehead  implies  that,  in  the  time  of  common  calamity,  God  will  make  such  a 
visible  difference  between  His  own  faithful  servants  and  others,  that  he  that  runs 
may  read,  according  to  that  (Mai.  iii.  18).  IV.  Inquire  into  the  reasons  why 
Christ,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  will  have  His  servants  marked  in  theib 
foreheads  when  the  winds  are  to  be  let  blow  ?  1.  In  so  many  words  He  will 
have  them  sealed,  because  they  are  His  Father's  gift,  "  Thine  they  were,  and  Thou 
gavest  them  Me,"  and  for  the  Father's  sake  that  gave  them.  He  will  have  them 
sealed.  2.  Because  He  hath  bought  them  at  a  dear  rate,  even  with  the  price  of 
His  precious  blood,  not  with  silver,  or  gold,  or  such  corruptible  things,  &c.  3.  He 
seals  them  because  they  beheve  in  Him  (Eph.  i.  13).  "  After  that  ye  beUeved,  ye 
were  sealed,"  <fec.  4.  He  seals  them  because  they  love  Him,  so  as  to  mourn  for 
injury  done  Him  (Ezek.  ix.  4).  5.  He  seals  them  because  they  are  His  faithful 
witnesses,  that  confess  Him  when  others  deny  Him.  6.  He  seals  them  that  they 
may  not  suffer  hurt  by  the  destroying  winds  that  blow  in  the  visible  Church.  They 
keep  the  commandments  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  ;  and  therefore  He  will 
keep  them  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  according  to  the  promise  (Psa.  xci.  3,  7). 
(E.  Erskine,  B.D.)  Pent-up  judgment : — I.  Pent-up  judgment.  Eighteousness 
produces  judgment,  and  grace  restrains  it.  Grace  does  not  nullify  or  cancel 
judgment ;  it  simply  suspends  it.  The  history  of  our  earth  is  one  of  suspended 
judgment.  Of  this  judgment,  we  may  say  that  it  is — 1.  Slow.  When  it  comes,  it 
comes  swiftly  ;  but  meanwhile  it  is  not  rash,  nor  precipitate.  This  slowness  often 
deludes  the  sinner.  2.  Silent.  It  makes  no  sign.  The  fermenting  elements  are 
noiseless.  There  are  often  no  thunder-clouds,  but  a  calm,  blue  sky.  3.  Sure.  It 
will  not  miss  its  mark,  nor  mistake  its  victim,  nor  forget  its  time.    Its  slowness 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  357 

and  silence  contribute  to  its  certainty.  4.  Terrible.  The  blow,  when  it  comes,  is 
overwhelming.  The  pent-up  torrent,  when  it  breaks  its  barrier,  carries  all  before 
it.  So  God's  vengeance  is  infinitely  terrible.  Who  can  stand  before  it  ?  11.  The 
SEALING.  In  the  chapter  before  us  it  is  a  Jewish  multitude  that  is  specially  named 
as  sealed  ;  but  as  in  ver.  3  it  is  the  *'  servants  of  God  "  that  are  said  to  be  sealed, 
we  may  infer  that  by  that  expression  both  Gentile  and  Jew  are  meant.  The  sealing 
seems  (as  in  Ezek.  ix.)  to  intimate  exemption  from  the  earthly  judgments  of  a 
particular  time.  I  do  not  dwell  on  this  further  than  to  point  out  God's  care  for 
His  own  in  days  of  trouble — as  in  Noah's  days,  in  Lot's  days,  in  Ezekiel's  days,  in 
the  time  of  Jerusalem's  great  siege.  I  would  remind  you  of  the  ninety-first  Psalm 
also,  which  is  specially  written  for  evil  days.  III.  The  inoatherino.  It  is  not 
simply  for  temporal  protection  that  God  stays  His  judgments,  but  for  salvation.  A 
time  of  pent-up  judgment  is  a  time  of  ingathering.  A  time  of  judgment  may  also 
be  so,  but  a  time  of  suspended  judgment  still  more  so.  For  at  such  a  time  God  is 
in  earnest — in  earnest  in  His  grace,  in  earnest  in  His  righteousness.  His  long- 
suffering  is  salvation ;  His  patience  is  life  eternal.  He  pities  to  the  last.  Judgment 
is  His  strange  work.  At  such  a  time  the  gospel  comes  with  peculiar  power. 
{U.  Banar,  D.D.)  The  sealing  of  the  elect : — There  is  here  revealed  to  us 
a  Divine  idea,  and  a  Divine  law  of  action,  which  is  now  advancing  with  per- 
petual energy,  past,  present,  and  to  come.  I.  God  has  a  foreknown  numbeb 
WHOM  He  will  gather  out  unto  Himself.  The  whole  of  the  new  creation 
sprung  from,  and  surrounding,  the  second  Adam  in  the  kingdom  of  life  eternal; 
the  mystical  Person  of  Christ,  both  the  Head  and  the  Body,  all  perfected  by  that 
which  "  every  joint  supplieth  " ;  the  true  and  eternal  Vine,  complete  in  all  its 
symmetry  from  root  to  spray ;  the  heavenly  court,  compassed  about  with  ranks  of 
angelic  hosts ;  the  order  of  patriarchs,  and  the  multitude  of  saints,  ascending  to 
the  Incarnate  Son  :  all  this  Divine  and  glorious  mystery  of  miraculous  love  and 
power  stands  in  the  foreknowledge  of  the  Eternal,  full,  perfect,  and  accompUshed, 
II.  The  course  of  this  world  will  run  on  until  this  foreknown  number  shall 
BE  gathered  in.  All  things  are  for  the  elect's  sake.  What  is  the  history  of  the 
world  but  a  history  of  man's  warfare  against  God  ?  of  our  provocation,  and  of  His 
patience  ?  HI.  Even  now,  while  judgment  is  stayed,  the  Church  in  the  midst 
OF  us  IS  sealing  God's  elect.  The  angel  ascending  from  the  east  is  a  type  of  the 
ministry  of  angels  and  men  knit  together  in  one  order  of  grace,  to  gather  out  the 
heirs  of  salvation.  The  visible  polity  of  the  Church,  its  stately  ritual  and  public 
solemnities,  its  fasts  and  feasts,  its  chants  and  litanies,  its  missions  and  preachings, 
all  the  public  order  and  movement  which  meets  the  eye  and  ear — all  this  is  as  the 
•'  net  let  down  into  the  sea,  which  taketh  of  every  kind,  both  good  and  bad."  But 
this  is  not  the  sealing  of  the  elect  It  is  an  inner  work  of  grace,  a  choosing  from 
among  the  chosen,  a  preparation  for  that  day,  when,  upon  the  eternal  shore,  the 
angels  "  shall  gather  the  good  into  vessels,  and  cast  the  bad  away."  1.  The  ultimate 
and  true  election  of  God  is  not  collective  but  several,  not  of  bodies  but  of  persons. 
Bom  alone,  alone  we  must  live  ;  alone  repent,  pray,  fast,  watch,  persevere,  and  die  ; 
each  one  for  himself  "  work  out  his  own  salvation,"  and  make  his  "  calling  and 
election  sure."  2.  This  mystery  of  election,  as  it  is  personal,  so  it  is  strictly 
consistent  with  our  personal  probation.  God  made  man  free,  and  elects  him  to  and 
in  the  exercise  of  freedom,  will,  and  power.  And  what  is  this  seal  of  the  hving 
God,  but  the  image  of  God  renewed  in  the  soul  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
the  likeness  and  the  mind  of  Christ  stamped  upon  us  by  a  perfect  regeneration ; 
the  inward  reality  of  a  saintly  spirit  wrought  in  us,  either  by  a  life  of  steadfast 
obedience  or  by  a  true  repentance,  by  a  persevering  grace  or  by  a  perfect  conversion  ? 
IV.  Let  us  try  ourselves  by  some  plain  questions  of  self-examination.  1. 
What  is  our  character  ?  By  this  we  mean  the  clear,  conscious,  and  definite  shape 
and  direction  which  has  been  given  to  our  whole  spiritual  nature.  Surely  it  is  no 
hard  thing  to  find  out  whether  we  are  living  in  any  known  sin  or  not;  whether  we 
are  striving  against  temptation  or  not ;  whether  we  have  mastery  over  our  faults 
or  our  faults  over  us ;  whether  we  desire  the  love  of  God  or  not ;  whether  sin  is 
to  us  a  sorrow,  and  the  very  thought  of  holiness  a  delight ;  whether  we  are  living 
for  this  world  or  for  the  next.  2.  If  we  have  not  this  higher  character,  what  are 
our  tendencies  ?  Is  sin  losing  hold,  and  the  spirit  of  sanctity  gaining  power  over 
us?  Are  our  temptations  weaker,  and  we  stronger;  our  faults  fewer,  and  our 
repentance  deeper  ?  3.  What  is  our  habitual  intention  ?  The  true  self  of  sincere 
minds  is  that  which  speaks  and  aspires  in  their  better  moments.  The  lower 
level  on  which  they  move  at  other  times  is  the  way  of  their  in&rmity.    As  the 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

resistance  of  the  atmosphere  stays  the  keenest  arrow's  flight,  and  bends  it  to  earth 
again,  so  the  purest  and  directest  intention  is  slackened  by  the  gross  thick  airs  of 
our  daily  life.  Not  to  sink  into  a  slower,  earthlier  motion  is  the  portion  of  those 
who  are  lifted  into  a  higher  and  heavenlier  sphere,  where  the  actings  of  the  soul 
have  nothing  to  resist  them.  In  heaven  "  they  rest  not  day  nor  night  "  ;  but  on 
earth  the  most  unresting  intention  is  overcome  by  weakness  and  weariness  at  last. 
It  cannot  always  be  conscious  and  actual ;  but  that  does  not  take  away  from  its 
true  and  habitual  reality.  Let  this,  then,  be  your  continual  endeavour,  to  uphold 
and  to  prolong  these  higher  intentions.  Quicken  and  strengthen  them  by  a  life 
of  prayer,  by  meditation,  by  habitual  communion,  by  self-examination,  by  confession ; 
by  exercises  of  the  heart,  and  by  acts  of  faith,  hope,  and  love.  {Archdeacon  Mamiing.) 
All-saints^  day  : — First,  then,  man  being  compassed  with  a  cloud  of  witnesses  of  his 
own  infirmities,  and  the  manifold  afflictions  of  this  life,  had  need  of  some  light  to 
show  him  the  right  way,  and  some  strength  to  enable  him  to  walk  safely  in  it.  And 
this  light  and  strength  is  here  proposed  in  the  assistance  of  an  angel.  Which 
being  first  understood  of  angels  in  general,  affords  a  great  measure  of  comfort  to 
us,  because  the  angels  are  faithful  and  diligent  attendants  upon  all  our  steps.  But 
our  security  of  deliverance  is  in  a  safer  and  a  stronger  hand  than  this  ;  not  in  these 
ministerial  and  missive  angels  only,  but  in  His  that  sends  them,  yea,  in  His  that 
made  them.  This  angel,  which  does  so  much  for  God's  saints,  is  by  many 
expositors  taken  to  be  our  Saviour  Christ  Himself.  And  will  any  man  doubt  of 
performance  of  conditions  in  Him  ?  Will  any  man  look  for  better  security  than 
Him  who  puts  two,  and  two  such,  into  the  band,  Christ  and  Jesus  :  an  anointed 
King,  able,  an  actual  Saviour,  willing  to  discharge  not  His,  but  our  debt  ?  This 
security,  then,  for  our  deliverance  and  protection,  we  have  in  this  angel  in  our  text, 
"  I  saw  an  angel,"  as  this  Angel  is  Christ ;  but  yet  we  have  also  another  security, 
more  immediate  and  more  appliable  to  us.  Besides  this  all-sufficiency  of  the 
Angel  of  the  Covenant,  Christ  Jesus,  we  have  for  our  security,  in  this  text,  "  I  saw 
an  angel,"  the  servants  of  Christ  too.  This  angel  is  indeed  the  whole  frame  and 
hierarchy  of  the  Christian  Church.  So,  then,  to  let  go  none  of  our  assistants,  our 
safety  is  in  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  Christ  Jesus,  radically,  fundamentally, 
meritoriously.  It  is  in  the  ministry  of  the  angels  of  heaven  invisibly  ;  but  it  is  in  the 
Church  of  God,  and  in  the  power  of  His  ministers  there,  manifestly,  sensibly, 
discernibly.  This  addition  is  intended  for  a  particular  addition  to  our  comfort ;  it 
is  a  particular  endowment,  or  enlargement,  of  strength  and  power  in  this  angel, 
that  he  comes  from  the  east.  Those  angels  which  have  had  their  sunset — their  fall — 
they  came  from  the  east.  "  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  0  Lucifer,  son  of 
the  morning  ?  "  He  had  his  begetting,  his  creation,  in  the  east,  in  the  light,  and 
there  might  have  stayed  for  any  necessity  of  falling  that  God  laid  upon  him. 
Take  the  angel  of  the  text  to  be  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  Christ  Jesus,  and  His 
name  is  The  East.  Every  way  the  gospel  is  an  angel  of  the  east.  But  this  is  that 
which  we  take  to  be  principally  intended  in  it,  that,  as  the  east  is  the  fountain  of 
light,  so  all  our  illumination  is  to  be  taken  from  the  gospel.  If  thou  suffer  thy 
soul  to  set  in  a  dark  cloud  of  ignorance  of  God's  providence,  or  in  a  darker  of  diffidence 
of  His  performance  towards  thee,  this  is  a  turning  to  the  west,  and  all  these  are 
perverse  and  awry.  But  turn  to  the  east  and  to  the  angel  that  comes  from  thence, 
the  ministry  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  Jesus  in  His  Church.  It  is  true  thou  mayest 
find  some  dark  places  in  the  Scriptures,  yet  fix  thyself  upon  this  angel  of  the  east, 
the  preaching  of  the  Word,  the  ordinance  of  God,  and  thine  understanding  shall 
be  enlightened,  and  thy  belief  established,  and  thy  conscience  unburthened.  Our 
angel  comes  from  the  east,  a  denotation  of  splendour,  an  illustration  of  under- 
standing and  conscience,  and  there  is  more — he  comes  ascending.  "  I  saw  an 
angel  ascend  from  the  east,"  that  is,  still  growing  more  clear  and  more  powerful 
upon  us  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  13).  Take  the  angel  to  be  Christ,  and  then  His  ascension  is 
intended.  But  as  this  angel  is  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  God  gave  it  a  glorious 
ascent  in  the  primitive  Church,  when  as  this  sun  ascended  quickly  beyond  the 
reach  of  heretics  and  persecutors.  Now  to  give  way  to  this  ascent  of  this  angel 
in  thyself,  make  the  way  smooth,  find  thou  a  growth  of  the  gospel  in  thy  faith,  and 
let  us  find  it  in  thy  life.  If  thou  find  it  not  ascending  it  descends.  If  thou  live 
not  by  it  nothing  can  redeem  thee,  thou  diest  by  it.  "  Of  the  living  God."  The 
gods  of  the  nations  are  all  dead  gods :  either  such  gods  as  never  had  life — stones, 
and  gold  and  silver — or  such  gods  at  best  as  were  never  gods  until  they  were  dead, 
for  men  that  had  benefited  the  world  in  any  general  invention,  or  otherwise,  were 
made  gods  after  their  deaths,  which  was  a  miserable  deification.    If  we  seek  this 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION,  359 

seal  in  the  great  Angel,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  Christ  Jesus  :  it  is  true  He  hath 
it,  for  "  the  Father  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son."  Christ,  as  the  Son 
of  Man,  executes  a  judgment,  and  hath  a  power,  which  He  hath  not  but  by  gift, 
by  commission,  by  virtue  of  this  seal,  from  His  Father.  The  servants  of  God  being 
sealed  in  their  foreheads  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  when  they  are  received  into 
the  care  of  the  Church,  all  those  means  which  God  hath  provided  for  His  servants, 
in  His  Church,  to  resist  afflictions  and  temptations,  are  intended  to  be  conferred 
upon  them  in  that  seal.  This  sealing  of  them  is  a  communicating  to  them  all 
those  assistances  of  the  Christian  Church.  Then  they  have  a  way  of  prevention  of 
sin,  by  hearing  ;  a  way  to  absolution,  by  confession  ;  a  way  to  reconciliation,  by  a 
worthy  receiving  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  Jesus.  And  these  helps  of  the 
Christian  Church  thus  conferred  in  baptism,  keep  open  still,  if  these  be  rightly 
used,  that  other  seal,  the  seal  of  the  Spirit  (Eph.  i.  13;  2  Cor.  i.  22).  {John 
Donne,  D.D.)  The  servants  of  our  God. — The  best  service  : — I.  We  ought  to 
BE  THE  ACTIVE  SERVANTS  OF  OUR  GoD.  It  is  necessary  for  us  to  pray,  and  if  we 
pray  aright,  it  will  make  us  active  in  going  about  doing  good.  Do  not  let  us  enter 
into  the  business  of  life  solely  on  our  own  account ;  let  us  be  servants  in  all  we  do 
on  God's  account.  How  earnestly  most  business  men  seek  opportunities  of  doing 
anything  and  everything  to  increase  their  trade  and  make  it  prosperous.  Why  do 
not  we  as  Christians  be  equally  earnest  in  attracting  people  to  our  churches  and 
chapels?  We  may  be  co-workers  with  God.  Your  holy,  charitable  life  and 
manners  may  melt  the  opposition  of  men  who  hate  goodness  and  truth.  U.  Then 
let  us  further  be  consistent  servants  of  our  God.  The  world  watches  us,  waiting 
to  see  whether  we  are  true  or  not.  Don't  be  pious  in  singing  hymns,  and  impious 
in  something  else.  Be  consistent.  If  you  have  faults,  don't  rest  until  you  get  rid 
of  them.  Grow  daily  in  grace,  piety,  and  reUgion,  like  healthy  plants,  which  grow 
in  beauty  day  by  day.  III.  Be  a  fbee  servant  of  our  God.  Don't  let  any  bad 
habits  make  you  their  prisoner.  It  is  said  that  habit  is  second  nature  ;  and  man 
is  a  bundle  of  habits.  You  know  that  when  you  walk  across  a  field  for  the  first 
time  you  make  scarcely  any  impression  on  the  grass.  But  if  you  go  several 
times  a  day  for  a  year  you  will  make  a  beaten  path.  So  one  sin  may  not  do  you 
much  injury,  but  it  is  the  beginning  of  many.  One  drop  of  water  from  yonder 
hill  soon  dries  up,  but  if  it  be  followed  by  fresh  drops  every  moment,  by  and  by 
it  scoops  out  a  way  through  the  hardest  rocks,  and  becomes  a  rapid,  gurgling 
stream,  which  dashes  from  stone  to  stone  until  it  reaches  the  broad  river.  So 
these  bad  habits  grow  upon  us  and  enslave  us.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  overcometh." 
The  Lord  God  has  promised  that  if  any  one  ask  Him,  He  will  send  His  Holy 
Spirit  into  that  man's  heart,  and  deUver  him  from  all  his  bad  habits.  IV.  Be  God's 
servants,  showing  forth  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Young  man,  you  may  not 
possess  a  titled  name,  but  you  may  make  yourself  the  embodiment  of  honour.  You 
may  not  possess  great  wealth,  but  you  may  be  known  as  one  of  the  upright  of 
the  earth.  When  a  beautiful  woman  dies,  nobody  mourns  her  ;  but  when  a 
woman  who  is  beautiful  in  soul  passes  away,  angels  welcome  her  to  glory  and 
good  men  weep  for  her.    Be  beautiful  in  life.    (W.  Birch.) 

Vers.  4-8.  The  number  of  them  which  were  sealed,  —  The  sealing  : — I.  Who, 

THEN,     ARE     THESE     144,000     SEALED     ONES?        II.     ThE     NATURE     OF     THE     SEALING 

OF  WHICH  THESE  144,000  ARE  THE  SUBJECTS.  1.  It  is  manifest  that  the  transaction 
takes  place  on  earth,  and  in  the  case  of  people  contemporaneously  Uving  in  the 
flesh.  2.  This  sealing  involved  the  impartation  of  a  conspicuous  and  observable 
mark.  3.  It  is  something  Divine.  The  seal  with  which  the  sealing  is  done  is 
**a  seal  of  the  living  God."  It  so  pledges  Him,  and  to  Him,  that  it  must  be 
regarded  as  His  own  act.  4.  The  office  of  this  sealing  is  in  the  hands  of  an 
angel,  who  comes  forth  from  the  sun-rising.  He  is  a  high  officer  from  God.  He 
carries  a  seal  of  the  miracle-working  God,  and  he  gives  commands  to  the  angels  of 
judgment.  Many  take  him  to  be  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself.  There  is  much  to 
sustain  this  view.  5.  This  sealing  was,  moreover,  a  moral,  and  not  a  mere  arbitrary 
or  external  thing.  Those  who  receive  it  are  described  as  "the  servants  of  our  God,"  as 
contradistinguished  from  other  classes  of  men.  And  from  what  is  said  of  them  in 
the  fourteenth  chapter  they  are  very  eminently  God's  servants.  It  is  the  common 
law  of  the  Divine  proceedings  that  His  special  honours  are  never  otherwise  con- 
ferred than  in  connection  with  special  dutifulness  and  fidelity  under  very  special 
trials  and  difficulties.  6.  And  from  this  we  are  enabled  to  get  a  stUl  deeper  glance 
into  the  nature  oi  this  peculiar  sealing.    The  seal  of  God  is  the  Spiiit  of  God, 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

particularly  in  His  more  unusual  gifts.  7.  Very  various  and  diverse :  hence  would 
also  be  the  outward  manifestations  of  this  mark.  It  would  show  itself  in  the 
doctrines  professed  by  the  sealed  ones,  in  the  power  with  which  they  announce  and 
defend  them,  in  a  particularly  holy,  prayerful,  and  self-denying  life,  in  a  bravery 
and  fearlessness  before  gainsayers  which  no  earthly  powers  can  daunt,  and  in  a 
wisdom  and  heavenliness  of  demeanour.  III.  The  intent  and  effect  op  this 
MARVELLOUS  SEALING.  It  is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  it  is  a  merciful  and 
gracious  act.  Its  first  efifect  is  to  stay  the  blasts  of  judgment,  and  to  produce  a  lull 
in  the  work  of  vengeance.  So  it  is  ever.  God's  people  are  the  salt  of  the  earth. 
But  for  them,  and  God's  gracious  purposes  toward  them,  judgment  and  ruin 
would  instantly  break  over  the  globe.  Governments  stand,  society  exists,  the 
waters  flow,  the  trees  live,  the  sea  retains  its  salubrity,  the  grasses  grow  upon  the 
earth,  and  the  death-blasts  of  the  destroying  angels  are  restrained,  only  because  the 
Lord  is  engaged  taking  out  from  among  the  nations  a  people  for  His  name,  the 
number  of  which  must  first  be  made  up.  But  this  sealing  was  more  particularly 
for  the  comfort,  assurance,  and  security  of  the  sealed  ones  themselves.  As  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  certified  and  assured  the  apostles  of  the  Divinity  of  the 
cause  they  had  espoused,  of  their  acceptance  as  God's  acknowledged  ambassadors ; 
so  this  sealing  with  the  seal  of  the  living  God  certified  and  assured  these  144,000 
of  the  unmistakable  character  of  their  faith,  of  their  election  as  a  firstfruits  of 
incoming  new  administrations,  and  guaranteed  unto  them  not  only  security  amid 
the  blasts  of  heightening  judgment  upon  earth,  but  also  a  peculiar  and  blessed 
portion  with  Jesus  in  His  glory.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D  D.)  All  saints : — I.  The  number 
OF  THE  BLESSED.  The  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  are  the  twelve 
thousand  from  each  of  the  twelve  tribes  ;  and  these  mystic  figures,  though  they  may 
mean  much  else,  seem  at  least  to  represent  a  certain  perfect  number  contemplated 
by  God.  Let  it  be  a  mystery,  this  apparent  limitation  of  the  number  of  the 
elect !  let  God's  foreknowledge  and  man's  freewill  defy  our  explanation,  and 
be  confused  in  our  attempt  to  see  the  relation  of  number  to  Him  who  is  infinite ! — 
yet  the  believer  feels  a  sensation  of  repose  in  the  thought  that  the  work  answers  to 
the  design,  and  that  the  number  of  the  redeemed  is  perfect  according  to  the  will  of 
God.  In  all  our  anticipations  of  the  result  of  labour  for  God,  this  faith  must 
rule  our  hearts,  viz.,  that  the  Divine  love  will  not  be  disappointed.  Care  must  be 
had  for  the  few,  that  they  may  lack  nothing  which  the  Church  can  give.  II.  There 
IS  A  great  multitude.  There  are  few  minds  that  are  not  swayed  by  a  comparison 
of  numbers.  The  multitude  who  agree  to  forget  God  charm  us  with  the  thought  of 
impunity,  if  we  be  no  worse  than  they ;  the  difiiculty  of  holy  living  is  increased  by 
its  singularity.  Is  not  one  blessing,  which  we  derive  from  a  contemplation  of  the 
angels,  the  thought  of  support  which  the  obedience  of  their  "innumerable 
company  "  lends  to  cheer  the  hearts  of  those  who  on  earth  are  fighting  against 
numbers?  III.  Their  happiness.  IV.  There  is  a  reason  why  even  Christians 
hesitate  to  call  a  man  happy  till  he  is  dead,  not  because  he  may  fall  into 
misfortune,  but  into  sin.  As  long  as  life  lasts,  so  long  lasts  temptation.  Exhaus- 
tion of  body,  or  extremity  of  pain,  or  influence  of  opiates,  or  dreadful  memory  of 
early  sins,  exercises  at  times  a  desperate  tyranny  over  the  quiet  of  the  closing  day. 
Therefore  with  such  dangers  even  to  the  last,  well  may  we  hold  our  breath  and  cal 
no  man  happy  till  he  be  dead.  V.  There  is  in  the  religious  life  scarcely  a  sorer 
trial  than  doubt.  And  not  only  in  matters  of  speculation  and  doubt,  but  in 
every  common  incident  of  daily  life,  let  us  force  ourselves  to  imagine  what  our 
departed  friends  now  feel,  not  what  they  once  felt.     VI.  A  contemplation  op  the 

DEAD   will    relieve     US     OF     THE     PAINFUL     THOUGHT    THAT    DEATH   CUTS   SHORT   THE 

WORK  OF  LIFE.  The  life  beyond  the  grave  has  been  beautifully  compared  to  the 
heavens  at  night.  Think  how,  at  the  creation  of  day  and  night,  Adam  must  have 
marvelled  to  see  the  sun  withdraw;  how  dread  and  awful  must  have  been  the 
first  darkness  veiling  from  his  eyes  a  world  of  perfect  beauty ;  what  a  blank  it 
must  have  appeared  in  his  sight  1  But  greater  far  was  his  amazement  when 
stars  broke  out,  and  one  by  one  lit  up  the  hollow  vaults  of  heaven,  and  the  whole 
spaces  of  the  air  were  jewelled  with  bright  orbs,  and  countless  worlds  like  unto  his 
own  were  presented  to  his  eyes  1  If  the  sun  by  day  can  so  blind  us,  and  the 
darkness  of  nightfall  can  reveal  so  many  worlds,  why  may  not  death  not  only 
compensate  a  man  for  the  loss  of  life,  but  open  to  his  clearer  vision  regions  of 
untraversed  light  which  it  had  not  entered  into  his  heart  to  conceive?    VII. 

BeMEMBER  above   all   THINGS   THAT   THE   HAPPINESS   OF   THOSE  WE   SPEAK   OP   DEPENDS 

»ox  ON  THEJisELVEs.     God  Himself  is   their  light  and  Ufe  and  their  exceeding 


CHAP.  VII.]  REVELATION,  361 

great  reward;    their   eyes  rest   on  Him;    salvation  is  His  free  gift.      {Canon 
Furse.) 

Vers.  9-17.  A  greaX  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number. — The  saints  in 
heaven : — I.  What  John  saw  and  heard.  1.  A  great  multitude  of  all  nations. 
When  John  was  on  earth  he  saw  but  few  believers.  The  Church  was  like  a  lily  in 
a  field  of  thorns — lambs  in  the  midst  of  wolves ;  but  now  quite  different — thorns 
are  plucked  away — the  lilies  innumerable.  Every  country  had  its  representatives 
there — some  saved  out  of  every  land.  All  were  like  Christ,  and  yet  all  retained 
their  different  peculiarities.  2.  Their  position.  They  stood  before  the  throne ;  yea, 
nearer  than  the  angels,  for  they  stood  round  about.  This  marks  their  complete 
righteousness.  In  Christ  they  stand,  not  in  themselves.  Nearer  than  angels  ;  the 
angels  have  only  creature-righteousness — these  have  on  Creator  righteousness.  If 
you  are  ever  to  be  near  God,  you  may  come  freely  to  Him  now.  Why  keep  so  far 
away  ?  3.  Their  dress — white  robes  and  palms.  They  have  all  the  same  dress, ' 
there  is  no  difference.  It  is  the  garment  of  Christ.  Awakened  persons  are  some- 
times led  to  cry,  "  O  that  I  had  never  sinned !  "  but  here  is  something  better  than 
if  you  had  never  sinned.  4.  Their  song.  The  substance  of  it.  Salvation.  They 
give  God  all  the  glory.  The  effect  of  it:  it  stirs  up  the  hearts  of  the  angels 
(vers.  11,  12).  How  do  you  feel  when  you  hear  of  others  being  saved  and  brought 
nearer  to  God  than  you  ?  Do  you  envy  and  hate  them,  or  do  you  fall  down  and 
praise  God  for  it?  H.  Their  past  history.  Two  particulars  are  given.  Each 
had  a  different  history ;  still  in  these  two  they  were  alike.  1.  They  had  washed  : 
their  robes.  You  think  to  go  to  heaven  by  your  own  decency,  innocency,  attention 
to  duties.  Well,  you  would  be  the  only  such  one  there  :  all  are  washed  in  blood. 
2.  They  came  out  of  great  tribulation.  Every  one  that  gets  to  the  throne  must  put 
their  foot  upon  the  thorn.  The  way  to  the  crown  is  by  the  Cross.  We  must  taste 
the  gall  if  we  are  to  taste  the  glory.  Go  round  every  one  in  glory ;  every  one  has  a 
different  story,  yet  every  one  has  a  tale  of  suffering.  One  was  persecuted  in  his 
family,  by  his  friends  and  companions ;  another  was  visited  by  sore  pains  and 
humbling  disease,  neglected  by  the  world ;  another  was  bereaved  of  children. 
Mark,  all  are  brought  out  of  them.  It  was  a  dark  cloud,  but  it  passed  away :  the 
water  was  deep,  but  they  have  reached  the  other  side.  Not  one  of  them  blames 
God  for  the  road  He  led  them — "  Salvation "  is  their  only  cry.  III.  Future 
history.  1.  Immediate  service  of  God.  Here  we  are  allowed  to  spend  much  of 
our  time  in  our  worldly  callings.  We  shall  spend  eternity  in  loving  God,  in 
adoring,  admiring,  and  praising  God.  We  should  spend  much  of  our  present  time 
in  this.  2.  Not  in  the  wilderness  any  more.  At  present  we  are  like  a  flock  in  the 
wilderness,  our  soul  often  hungry,  and  thirsty,  and  sorely  tried.  Learn  to  glorify 
Him  in  the  fires,  to  sing  in  the  wilderness.  This  is  the  only  world  where  you  can 
give  God  that  glory.  3.  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  wiU  bless  us.  {R.  M.  McCheyne.) 
Humanity  in  heaven : — I.  Humanity  in  heaven  form  one  vast  community.  This 
fact  implies — 1.  The  marvellous  success  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  impartiality  of  the 
gospel.  3.  The  socialising  power  of  the  gospel.  U.  Humanity  in  heaven  are 
distinguished  m  position.  "  Stood  before  the  throne."  This  indicates — 1.  The 
highest  service.  2.  The  highest  honour.  3.  The  highest  integrity.  IH.  Humanity 
IN  heaven  are  glorious  in  appearance.  1.  Perfectly  sinless.  "  White  robes." 
2.  Completely  triumphant.  "  Palms."  IV.  Humanity  in  heaven  are  delightful 
IN  EMPLOYMENT.  Singing  is  worship  in  its  perfect  form.  The  song  is — 1.  Redemp- 
tive in  its  theme.  2.  Grateful  in  its  purpose.  (1)  To  God  as  the  author  of 
salvation.  (2)  To  the  Redeemer  as  the  medium  of  salvation.  3.  Enthusiastic  in 
its  spirit.  -  4.  Contagious  in  its  effect.  V.  Humanity  in  heaven  are  perfect  in 
BLISS.  1.  Freedom  from  all  evil.  (1)  No  more  sin.  (2)  No  more  suffering. 
(3)  No  more  sorrow.  2.  Enjoyment  of  all  good.  (1)  Divine  service.  (2)  Divine 
fellowship.  (3)  Divine  care.  {B.  D.  Johns.)  The  saints  in  heaven  : — There  is 
no  good  reason  why  this  graphic  picture  of  the  heavenly  land  should  be  m  our 
hands  except  for  some  practical  purpose.  The  Bible  is  a  practical  book.  The 
Bible  comes  to  put  the  seen  where  it  belongs,  and  give  the  unseen  a  chance  to  get 
hold  of  us,  lest,  in  wilful  near-sightedness,  we  miss  altogether  the  eternal  realities 
with  which  lies  our  chief  concern.  Linger  in  the  vestibule  we  must  for  a  time, 
but  how  ?  With  faces  averted  from  the  cathedral  entrance,  indifferent  to  what  lies 
beyond,  or  intent  upon  the  grander  thing  that  lies  before  us,  for  whose  revelation  we 
wait  with  expectant  heart?  In  this  picture — (1)  Heaven  is  nothing  if  it  be  not  realistic. 
It  has  a  local  habitation  as  well  as  a  name.  So  had  it  to  all  Bible-men  of  faith.  How 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

real  to  them  !  (2)  Again,  what  catholicity  in  heaven  I  Of  the  covenant  mercies  of 
the  Jewish  tabernacle  it  was  hard  for  a  Gentile  to  get  a  glimpse ;  to  sit  down  as  one 
of  the  true  Israel  was  his  only  as  by  reluctant  concession  to  an  alien.  But  this 
€xclusiveness  lingers  not  even  to  cast  a  shadow.  No  barrier  of  race  nor  of  high  or 
low,  of  early  or  late,  intervenes  to  hinder  that  they  come  into  that  high  fellowship 
of  God-like  catholicity.  (3)  But,  though  so  catholic,  there  is  a  discrimination  of 
character  which  makes  them  one,  which  also  gives  to  heaven  an  air  of  exclusive- 
ness.  They  are  white-robed,  all  of  them,  and  not  one  robe  made  white  by  any 
process  save  one.  The  fact  and  the  manner  of  it  are  both  significant.  There  are 
no  notes  of  discord  in  the  song  they  sing — no  praises  but  of  One  and  the  efficacy  of 
His  atoning  blood.  Rejecting  Christ  as  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  be  it  by  Jew  or  GentUe,  is  turning  away  from  Him  who  opens  and  no  man 
shuts,  shuts  and  no  man  opens.  It  is  to  reject  the  only  means  of  blanching 
character  to  snowy  whiteness,  the  only  condition  of  sin's  forgiveness.  (4)  Note 
the  contrasts  to  their  former  condition.  {H.  C.  Haydn,  D.D.)  The  human 
population  in  heaven : — I.  Its  numbers  abe  too  great  for  calculation.  1.  A 
reproof  to  all  sectarianism.  2.  An  encouragement  to  all  Christly  work.  3.  A. 
response  to  all  philanthropic  desires.  4.  An  attestation  of  benevolent  Creatorship. 
n.  Its  variety  includes  all  the  races  of  mankind.  1.  Our  highest  aim  should 
be  to  become  true  men.  2.  Our  highest  love  should  be  for  men.  HI.  Its  globious- 
ness  transcends  all  description.  1.  Their  position.  2.  Their  attire.  3.  Their 
blessed  rest.  IV.  Its  engagements  are  rapturous  in  devotion.  *•  Salvation  " 
includes  restoration  from  ignorance  to  true  knowledge,  from  impurity  to  holiness, 
from  bondage  to  soul  liberty,  from  selfishness  to  benevolence,  from  materialism  to 
genuine  spirituality,  from  the  reign  of  wrong  to  the  reign  of  right.  {D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  The  redeemed  in  glory  : — I.  The  redeemed  in  heaven  are  exceedingly 
NUMEROUS.  1.  We  might  infer  from  some  passages  of  Scripture  that  very  few 
persons  would  be  saved.  2.  We  might  infer  from  the  present  aspect  of  society 
that  very  few  persons  would  be  saved.  II.  The  redeemed  in  heaven  are  greatly 
diversified.  1.  The  society  of  heaven  will  be  greatly  diversified.  From  all  ranks 
and  conditions  in  life.  2.  The  service  of  heaven  will  be  greatly  diversified.  III. 
The  redeemed  in  heaven  are  highly  exalted.  1.  They  have  access  to  the  throne 
of  God.  2.  They  have  fellowship  with  the  Lamb  of  God.  IV.  The  redeemed  in 
heaven  are  perfectly  happy.  1.  Perfectly  holy.  2.  Perfectly  safe.  {J.  T. 
Woodhouse.)  The  redeemed  in  heaven  : — I.  The  great  number  op  the  redeemed. 
It  is  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  number  of  the  redeemed  will 
finally  exceed  the  number  of  the  lost.  For  consider — 1.  The  vast  number  of 
children  that  die.  2.  The  predictions  of  Scripture,  that  a  time  is  coming 
when  the  whole  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  3.  Jesus 
Christ  is  represented  as  ultimately  to  be  &  conqueror.  II.  The  extensive 
VARIETY  OF  THE  REDEEMED.  Evcry  geographical  barrier  which  now  separates  people 
from  people  will  be  swept  away ;  every  national  antipathy  will  be  extinguished,  and 
every  denominational  peculiarity  wiU  be  at  an  end.  III.  The  beautiful  appear- 
ance OF  the  REDEEMED.  The  whitc  robe  is  an  emblem  of  the  moral  purity  which 
characterises  the  redeemed  in  heaven.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  grand  and  tiie  only 
specific  for  moral  purification.  Its  efficacy  is  the  same  for  men  of  all  generations 
and  of  all  climes.  IV.  The  delightful  song  op  the  redeemed.  The  glories  of 
God,  as  displayed  in  the  works  of  His  hand,  will  furnish  the  occasion  of  growing 
wonder  and  delight.  Then,  too,  we  believe  that  mysteries  of  Providence  will  be 
disclosed.  And  yet,  glorious  as  will  be  the  discoveries  that  God  will  afford  of  His 
works  in  creation,  and  of  His  ways  in  providence,  it  will  still  be  "  salvation  "  that 
will  be  the  keynote  of  rejoicing  to  the  Church  triumphant.  And  who  ^ill  be  the 
objects  of  their  praise  ?  God  and  the  Lamb.  {Charles  Hargr eaves.)  The  great 
multitude : — The  vision  of  pent-up  judgment  begins  this  chapter  ;  then  the  sealing 
and  the  ingathering.  Our  text  is  the  result  of  the  ingathering,  as  seen  in 
heaven.  I.  The  numbers.  "A  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number." 
The  three  thousand  at  Pentecost  were  a  large  number,  but  this  is  greater. 
The  hundreds  and  thousands,  both  in  Judea  and  throughout  the  Gentile  world, 
at  Corinth,  Kome,  Ephesus,  Philippi,  and  other  places,  were  specimens  of 
the  great  ingathering ;  but  here  we  have  the  aggregate,  the  summing-up  of 
all.  Like  Israel,  they  cannot  be  numbered  for  multitude  ;  they  are  like< 
the  stars  of  heaven,  or  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea-shore.  II.  Thbi 
nationalities.  Every  people  furnishes  its  quota  to  this  great  assembly ;  every  tribei 
has  its  representatives  here;  every  region,  every  colour,  every  language,  every) 


CHAP.  VII.]  REVELATION,  363 

kingdom,  every  people,  every  age  and  century.  It  is  the  general  assembly  and  Church 
of  the  first-born.  Here  all  nationalities  meet  in  one  great  heavenly  nationality, 
without  jealousy  or  distrust ;  all  one  in  Him  who  redeemed  them  by  His  blood. 
in.  The  posture.  "  Standing  before  the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb."  They 
"  stand,"  It  is  the  posture  of  triumph  and  honour ;  "  having  done  all,  they  stand  " 
(Eph.  vi.  13).  Not  bowed  down,  nor  kneeling,  nor  prostrate,  their  erect  posture 
indicates  the  high  position  to  which  they  have  been  brought ;  and  especially  is  this 
honour  apparent  when  we  see  them  standing  "before  the  throne,  and  before  the 
Lamb,"  in  the  very  presence  of  the  King.  IV.  The  raiment.  They  are  "clothed  with 
white  robes."  1.  It  is  the  raiment  of  heaven  (Mark  xvi.  5  ;  John  xx.  12  ;  Acts  i.  12). 
2.  It  is  the  raiment  of  purity  and  perfection.  3.  It  is  the  raiment  of  triumph.  It 
is  given  to  him  that  overcometh  (chap.  iii.  5).  4.  It  is  the  festal  dress.  At  the 
marriage-supper  this  is  the  raiment  provided  ;  the  bride  sits  down  at  the  table  in 
the  King's  pavilion  "  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white  "  (chap.  xix.  8).  V.  The 
badge.  They  had  "  palms  in  their  hands."  The  palm  is  the  symbol  of  gladness 
and  of  victory.  Here  it  is  specially  used  in  reference  to  the  feast  of  tabernacles, 
the  gladdest  of  all  Israel's  festivals  (Lev.  xxiii.  40).  The  true  feast  of  tabernacles, 
the  memorial  of  our  desert  sojourn  and  earthly  pilgrimage  ended  for  ever,  the 
saints  shall  celebrate  in  the  New  Jerusalem.  The  days  of  their  mourning  shall  be 
ended ;  their  everlasting  joy  begun.  VI.  The  shout.  They  "  cry  with  a  loud  voice, 
Salvation  to  our  God  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb."  (H.  Bonar, 
D.D.)  What  they  wear  and  do  in  heaven  : — 1.  How  shall  I  begin  by  telling 
YOU  OP  THE  NUMBER  OP  THOSE  IN  HEAVEN  ?  One  of  the  most  imprcssivc  things  I  have 
looked  upon  is  an  army.  Standing  upon  a  hillside  you  see  forty  thousand  or  fifty 
thousand  men  pass  along.  You  can  hardly  imagine  the  impression  if  you  have  not 
actually  felt  it.  H.  Their  antecedents — "  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds  and 
tongues."  Some  of  them  spoke  Scotch,  Irish,  German,  English,  ItaHan,  Spanish, 
Tamil,  Burmese.  I  suppose,  in  the  great  throng  around  the  throne,  it  will  not  be 
difficult  to  tell  from  what  part  of  the  earth  they  came.  In  this  world  men  prefer 
different  kinds  of  government.  The  United  States  want  a  Eepublic.  The  British 
Government  needs  to  be  a  Constitutional  Monarchy.  Austria  wants  Absolutism ; 
but  when  they  come  up  from  earth,  they  will  prefer  one  great  monarchy — King 
Jesus  ruler  over  it.  III.  The  dress  op  those  in  heaven.  It  is  white  1  In  tliis 
world  we  had  sometimes  to  have  on  working-day  apparel.  Bright  and  lustrous 
garments  would  be  ridiculously  out  of  place  sweltering  amid  forges,  or  mixing 
paints,  or  plastering  ceilings,  or  binding  books.  When  all  toil  on  earth  is  past, 
and  there  is  no  more  drudgery,  and  no  more  weariness,  we  shall  stand  before  the 
throne  robed  in  white.  On  earth  we  sometimes  had  to  wear  mourning  apparel — 
black  scarf  for  the  arm,  black  veil  for  the  face,  black  gloves  for  the  hands,  black 
band  for  the  hat.  But  when  these  bereavements  have  all  passed  and  no  more 
sorrow  to  suffer,  we  shall  put  off  this  mourning  and  be  robed  in  white.  IV.  The 
SYMBOLS  THEY  CARRY.  V.  The  SONG  THEY  SING.  In  this  world  WO  have  secular 
songs,  nursery  songs,  boatmen's  songs,  harvest  songs,  sentimental  songs ;  but  in 
heaven  we  will  have  taste  for  only  one  song,  and  that  will  be  the  song  of  salvation 
from  an  eternal  death  to  an  eternal  heaven,  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Heaven  : — I.  The  redeemed  of  the 
LORD  IN  THEIR  STATION  ABOVE :  brought  Hot  merely  to  the  same  world  in  which 
their  Saviour  dwells,  to  the  same  kingdom,  to  its  metropolis,  to  the  palace,  to 
the  Court,  but  into  the  very  presence  chamber  of  the  King,  and  stationed  before 
His  throne.  Not  that  throne  of  grace  before  which  on  earth  they  bowed  in 
penitence,  brokenness  of  heart  will  then  for  ever  pass  away  ;  not  the  throne  of 
judgment  around  which  they  will  gather  at  the  last  day,  they  will  have  passed 
from  that ;  but  the  throne  of  glory — to  behold  God  "  face  to  face  " — to  "  see  Him 
as  He  is  " — not  merely  by  an  intellectual  apprehension,  but  by  the  eyes  of  the 
glorified  body.  They  "  stood  before  the  throne  "  ;  a  word  importing  holy  confidence, 
consciousness  that  they  are  welcome.  H.  The  appearance  or  this  multitude.  1.  Clad 
in  "  white  robes  "  :  importing  their  complete  justification  and  acceptance  with  God. 
We  have  only  to  look  at  the  scene  before  us  to  see  the  indispensable  necessity  of 
the  Divinity  of  Christ,  to  constitute  the  efficacy  of  the  atonement.  These  two  stand 
or  fall  together.  If  there  be  an  atonement  for  sin,  it  must  of  necessity  make  way 
for  as  clear  a  display  of  Divine  justice  as  well  as  mercy,  in  the  salvation  of  the 
redeemed,  as  if  they  had  suffered  the  penalty  of  their  transgiessions  in  their  own 
proper  person,  and  had  sunk  under  their  guilt  down  to  the  lowesu  hell.  There 
must  be  an  equivalent  by  the  atonement,  whatever  it  be.    I  dj  not  mean  a  money 


864  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

equivalent ;  but  there  must  be  a  moral  equivalent.  It  would  be  no  atonement  if  a 
way  were  not  made  for  the  manifestation  of  Divine  justice,  as  clear  and  as  impres- 
sive as  it  would  have  been  if  the  whole  redeemed  had  sunk  under  the  chains  of  their 
transgressions.  Look,  then,  to  the  redeemed,  and  think  of  countless  myriads  washed 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  and  who  must  that  Lamb  be  but,  in  another  view  of  His 
nature,  the  Son  of  God,  equal  with  the  Father  ?  But  the  expression  imports  another 
thing  with  respect  to  the  redeemed :  their  entire  sanctification.  Their  robes  are 
washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ;  their  sanctification  is  effected  by  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  Holy  Spirit  is  granted  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
the  Holy  Spirit  uses  as  the  means  of  our  sanctification  the  great  truths  presented 
in  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Cross  ;  and  therefore  our  sanctification  is  effected  by 
the  blood  of  Christ,  as  well  as  our  justification.  2.  "  Palms  in  their  hands," 
Heaven  will  be  the  sweeter  for  the  power  of  contrast.  We,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
victory,  shall  think  of  the  conflict.  HI.  The  number — "  a  multitude  which  no  man 
can  number."  Add  these  things  together — the  fruits  of  the  Father's  eternal  love, 
of  the  Son's  redeeming  work,  and  the  Spirit's  sanctification  ;  think  of  the  answer  of 
the  prayers  of  the  righteous  in  every  age  who  have  wrestled  with  God  for  the  out- 
pouring of  His  Spirit :  and  then  say  whether  the  multitude  will  not  be  greater  than 
can  be  numbered.  IV.  Their  variety — "  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people, 
and  tongues."  Various  are  the  systems  of  Church  polity,  and  the  rites  and  the 
ceremonies  and  the  usages,  that  distinguish  and  divide  Christians  now ;  and,  alas  ! 
not  merely  for  poor  human  nature,  but  for  poor  renewed  nature — the  party  spirit, 
the  bitterness,  the  strife,  to  which  these  differences  give  rise  !  But  one  heaven  shall 
contain  them  all.  Why  cannot  we  be  more  one  now  since  we  shall  certainly  be 
one  hereafter?  V.  Their  occupation.  They  are  "before  the  throne."  They  are 
presented  to  us  in  an  act  of  praise.  The  adoration  of  God,  the  service  of  God, 
fellowship  with  God,  will  be  the  felicity  of  the  redeemed.  We  must  never  let  drop 
that  idea.  We  are  to  see  God  ;  "  His  servants  shall  serve  Him,  and  they  shall  see 
His  face."  We  shall  see  God  in  Christ.  Such  appears  to  be  our  eternal  occupation, 
mingled  with  the  other  occupations  in  which  we  engage.  Just  look  at  the  theme 
of  their  praise — "  salvation."  If  salvation  be  little  thought  of  on  earth,  it  is  much 
thought  of  in  heaven ;  if  it  is  the  lowest  in  men's  pursuits  here,  it  is  the  highest  in 
their  enjoyments  there.  Think  of  the  object  of  their  praises :  not  only  "  God," 
but  "  the  Lamb."  What  an  argument  for  the  Divinity  of  Christ! — that  in  the 
heavenly  world  He  is  presented  as  occupying  the  same  seat  of  dignity,  surrounded 
with  the  same  worshippers,  receiving  the  same  homage  as  the  Father !  Look  at  the 
harmony  of  their  praise.  It  is  one  song.  Yes,  we  shall  be  harmonised  in  heaven,  if  we 
are  not  upon  earth.  Notice,  lastly,  the  rapture  of  their  praise — "they  sing  with  a  loud 
voice."  Hosannahs  will  be  changed  into  hallelujahs.  And  that  sung  not  with  dulness, 
as  we  too  often  now  worship  God  ;  not  with  coldness,  as  if  our  praises  came  from  lips 
of  ice  ;  no,  but  with  rapture  of  hearts  too  full  to  hold  their  bliss.  The  song  will  never 
cease  and  never  tire.  I  have  a  question  to  ask  you  :  Will  you  be  there  ?  Will  you 
join  that  multitude?  Will  you  swell  that  choir  and  anthem?  (J.  A.  James.) 
A  glimpse  of  the  redeemed  in  glory  : — I.  Who  are  there  ?  1.  "  A  multitude."  The 
region  is  not  solitary.  Once  it  was.  The  period  was  when  God  was  all  in  all. 
There  was  the  throne,  and  the  great  I  Am  sat  upon  that  throne.  But  there  was  no 
world  beneath  it,  and  no  multitude  before  it.  Aiid  even  after  the  sons  of  God  were 
made,  it  was  long  before  any  of  our  race  was  there.  When  Abel  found  himself 
before  the  throne,  he  found  no  human  comrade  there.  But  thus  it  is  not  now. 
There  is  "  a  multitude  " — so  many,  as  to  give  the  region  a  friendly  look  of  terrestrial 
brotherhood — so  many,  that  the  affinities  and  tastes  which  still  survive  will  find  their 
counterparts — so  many,  that  every  service  will  be  sublimed,  and  every  enjoyment 
heightened,  by  the  countless  throng  who  share  it.  2.  A  mighty  multitude.  "  A 
great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number."  Not  a  stinted  few — not  a  scanty 
and  reluctant  remnant ;  but  a  mighty  host — like  God's  own  perfections,  an  affluent 
and  exuberant  throng — like  Immanuel's  merits,  which  brought  them  there,  some- 
thing very  vast,  and  merging  into  infinity.  3.  A  miscellaneous  multitude.  "  Of 
all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues."  For  many  ages  one  nation 
supplied  most  of  the  inhabitants.  But  Jesus  broke  down  the  partition  wall ;  and 
since  His  gospel  went  into  all  the  world,  all  the  world  has  contributed  its  citizens  to 
the  New  Jerusalem.  All  kindreds  and  people  are  there — men  of  all  aptitudes  and 
all  instincts — men  of  all  grades  and  conditions.  And  there,  suffused  with  sanctity, 
and  softened  into  perfect  subjection,  we  may  recognise  the  temperament  or  the 
talent  which  gave  each  on  earth  his  identity  and  his  peculiar  interest.    Blended 


CHAP.  vii.J  REVELATION. 


and  overborne  by  the  prevailing  likeness  to  the  Elder  Brother,  each  may  retain  his 
mental  attributes  and  moral  features  ;  and  in  the  dimensions  of  their  disc,  and  the 
tinting  of  their  rays,  the  stars  of  glory  may  differ  from  one  another.  4.  A  multitude 
who  once  were  mourners.  "  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation." 
To  live  in  a  world  like  this  was  itself  a  tribulation — a  world  of  distance  from  God 
— a  world  of  faith  without  sight — a  world  of  wicked  men  ;  but  they  have  come  out 
of  that  tribulation.  To  have  had  to  do  with  sin  was  a  terrible  tribulation — from 
the  time  that  they  were  first  convinced  of  it,  all  along  through  the  great  life-battle, 
contending  with  manifold  temptations — contending  with  their  own  carnality  and 
sloth,  their  pride  and  worldly-mindedness,  their  unruly  passions  and  sinful  tempers : 
but  they  have  come  out  of  that  tribulation  also.  5.  And  they  are  a  multitude  who 
shall  form  an  eternal  monument  of  the  Redeemer's  grace  and  power.  Such  are  the 
human  inhabitants  of  heaven.  II.  But  what  is  it  that  they  do  there?  1.  They 
celebrate  a  victory.  They  have  "  palms  in  their  hands."  They  are  "  overcomers." 
2.  They  serve  God.  Adoration  at  the  throne,  activity  in  the  temple — the  worship 
of  the  heart,  the  worship  of  the  voice,  the  worship  of  the  hands — the  whole  being 
consecrated  to  God — these  are  the  service  of  the  upper  sanctuary.  Here  a  week 
will  often  see  us  weary  in  well-doing  ;  there  they  are  drawn  on  by  its  own  delicious- 
ness  to  larger  and  larger  fulfilments  of  Jehovah's  will.  Here  we  must  lure  ourselves 
to  work  by  the  prospect  of  rest  hereafter  :  there  the  toil  is  luxury,  and  the  labour 
recreation — and  nothing  but  jubilees  of  praise,  and  holidays  of  higher  service,  are 
wanted  to  diversify  the  long  and  industrious  Sabbath  of  the  skies.  3.  They  see 
God.  "  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dweU  among  them  " ;  or,  as  in  chap, 
xxii.  4,  "  They  see  His  face."  4.  They  follow  the  Lamb.  "  The  Lamb  which  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains 
of  waters."  Even  in  heaven  something  of  the  mediatorial  economy  survives.  Even 
where  they  see  God,  they  follow  the  Lamb,  and  a  close  and  conspicuous  relation 
continues  to  subsist  betwixt  the  Redeemer  and  His  ransomed.  He  remains  the 
Leader  of  His  blood-bought  company  ;  and  whilst  He  prescribes  their  occupation, 
He  is  the  immediate  source  of  their  blessedness.  6.  And — just  to  complete  the 
glance — there  are  some  things  which  there  they  never  do.  They  do  not  want,  they 
do  not  weary,  and  they  do  not  weep.   {Jos.  Hamilton.)       The  redeemed  in  heaven : — 

I.  The  text  presents  the  redeemed  in  heaven  as  forming  one  blessed  and  olorious 
SOCIETY.  Man  is  formed  for  society,  which  not  only  furnishes  some  of  his  sweetest 
enjoyments,  but  is  necessary  to  call  forth  the  powers  of  his  mind.  Without  it 
the  best  purposes  of  his  being  would  be  defeated ;  the  benevolent  principles  of  his 
nature  would  be  rendered  useless.  His  pleasures,  from  having  no  kindred  soul  to 
share  them,  would  cease  to  please.  Hence  society  is  eagerly  sought  as  essential  to 
our  happiness ;  but  the  pleasures  which  it  is  fitted  to  yield  are  greatly  impaired 
by  a  variety  of  disagreeable  circumstances,  arising  out  of  the  imperfection  of  the 
present  state.  But  it  is  otherwise  with  the  society  of  heaven.  There  the  honey 
is  without  the  sting,  and  the  rose  without  the  thorn,  and  attachment  and  inter- 
course without  any  detraction  or  alloy.  Their  opportunities  of  intercourse  are 
ample,  and  the  pleasures  which  flow  from  it  are  of  the  purest  kind.  Here  it  is  with 
difficulty  that  we  can  select  from  the  crowd  a  few  with  whom  we  are  disposed  to 
unite  in  intimate  fellowship ;  but  there  are  to  be  found  all  the  great  and  the  good 
who  ever  existed  in  the  universe  of  God.  Their  intercourse  is  free  and  unreserved. 
The  caution  and  concealment  which  we  often  find  it  necessary  to  observe  in  our 
correspondence  with  one  another,  are,  amongst  them,  altogether  unknown.  One 
common  principle  of  sympathy  is  diffused  throughout  the  whole ;  and  whatever 
each  has  to  communicate  finds  a  response  in  every  bosom,  and  awakens  a  reciprocal 
emotion  in  every  soul.   Their  attachment  for  one  another  is  also  sincere  and  ardent. 

II.  In  the  text  the  redeemed  in  heaven  are  represented  as  a  society  op  vast 
AMOUNT.  Heaven  is  not  to  be  viewed  as  a  thinly  peopled  country,  or  a  place  of 
narrow  and  confined  dimensions,  containing  only  a  few  inhabitants.  We  are  taught 
to  conceive  of  it  as  a  large  and  extensive  empire,  teeming  everywhere  with  a  happy 
and  active  population.  When  we  think  of  the  number  who,  during  the  long  period 
of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  lived  and  died  in  the  faith  of  the  Messiah  to 
come — and  of  the  still  greater  number  who,  since  His  coming,  have  believed  in  Him 
to  the  saving  of  the  soul — the  whole,  taken  collectively,  will  be  found  to  be  a  count- 
less multitude.  To  those  who  are  now  in  the  world  of  glory  we  must  add  the 
multitude  who  shall  believe  in  the  Son  of  God  ere  the  gospel  dispensation 
comes  to  a  close  ;  and  then,  who  shall  be  able  to  calculate  their  amount? 
m.  In  the  text  the  redeemed  in  heaven  are  represented  as  collected  from  all 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

THE  VARIETIES  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.  Heavcn  is  not  the  destined  dwelling-place  of 
any  one  class  only  of  the  human  race.  The  gospel  reveals  a  common  salvation, 
and  opens  a  path  to  heaven  for  all  the  diversities  of  the  human  race.  Many  have 
already  "  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from  the  north,  and  from  the 
south,  and  have  sat  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven*"  ;  and  every  day  is  adding  to  their  number.  No  power  shall  prevent  the 
universal  diffusion  of  the  gospel  when  "  the  time  to  favour  Zion,  even  the  set  time, 
is  come."  Scepticism  and  infidelity  shall  find  a  grave.  Pagan  superstition  shall 
pass  away  as  the  mist  which  rolls  up  the  mountain's  side  disappears  before  the 
rising  glory  of  the  summer  morn.  Then  "  all  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember, 
and  turn  unto  the  Lord ;  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  worship  before 
Him  :  for  the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's,  and  He  is  the  Governor  among  the  nations." 
He  shall  take  to  Himself  His  great  power  and  reign.  IV.  In  the  text  the  redeemed 
in  heaven  are  represented  as  in  the  immediate  presence  of  their  God  and 
Eedeemer.  Even  in  this  dark  and  distant  world  the  people  of  God  enjoy  His 
gracious  presence.  To  them  He  manifests  Himself  as  He  doth  not  unto 
the  world.  He  blesses  them  with  the  knowledge  of  His  character,  and  with 
a  sense  of  His  love;  but  here  they  see  Him  only  obscurely.  .vThey  see  Him 
through  the  medium  of  His  Word  and  ordinances,  as  in  a  mirror,  darkly. 
It  is  otherwise  in  heaven.  There  He  gives  displays  of  His  glory,  of  which 
the  Shekinah,  the  bright  shining  cloud  in  which  He  appeared  of  old  in  the 
holy  of  holies,  was  but  a  faint  and  feeble  emblem.  There  He  is  beheld,  not  in 
the  dim  vision  of  faith,  but  clearly,  as  with  our  bodily  organs  we  behold  the  sun 
shining  in  the  firmament.  Even  in  heaven  it  is  true,  that  as  to  His  essence,  God 
will  be  for  ever  unseen  and  unknown.  But  there  He  manifests  Himself  by  such 
external  tokens  as  show  that  He  is  near.  The  beams  of  His  glory  are  so  diffused 
over  aU  that  happy  land,  that  all  its  inhabitants  have  the  clear  and  intimate  per- 
ception of  His  presence,  and  a  full  and  distinct  consciousness  of  abiding  in  it.  They 
feel  themselves  to  be  walking  continually  in  the  brightness  of  His  face !  V.  The 
text  represents  the  redeemed  in  heaven  as  distinguished  by  spotless  holiness. 
From  all  that  was  imperfect  in  their  character  here  below  ;  from  all  that  was  wrong 
in  their  temper  or  disposition  ;  from  all  that  was  feeble  in  their  love  and  devotion ; 
from  all  that  was  displeasing  to  the  view  of  others,  they  are  entirely  and  for  ever 
freed.  They  appear  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  VI.  In  the  text 
the  redeemed  in  heaven  are  represented  as  enjoying  the  honours  and  bliss  of 
A  triumph.  (D.  M.  Inglis.)  Society  in  heaven : — 1.  There  is  nothing  which  is 
so  distressing  to  an  earnest  man  as  the  thought  which  sometimes  rises  in  his  mind, 
that  here  we  are  bound  together  in  families  and  nations  ;  that  after  death  all  such 
relations  cease ;  that  all  becomes  individual  and  solitary.  If  St.  John's  teaching 
is  true,  this  teaching  is  false.  The  multitude  that  no  man  can  number  is  a  society. 
Their  robes  have  become  white,  because  every  stain  of  selfishness  has  been  washed 
from  them  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Their  palms  show  that  they  have  gotten  the 
victory  over  those  causes  which  have  destroyed  the  unity  of  kindreds  and  nations 
here.  There  is  no  dull  uniformity,  no  single  tongue:  but  all  is  harmonious 
amidst  diversity.  In  that  company  the  one  word  which  is  connected  with  the 
Divine  name  is  Salvation ;  salvation  from  the  curse  that  men  have  made  for  them- 
selves. 2.  The  sight  of  this  multitude  from  every  nation  and  kindred  must  have 
been  a  lesson  to  the  missionary  of  that  day,  may  be  a  lesson  to  the  missionary  of 
this,  tending  to  abate  his  pride,  but  also — why  do  I  say  but,  why  not  therejore  f — 
his  despair.  He  sometimes  tries  to  console  himself  with  thoughts  of  God's  mercy 
to  those  who  are  ignorant,  and  have  had  no  means  of  knowing  better.  But  then 
he  sees  that  the  heathens  among  whom  he  goes  are  actually  brut^lised  and  cor- 
rupted ;  no  tolerance  of  their  religion  can  make  that  fact  less  appalling  to  him. 
And  then,  when  he  thinks  how  few  can  ever  hear  his  preaching,  how  few  can 
understand  the  sounds  he  utters,  he  begins  to  doubt  if  God  has  not  deserted  His 
own  world.  But  it  is  not  so.  His  converts  may  be  few.  He  may  have  little  power 
of  making  himself  intelligible.  But  He  of  whom  the  missionary  speaks,  He  who 
has  sent  him,  has  His  ways  of  making  Himself  intelligible,  has  His  ways  of  bringing 
people  of  every  nation,  and  tongue,  and  clime,  through  much  tribulation,  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  who  died  for  them  and  is  ever  with  them,  to  a  knowledge  of 
His  Father  and  their  Father.  3.  I  am  aware  how  easily  a  captious  bystander, 
lowing  nothing  of  the  real  anguish  of  a  missionary,  or  of  his  real  inspiration, 
may  turn  what  I  have  said  into  an  argument  why  he  may  be  indifferent  to  the 
work,  seeing  it  will  be  performed  without  him.    In  hours  of  unutterable  sorrow, 


CHAP.  VII.]  REVELATION,  367 

voices  of  consolation  have  come  to  you,  you  knew  not  from  whence.  In  times  of 
temptation,  when  your  souls  were  balancing  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  some  old 
sentence  has  been  brought  back  to  you  from  the  field  of  sleep,  some  house  or  tree 
has  served  to  pour  forth  strange  warnings  or  encouragements.  Why  may  not  those 
whispers  have  been  borne  from  those  who  spoke  them  of  old  to  the  ear,  not  as  now 
to  the  heart  ?  Why  may  not  elder  patriots  and  martyrs  be  echoing  Christ's  own 
words  in  the  ears  of  their  brothers,  in  lonely  dungeons  which  no  friend  in  the  flesh 
can  approach,  at  the  stake  when  no  visible  smile  may  greet  them,  when  God's  name 
is  used  to  condemn  them — "Be  faithful  unto  death.  He  will  give  you  the  crown  of 
life."  And  why  may  not  these  same  be  the  teachers  and  evangelists  of  the  lands 
for  which  they  wept  and  bled  below  ?  4.  There  is  one  thought  more  in  connection 
with  this  subject  which  I  dare  not  suppress.  In  the  calendar  of  a  great  part  of 
Christendom  All  Saints'  Day  is  followed  by  All  Souls'  Day.  We  may  remember 
that  the  angels  of  God  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repents,  because  God  rejoices. 
We  may  be  sure  that  He,  without  whom  a  sparrow  does  not  fall  to  the  ground,  does 
not  lose  sight  of  a  soul  which  He  has  made.  We  may  be  sure,  therefore,  that  all 
saints  care  for  all  souls.  Their  affections,  their  powers  of  sympathy  and  blessing, 
are  not  limited  as  ours  are  by  circumstances  of  time  and  space.  They  are  limited 
only  by  that  love  of  God,  the  height  and  depth  and  length  and  breadth  of  which 
they  are  as  incapable  of  measuring  as  we  are,  but  which  flows  forth  to  them, 
and  in  them,  and  through  them  everlastingly.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  great 
multitude  : — It  is  a  refreshing  thing  to  look  away  for  a  moment  from  the  strife  and 
oncharitableness  of  human  systems  and  conclusions,  each  disposed  to  narrow 
heaven  within  its  own  pale  and  party,  and  to  behold  "  a  multitude,  such  as  no  man 
could  number,"  entering  by  the  gate  into  the  everlasting  city.  But  whilst  we  may 
justly  rejoice  in  being  able  to  appeal  from  human  judgment  to  Divine,  in  having  the 
authority  of  Scripture  for  not  only  assigning  vast  capacity  to  heaven,  but  for 
regarding  it  as  the  home  of  an  interminable  throng,  we  are  to  take  heed  that  we 
lower  not  the  conditions  of  admission,  as  though  the  entrance  must  be  easy,  because 
a  great  multitude  shall  be  there.  The  great,  the  solemn  truth  remains,  that  ♦'  there 
shall  enter  into  the  city  nothing  which  deflleth,"  "  neither  whatsoever  worketh 
abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie,  but  they  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life." 
And  a  glance  at  the  context  should  suflSice  to  keep  down  any  rising  thought  that, 
because  there  shall  be  "a  great  multitude"  in  heaven,  and,  therefore,  perhaps, 
numbers  whom  their  fellow-men  never  expected  to  be  there,  some  may  find 
admission  who  have  taken  no  pains  to  secure  so  great  a  blessing.  So  far  from 
there  being  anything  for  you  to  reckon  upon,  ye  who  are  not  striving  after  a  moral 
fitness  for  heaven,  in  the  alleged  vastness  of  the  multitude  which  is  to  occupy 
heaven,  there  is  much  to  admonish  and  warn  you :  if  ye  know  nothing  of  the 
••  great  tribulation,"  of  the  warfare  with  "  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,"  ye 
may  forfeit  your  places :  but  those  places  will  not  stand  empty:  "  God  is  able  of 
these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham  "  ;  and  He  will  not  be  reduced 
through  the  want  of  faithful  disciples  to  the  admitting  into  His  presence  the 
rebellious  and  unclean.  Yea,  and  over  and  above  there  being  a  warning  to  us  in 
the  fact  that  heaven  shall  be  peopled  to  the  full,  even  should  we  ourselves  come 
short  of  the  inheritance,  is  it  not  an  animating  thing  to  be  told  of  all  "  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,"  as  contributing  to  the  occupancy  of  themajestio 
abode  ?  Oh,  glorious  society  which  shall  thus  be  gathered  from  aU  ages,  all  ranks, 
all  countries  1  There  is  beauty  in  diversity,  there  is  majesty  in  combination.  Even 
now  it  is  felt  to  be  an  ennobling,  inspiriting  association,  if  the  eminent  of  a  single 
Church,  the  illustrious  of  a  solitary  country,  be  gathered  together  in  one  great 
conclave.  How  do  meaner  men  flock  to  the  spot ;  with  what  interest,  what  awe, 
do  they  look  upon  persons  so  renowned  in  their  day ;  what  a  privilege  do  they 
account  it  if  they  mingle  awhile  with  sages  so  profound,  with  saints  so  devoted ; 
how  do  they  treasure  the  sayings  which  reach  them  in  so  precious  an  inter- 
course. And  shall  we  think  little  of  heaven  when  we  hear  of  it  as  the  meeting- 
place  of  all  that  hath  been  truly  great,  for  of  all  that  hath  been  truly  good ; 
of  all  that  hath  been  really  wise,  for  of  all  that  hath  yielded  itself  to  the 
teachings  of  God's  Spirit,  from  Adam  to  his  remotest  descendant  ?  But  it  is 
not  merely  as  asserting  the  vastness  of  the  multitude  which  shall  finally  be 
gathered  into  heaven  that  our  text  presents  matter  for  devout  meditation.  We  are 
not  to  overlook  the  attitude  assigned  to  the  celestial  assembly,  an  attitude  of  rest 
and  of  triumph,  as  though  there  had  been  labour  and  warfare,  and  Uie  wearied 
combatants  were  henceforward  to  enjoy  unbroken  quiet.     "  They  stood  before  the 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yiT. 

throne,  and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  pahns  in  their  hands." 
Not  that  by  repose  we  are  to  understand  inactivity,  for  Scripture  is  most  express  on 
the  continued  engagement  of  every  faculty  of  a  glorified  saint  in  the  service  of  the 
Creator  and  Kedeemer.  The  great  multitude  stand  before  the  throne — the  attitude 
implying  that  they  wait  to  execute  the  commands  of  the  Lord  ;  and  they  join  in  a 
high  song  of  praise  and  exultation,  "  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb."  No  idleness  then,  though  there  is  perfect  repose. 
But  rest,  as  opposed  to  anything  that  is  painful  or  toilsome  in  employment — repose, 
as  implying  that  there  shall  never  again  be  weariness,  exhaustion,  difiSculty,  or 
danger,  notwithstanding  that  there  shall  be  the  consecration  of  the  whole  man  to 
the  work  of  magnifying  the  Lord.  What  an  attractive,  what  an  animating  view  of 
heaven  is  that  of  its  being  a  state  of  repose,  as  contrasted  with  our  present  state  of 
warfare  and  toil — the  white  robe  in  place  of  the  "  whole  armour  of  God  " ;  the 
palm  in  place  of  the  sword  in  the  hand.  For — let  the  course  of  the  Divine 
dealings  with  any  member  of  the  Church  be  the  very  smoothest  that  is  com- 
patible with  a  state  of  probation,  still,  compassed  about  as  we  all  are  with  infirmity, 
called  upon  to  do  many  things  to  which  we  are  naturally  disinclined,  which  we  can 
neither  perform  without  painful  effort  nor  omit  without  sinful  neglect ;  exposed  to 
temptations  from  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil — indeed  it  were  hard  to  under- 
stand how  any  believer  could  often  be  other  than  "  weary  and  heavy  laden."  It  is 
not  that  he  would  give  up  the  service  of  God,  but  that  he  would  be  able  to  serve 
God  without  weariness.  It  is  not  that  he  would  be  released  from  the  struggle  with 
corruption,  but  that  he  would  have  no  corruption  to  struggle  with,  the  final  touches 
of  sanctification  having  been  given,  so  that  he  is  "  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
such  thing."  And  such  a  state  of  repose  awaits  us  in  heaven.  There  is  another 
distinguishing  feature  of  the  heavenly  state  which  may  be  gathered  from  our  text. 
You  cannot  fail  to  observe  that,  though  the  great  multitude  is  collected  from  all 
nations  and  tribes,  there  is  perfect  concord  or  agreement ;  they  form  but  one  company 
and  join  in  one  anthem.  The  redeemed  are  to  constitute  one  rejoicing  company. 
Nay,  and  the  representation  may  almost  be  said  to  go  beyond  this.  How  are  they 
to  constitute  this  one  company,  associated  by  close  ties,  and  joining  in  the  same 
song,  unless  they  are  to  know  one  the  other  hereafter?  When  Christ  speaks  of 
many  as  coming  from  the  east  and  the  west.  He  speaks  also  of  their  sitting  down 
with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  But  this  were  apparently  no  privilege,  unless 
they  are  to  know  these  patriarchs.  It  argues  a  heart  still  bound  up  in  selfishness, 
if  it  be  little  to  us  that,  admitted  into  heaven,  we  are  to  be  freed  from  all  petty 
bounds  and  distinctions,  and  to  form  part  of  one  close  but  countless  community. 
The  soul  should  be  stirred  within  us  as  we  think  of  patriarchs,  and  prophets,  and 
priests,  and  kings — of  apostles,  confessors,  and  martyrs  ;  of  the  illustrious,  not  by 
earthly  achievements  which  too  often  dazzle  by  a  false  glare ;  but  the  illustrious  in 
the  fight  of  faith — and  not  only  of  the  illustrious  whose  names  go  down  in  Christian 
biography,  the  precious  legacy  of  age  to  age ;  but  of  that  unknown,  that  unremembered 
multitude,  the  good,  the  godly,  of  successive  generations,  who,  in  the  quiet  privacies 
of  ordinary  life,  have  served  their  God  and  their  Eedeemer — for  "  he,"  saith  Christ, 
*'  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things  " — oh,  I  say,  the  soul  should  be  stirred 
within  us  as  we  think  of  such  an  assembly,  and  hear  ourselves  invited  to  join  it, 
and  are  told  that  we  may  have  the  friendship  of  each  and  every  one  in  the  inter- 
minable gathering.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  All  saints  : — Is  not  this  a  strengthening, 
elevating  thought — this  of  that  countless  multitude  which  will  one  day  stand 
before  the  throne  ?  How  often  we  are  tempted  to  be  out  of  all  heart.  The  world 
seems  so  strong,  and  the  Church  seems  so  weak — Christianity  itself  almost  a  failure, 
unable  to  enlist  the  affections  of  men,  at  least  of  the  men  of  this  generation, 
impotent  to  contest  the  battle-field  of  the  earth  with  the  powers  which  are  arrayed 
against  it.  Put  away  from  you  thoughts  like  these.  They  are  the  pleas  of  our 
indolence,  the  outcomings  of  our  unbelief.  They  may  be  few  here  or  few  there ; 
but  let  them  all  be  gathered  into  one,  and  they  will  constitute  an  innumerable 
company.  God  would  not  be  satisfied  with  less.  He  will  have  no  solitudes,  no 
vacant  thrones  in  heaven,  but  infinite  multitudes  to  be  sharers  in  His  blessedness, 
to  declare  to  all  creation  and  through  all  eternity  the  wondrous  counsels  of  His 
love.  And  then  what  thoughts  arise  in  the  heart  as  we  contemplate  not  the  numbers 
only,  but  the  quarters  from  which  all  these  will  have  been  gathered — from  "  all 
nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues."  Those  who  were  divided  here  by 
all  which  could  divide,  who  were  separated  from  one  another  by  immense  distances 
of  time,  of  space,  of  culture — barbarians  to  one  another  here— yea,  those  who  were 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  869 

kept  asunder  by  far  sadder  barriers  than  these,  those  who  misunderstood,  perhaps 
mutually  anathematised  one  another,  shall  yet,  being  one  in  Christ,  one  in  their 
faith  and  love  to  Him,  stand  together  before  the  throne,  and  exchange  the  long 
alienations  and  miserable  discords  of  earth  for  the  blessed  concords  of  heaven. 
Think,  too,  from  other  points  of  view,  what  a  marvellous  company  will  that  be ! 
Think  of  all  that  will  be  there,  and — awful  thought ! — of  all  that  will  not  be  there. 
Not  there  many  who  have  walked  in  the  full  blaze  of  gospel  light,  who,  knowing 
much,  have  loved  not  at  aU ;  whose  places,  therefore,  for  there  were  places  for  them 
if  they  had  shown  themselves  worthy  of  them,  shall  know  them  not ;  while  there 
■will  be  found  in  that  wondrous  company  not  a  few  who,  amid  much  darkness, 
superstition,  and  error,  have  been  true  to  the  central  truth  of  all,  have  clung  to 
Jesus  with  full  affiance  of  heart ;  and  when  it  shall  be  inquired  with  something  of 
wonder  why  this  one  or  the  other  is  so  near  to  the  throne,  "  He  loved  much,"  or 
•'  She  loved  much,"  will  be  the  key  and  explanation  of  all.  {Abp.  Trench.) 
The  saved  a  great  multitude  : — Looking  through  a  large  library  the  other  day,  I 
came  upon  an  old  collection  of  tracts,  printed  some  two  hundred  years  ago,  and  one 
of  them,  written  by  an  Oxford  professor,  bore  the  wonderful  title,  "  Moral  reflec- 
tions upon  the  number  of  the  elect,  proving  plainly  that  not  one  in  a  hundred 
thousand,  probably  not  one  in  a  million,  from  Adam  to  our  time,  shall  be  saved." 
{W.   Baxendale.)  Salvation    to    our    CrOd  .  .  .  and    unto    the    Lamb. — The 

song  of  the  Church  in  heaven  and  on  earth  : — The  work  of  redemption  by 
Christ  fills  the  Church  in  heaven  and  earth  with  wonder,  gratitude,  and  joy; 
"  Salvation  to  God,  and  to  the  Lamb."  God  Himself  rejoices  in  the  work  of 
redemption.  When  He  made  the  world,  He  rested,  and  was  refreshed — all 
was  very  good ;  when  the  scheme  of  His  providence  shall  be  wound  up.  He 
will  rejoice  in  all  His  works ;  but  He  delights  more  in  the  work  of  redemption 
than  in  those  of  creation  and  providence ;  for  these  are  only  subservient  to  this 
illustrious  display  of  Himself.  The  saints  in  heaven  and  on  earth  rejoice  in  the 
work  of  redemption,  and  praise  God  for  it  :  "  Salvation  to  God  and  to  the 
Lamb."  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the 
Lamb ;  the  wonders  of  creation,  and  providence,  and  grace.  On  earth  the  saints 
praise  God  with  many  imperfections.  How  can  they  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a 
strange  land  ?  But  they  sing  in  faith,  in  hope,  with  sincerity,  and  with  true  glad- 
ness of  heart.  The  same  principle  which  influences  the  saints  in  heaven  to  rejoice 
in  the  increase  of  their  own  number,  operates  in  the  saints  on  earth,  when  Sion 
breaks  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  They  rejoice,  therefore,  when  they 
hear  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  runs  and  is  glorified  over  all  the  earth.  The  holy 
angels  rejoice  in  the  salvation  of  sinners  by  the  Lamb  (ver.  11).  God  reveals  as 
much  of  His  plan  of  grace  towards  sinners  of  Adam's  family  to  the  angels  as  fills 
them  with  wonder  and  love.  They  rejoice  in  this  work,  because  they  rejoice  in  God 
Himself  as  the  author  of  it.  The  joy  of  angels  in  relation  to  the  work  of  the 
redemption  of  sinners  is  continually  upon  the  increase.  They  rejoice  in  the 
additions  daUy  made  to  the  glory  of  Christ — in  the  new  crowns  set  on  His  head,  the 
new  victories  of  His  grace  over  Satan  and  sin — the  new  evidences  of  the  Divinity  of 
His  reUgion — and  with  the  Church  shall  sing  a  new  song,  when  nations  are  born  at 
once,  and  a  people  in  a  day !  The  work  of  redemption  is  a  proper  foundation  for  joy. 
In  heaven  they  sing  for  ever  of  it ;  on  earth,  all  who  know  it  admire  and  adore  God 
who  hath  abounded  in  it  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence.  It  is  the  chief  of  His  ways. 
The  work  of  salvation  by  Christ  gives  wonderful  displays  of  God,  and  therefore  is  a 
foundation  of  joy  and  wonder.  In  this  stupendous  work  of  redemption  God  is  seen 
as  a  God  of  infinite  mercy.  His  mercy  flows  in  the  atonement  of  His  Son,  for  He 
is  a  just  God,  as  well  as  merciful,  and  a  Saviour.  The  salvation  of  sinners  greatly 
exalts  the  character  of  the  Saviour.  Each  person  in  the  Godhead  has  His  own 
distinct  part  in  salvation  and  His  own  distinct  glory.  The  glory  belongs  to  the 
eternal  Three,  but  the  Lamb  is  the  chief  subject  of  praise  by  the  Church.  {The 
Christian  Magazine.)  The  worship  of  heaven  : — Heaven's  worship  is  the  worship 
of  praise.  Prayer  is  not  offered  there.  The  ordinance,  "  Every  one  that  asketh 
receiveth,"  does  not  extend  to  heaven.  Heaven's  tenants  are  always  receiving  ;  but 
they  receive  everything  without  asking.  The  spiritual  discipline  of  asking  is  not 
needed  in  heaven.  Complaint  is  not  heard  there  ;  deprecation  is  not  heard  there ; 
intercession  is  not  heard  there.  God's  attributes  are  celebrated  in  chant  and  song. 
If  the  spirits  in  heaven  were  disembodied  there  would  still  be  worship  ;  but  it  would 
be  silent  worship — worship  in  affection ;  worship  in  volition.  But  if  corporeal  form 
shelter  human  souls  there,  and  the  faculty  of  utterance  be  given  to  those  forms, 

24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vu. 

surely  that  faculty  must  be  consecrated  to  the  purposes  of  devotion.    There  are 
bodies,  and  there  is  utterance.     The  praise  of  heaven  is  common — not  solitary. 
There  are  no  mere  listeners  there — all  worship.    And  this  praise  is  melodious.    It 
is  not  praise  in  common  speech,  or  ordinary  language.     There  is  music  as  well  as 
voice.     There  are  harmony  and  melody.     The  celestial  congregation  do  not  speak 
praise — they  sing  praise.    It  is  known  to  all,  moreover,  that  the  worship  of  heaven 
is  neither  localised  nor  limited  to  seasons.     There  is  incessant  worship.      The 
worship  of  the  Paradise  regained  corresponds  with  the  worship  of  the  Paradise  lost. 
All   the  ground  is  hallowed;  every  day  is  a  holy  day;  every  hour  a  season  of 
worship ;  and  worship  is  always  in  season.    Is  it  possible  for  us  men  ever  to  be 
engaged  in  this  worship  ?    What  are  the  qualifications  of  redeemed  men  for  the 
worship  of  the  skies  ?    Capacity,  qualification  even  for  the  worship  of  the  skies,  is 
involved  in  all  that  constitutes  your  salvation ;  involved  in  your  new  birth ;  involved 
in  the  position  which  you  occupy  as  justified  before  God;  involved  in  your  sanctifi- 
cation.     1.  A  saved  man  has  a  capacity  for  the  worship  of  heaven  in  his  personal 
holiness,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  God  with  which  that  holiness  is  associated.  Bom 
with  a  sinful  nature,  and  going  astray  from  the  beginning  of  life,  he  could  not 
always  see  God  in  himself.     Conscience  then  was  smarting;   but  the  wound  is 
healed.    Memory  was  then  burdened  with  a  load  of  transgression ;  but  that  load  is 
taken  away.     Sin  in  various  forms  had  dominion  in  that  heart ;  but  the  dominion 
of  sin  is  for  ever  destroyed.    2.  Glorified  saints  have  ability  to  worship  in  ever 
increasing  knowledge  of  God  ;  for  in  all  celestial  objects  God  is  seen,  and  seen  in 
those  objects  more  and  more.     3.  The  saved  in  heaven  are  capable  of  celestial 
worship  through  the  influence  over  them  of  superior  spirits.    Before  redeemed  men 
rank  angels  and  seraphs ;  and  rising  above  them  are  thrones,  dominions,  princi- 
palities, and  powers.    All  these  worship,  and  they  excite,  and  they  encourage  the 
saved  man  to  worship.     To  be  silent  would  be  to  imprison  his  own  heart,  and  to 
fetter  his  own  mind.    4.  The  serenity,  the  peace  of  mind  which  characterises  the 
redeemed  is  another  element  of  power  for  worship.     The  peace  of  God — that  quiet- 
ness of  soul  which,  as  you  know,  is  essential  to  the  highest  worship,  to  adoration 
and  to  praise — keeps  their  hearts  and  minds ;  and  there  is  no  confusion  of  mind, 
no  perturbation  of  soul.    The  troubled  sea  is  an  emblem  of  an  unpardoned  soul ; 
but  a  sea  of  glass  is  a  symbol  of  the  glorified  spirit.      Understanding,  reason, 
imagination,  conscience,  emotion,  will,  are  all  in  their  place,  performing  with 
accuracy  and  vigour  the  functions  assigned  to  them.      Here  is  no  intellectual 
dulness  or  obliquity,  no  misguided  or  misplaced  affection.     The  harp  is  strung  and 
tuned,  every  string  perfect,  and  the  tension  complete.     The  voice  is  strong,  and 
sweet,  and  clear  :  there  is  no  harshness,  no  lack  of  melody.    5.  The  equal  develop- 
ment of  every  spiritual  faculty  and  grace  increases  the  capacity  for  worship. 
InequaUty  in  our  spiritual  development  is  a  great  hindrance  to  worship.     Here  we 
often  see  narrow  minds,  feeble  hearts,  weak  faith,  fickle  love,  wavering  hope,  or 
broken  utterance.    In  heaven  the  development  is  like  that  of  a  full-blown  flower,  or 
of  perfectly  ripe  fruit,     6.  Conscious  identity  is  another  element  of  power.    Into 
the  "  I  am,"  and  the  "  I  was,"  the  glorified  Christian  fully  enters  ;  and  the  contrasts 
prompt  him  to  worship.     "  I  was,"  he  says,  "  in  danger — I  am  safe.    I  was  a 
criminal — I  am  a  righteous  child.    I  was  a  sufferer — I  am  now  without  a  tear, 
without  a  sigh.    I  was  poor — I  have  now  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undefiled, 
and  that  fadeth  not  away."     7.  They  have  qualification  also  in  the  knowledge  of 
all  things  with  which  they  need  to  be  acquainted.     Many  a  matter  that  we  have 
here  called  a  mystery  will  there  be  fully  explained.     8.  A  mighty  power  in  worship 
is  that  of  love — the  love  of  gratitude  and  the  love  of  complacency.     We  mean  a 
deep  sense  of  obligation  to  God,  and  a  thorough  joy  in  God.     (S.  Martin,  D.D.) 

Yers.  11,  12.  AU  the  ang^els  stood  round  about  the  throne. — The  existence  and 
employment  of  the  holy  angels  : — I.  The  existence  of  angels.  To  what  purpose 
discourse  to  us  concerning  the  inhabitants  of  a  world  future,  remote,  and  of  which 
our  ideas  are  very  confused  ?  Let  us  rather  attend  to  the  world  in  which  we  live, 
and  to  them  that  dwell  therein.  It  would  be  perfectly  right  so  to  do  if  the  world  in 
which  we  live  were  the  only  one  with  which  we  were  connected,  and  death  the  final 
period  of  our  existence.  But  if  there  be  another  world  which  is  to  receive  us  for 
ever,  the  existence  of  its  inhabitants  becomes  a  speculation  both  pleasing  and 
important.  This  state  of  our  being,  you  say,  is  future.  It  is  so  to-day,  but  before 
to-morrow  it  may  be  present  to  some.  You  say  it  is  remote.  That  by  no  means 
appears.    It  may  not  be  "  far  from  every  one  of  us."    The  spiritual  and  eternal, 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION,  371 

world,  into  which  we  are,  at  a  destined  hour,  to  be  born,  may  be,  like  its  Divine 
Maker  and  King,  near  us,  and  round  about  us,  in  a  manner  of  which  we  are  not 
aware,  nor  shall  be,  till  we  enter  it.  But  our  ideas  of  this  future  world  are  con- 
fused and  indeterminate.  We  have  the  Divine  assurance  of  God's  Word  that  such 
a  world  exists.  But  the  truth  is,  that  whatever  ideas  of  a  future  and  invisible 
world  may  be,  at  certain  times,  impressed  upon  our  minds,  they  are  presently 
efifaced  by  a  tide  of  business  or  pleasure,  and  stand,  therefore,  in  need  of  being 
continually  renewed.  Now,  what  can  do  this  so  effectually  as  frequent  meditations 
on  the  blessed  inhabitants  of  that  world,  the  holy  angels  ?  We  love  to  recollect  a 
place,  by  the  circumstance  of  those  friends  we  have  in  it.  By  thinking  of  them,  we 
are  led  to  think  of  the  place  where  they  are,  and  learn  to  love  and  desire  it  the 
more.  An  intercourse  is  by  this  means  opened,  a  correspondence  established, 
between  heaven  and  earth.  II.  Their  nature  and  condition.  Angels  are  spirits. 
Not  formed  of  the  same  gross  materials,  they  are  free  from  the  inconveniences  we 
feel,  the  temptations  and  sufferings  to  which  we  are  subject.  Their  appearance 
is  glorious  as  the  light  of  heaven ;  and  their  motion,  like  that,  rapid,  and,  as  it 
were,  instantaneous.  The  contemplation  of  so  many  excellent  and  happy  beings 
opens  our  understandings,  and  enlarges  our  conceptions  of  the  Creator's  power 
and  goodness.  But  if  we  ourselves  are  miserable,  what  benefit,  it  will  be  asked, 
can  result  to  us  from  contemplating  the  happiness  of  others  ?  Will  not  our  misery 
be  rather  aggravated  than  alleviated  by  it  ?  We  do  not  cease  to  be  wretched  upon 
earth  because  the  angels  are  otherwise  in  heaven.  Redeemed  by  the  Son  of  God, 
leave  off,  0  man,  to  complain  I  Wait  but  for  a  little  while  in  faith  and  patience, 
and  their  happiness  shall  be  yours.      III.    The  perfect  service,   ready   and 

UNLIMITED  obedience  BY  THEM,   PAID   TO   THEIR  ALMIGHTY  CREATOR.      Their  felicity 

does  not  consist  in  freedom  and  independence.  Like  the  lightnings,  which  say, 
"  Here  we  are,"  they  are  represented  as  waiting  before  the  throne,  ready,  at  the 
Divine  command,  to  fly  to  the  extremities  of  the  world.  Nor  are  the  angels  more 
exact  in  loyalty  to  their  King  than  in  preserving  due  subordination  in  their  several 
ranks  and  under  their  respective  leaders,  without  which  peace  could  not  be  in 
heaven  any  more  than  on  earth.  IV.  The  benevolence  and  charity  of  the 
HOLY  angels  ;  the  love  they  have  always  shown  for  man,  and  the  services  by  them 
rendered  to  him.  And  here  a  scene  opens  worthy  of  all  admiration,  gratitude, 
and  praise,  for  never  do  those  blessed  spirits  obey  with  greater  delight  the 
commands  of  their  Maker  than  when  mankind  is  the  subject  of  those  commands ; 
so  deeply,  from  the  begirming,  have  they  interested  themselves  in  our  welfare. 
{Bishop  Home.) 

Vers.  13,  14.  Wbat  are  these  which  are  arrayed  In  -white  robes. — What  and 
whence  are  these  ? — I.  Concerning  the  bright  spirits  in  heaven — Whence  came 
THEY?  "These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation."  1.  They  were 
then  like  ourselves,  for,  in  the  first  place,  they  were  tried  like  others.  (1)  The  saints 
now  glorified  were  not  screened  from  sorrow.  I  saw  to-day  a  number  of  lovely 
flowers ;  they  were  as  delightful  in  this  month  of  February  as  they  would  have 
been  in  the  midst  of  summer;  but  I  did  not  ask,  "Whence  came  they?"  I 
know  very  well  that  they  were  the  products  of  the  conservatory ;  they  had  not 
been  raised  amid  the  frosts  of  this  chill  season,  else  they  had  not  bloomed  as  yet. 
But  when  I  look  upon  God's  flowers  blooming  in  heaven,  I  understand  from  the 
voice  of  inspiration  that  they  enjoyed  no  immunity  from  the  chill  breath  of  grief  ; 
they  were  made  to  bloom  by  the  master  hand  of  the  Chief  Husbandman,  in  all 
their  glory,  amid  the  adversities  and  catastrophes  which  are  common  to  men. 
(2)  They  were  not  even  screened  from  temptation.  To  the  child  of  God,  temptation  to 
sin  is  a  greater  grievance  than  the  suffering  of  pain.  Storms  on  any  sea  are  to  be 
dreaded ;  but  a  whirlwind  raised  by  Satan  on  the  black  sea  of  corruption  is  horrible 
beyond  conception.  Yet,  do  not  say  you  cannot  enter  heaven  because  you  are 
tempted,  for  all  those  snow-white  bands  attained  their  glorious  standing  through 
much  temptation,  as  weU  as  through  much  affliction.  (3)  They  were  men  who  as 
keenly  felt  trial  and  temptation  as  we  do.  Good  men,  because  they  are  good,  are 
not  the  less  sorrowful  when  their  beloved  ones  are  taken  from  them  :  gracious  men 
are  not  by  grace  petrified  so  as  to  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord.  Jacob 
mourned  for  Rachel,  and  David  for  Jonathan.  Peter  wept  bitterly,  and  Paul  had 
continual  heaviness.  Tribulations  abounded  and  afflictions  were  multiplied  to 
the  first  disciples,  and  we  wrong  both  themselves  and  us  if  we  dream  that  it  was 
easier  for  them  to  suffer  than  for  us.    I  grant  you  that  they  possessed  a  secret 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

something  which  enabled  them  to  endure,  but  that  something  was  not  homebom 
in  their  nature  any  more  than  it  is  in  ours.  They  were  fortified  by  a  secret  strength 
which  they  found  at  the  throne  of  God  in  prayer,  a  patience  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
wrought  in  them,  and  which  He  is  equally  ready  to  work  in  us.  2.  The  saints  who 
are  now  in  heaven  needed  trial  like  others.  To  what  end  do  men  need  tribulation  ? 
We  reply,  they  often  require  it  to  arouse  them ;  and  yonder  saints  who  serve  God 
day  and  night  in  His  temple,  once  slept  as  do  others,  and  needed  to  be  bestirred. 
They  required  adversity  to  educate  them  into  complete  manhood,  for  they,  too, 
were  once  babes  in  grace.  They  needed  tribulation,  moreover,  that  they  might  be 
made  like  their  Saviour.  3.  The  children  of  God  who  are  in  heaven  in  their  trials 
had  no  other  support  than  that  which  is  still  afforded  to  all  the  saints.  4.  If 
there  was  any  difference  between  those  saints  and  ourselves,  it  lay  in  their  enduring 
superior  tribulations,  for  "these  are  they  that  came  out  of  great  tribulation." 
II.  What  abe  these  ?  The  reply  was,  "  They  have  washed  their  robes,"  &c.  1.  All 
those  in  heaven  were  sinners,  for  they  all  needed  to  wash  their  robes.  2.  All  who  are 
in  heaven  needed  an  atonement,  and  the  same  atonement  as  we  rely  upon.  They 
have  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Not  one 
of  them  became  white  through  his  tears  of  repentance,  not  one  through  the 
shedding  of  the  blood  of  bulls  or  of  goats.  3.  The  saints  in  heaven  realised  the 
atonement  in  the  same  way  as  we  must  do.  The  act  which  gave  them  the  virtue 
which  lies  in  the  atonement  was  the  act  of  faith.  There  is  nothing  to  do,  and 
nothing  to  feel,  and  nothing  to  be,  in  order  to  forgiveness ;  we  have  but  to  wash 
and  the  filth  is  gone.  III.  Now,  what  of  all  this  ?  Why,  first  of  all,  we  must 
not  draw  the  conclusion  that  trouble  and  temptation  are  any  argument  that  a  man 
will  get  to  heaven.  I  add  a  caution.  I  would,  however,  have  you  learn  that  no 
amount  of  trial  which  we  have  to  suffer  here,  if  we  are  believers  in  Jesus,  should 
lead  us  to  anything  like  despair,  for  however  trouble  may  encompass  us  to-day, 
those  in  heaven  came  through  as  great  a  tribulation,  and  why  may  not  we? 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Whence  come  the  saints  ? — "  Whence  came  they  ?  "  Heaven, 
then,  itself  has  a  retrospect  as  well  as  a  fruition.  Heaven  itself  is  a  sequel  and  a 
consequence  as  well  as  a  fact,  and  a  present.  Heaven  is  an  arrival ;  heaven  is  a 
development ;  heaven  is  a  result,  in  one  aspect,  however  infinite  its  capacities 
of  attainments  beyond.  "Whence  came  they?"  Then  they  were  somewhere 
before.  These  same  persons,  different  as  they  are,  transfigured  as  they  are 
from  anything  that  we  see,  yet  were  once  here.  We  have  seen  such  persons; 
we  have  talked  with  some  of  them.  The  dark  river  was  known  not  to  them, 
and  it  was  no  unmaking  and  remaking  of  them  to  us.  "  Whence  came 
they?"  They  came  from  this  earth,  and  they  are  perfected.  But  the  ques- 
tion as  it  is  answered  in  the  context  has  a  fuller  meaning  than  this  —  it 
pre-supposes  this,  and  passes  on.  "  From  earth,"  of  course  is  the  answer,  but 
from  earth  how  conditioned  and  how  used?  Heaven  is  a  sequel  and  a  conse- 
quence— a  consequence  of  what  sort  of  earth?  Heaven  is  a  consummation, 
though  never  itself  to  be  consummated.  Then  of  what  experience  is  it  the 
consummation !  He  calls  it  two  things  :  two  only — pain  and  purification.  "  These 
are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes."  The 
simplicity,  the  brevity  of  the  answer  may  surprise  us?  "Whence  came  they?" 
We  might  have  expected  in  answer.  From  every  possible  variety  of  condition, 
private  or  public,  humble  or  conspicuous,  adverse  or  prosperous ;  wealth  and  length 
of  days,  or  else  sickness,  privation,  distress,  and  woe.  Not  so.  The  kind  of  earth 
from  which  they  came  was  one  and  but  one.  "  These  are  they  that  came  out  of 
great  tribulation."  Pain,  then,  is  the  common  feature  of  the  earth,  of  which  the 
terminus  is  heaven.  It  is  a  thought  which  has  exercised  Christian  people,  and  we 
cannot  wonder  at  it.  If  those  who  wear  the  white  robes  came  out  of  great 
tribulation,  what  prospect  is  there  for  me  to  whom  tribulation  is  an  experience 
unknown  ?  The  question  ought  to  press  upon  us.  It  is  easy  to  say.  You  cannot 
force,  you  need  not  invite,  and  you  must  not  simulate  pain.  If  pain  does  not 
come  the  fault  is  not  yours.  Pain  may  be  on  its  way — you  must  bear  it  when  it 
comes.  This  is  true,  but  it  is  not  all  the  truth.  If  life  smiles  on  you  personally, 
if  it  supplies  your  abundant  needs,  if  its  occupations  are  pleasant,  if  its  friends 
are  many,  if  its  bereavements  are  few  and  far  between  ;  if,  therefore,  you  cannot 
affect  not  to  be  happy,  it  is  plain  that  as  regards  yourself,  the  only  two  questions 
on  this  head  can  be — Are  you  thankful  ?  and  Are  you  kind  ?  Do  you  receive  your 
blessings  from  God,  and  do  you  share  them  generously  with  men?  But  much 
more  than  this.     The  compass  of  pain  is  not  thus  limited.     If  neither  bodily  pain 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  373 

nor  mental  is  yours,  we  go  on  to  ask,  What  of  spiritual  ?  Is  it  no  pain  to  feel 
myself  so  sinful,  that  when  I  would  do  good  evil  is  present  with  me ;  when  I  would 
feel  the  wonderful  love  there  is  no  response;  when  I  would  mount  up  into  the 
heaven,  which  is  God's,  I  faint,  and  fall  back  into  the  dreamy  world  where  God  is 
not  ?  But  while  spiritual  pain  is  one  kind,  one  ingredient  of  the  great  tribulation, 
there  is  another — the  purely  unselfish  pain:  the  pain  which  looks  upon  the 
animate  creation  groaning  in  travail,  and  travails  in  pain  with  it ;  the  pain  which 
looks  on  this  anguished  England,  with  food  not  enough,  and  work  not  enough  for 
its  toiling  millions;  feels,  too,  with  the  foolish  misled  dupes  of  the  so-called 
sympathy  or  philosophy  which  leads  them  on  to  quagmires  and  quicksands 
unfathomable.  Yes,  there  is  an  unselfish  as  well  as  a  spiritual  tribulation ;  and  I 
think  some  of  the  white-robed  in  heaven  have  come  out  of  it.  So,  then,  pain  is 
one  of  the  two  earths  out  of  which  heaven  is  made.  Now  for  the  other.  We  have 
called  it  in  one  word,  purification.  They  washed  their  robes  down  here  and  made 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Purification :  the  being  made  white  ;  Oh, 
who  shall  give  me  that  for  this  black  thing,  this  spotted,  sullied,  sordid  blackening 
which  is  all  around  me?  I  feel  it,  I  am  ashamed,  I  am  unhappy.  Oh,  for  the 
whiteness,  oh,  for  purification.  Is  it  a  name ;  is  it  a  dream ;  or  is  it  a  reality  ? 
These  white-robed  ones  in  heaven,  they  have  it ;  nay,  they  had  it  down  here.  So 
then  justification,  which  is  in  other  words  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  sets  in  motion 
sanctification,  which  is  purification,  too.  But,  lastly,  we  would  bid  you  all  ask, 
are  you  in  process  of  purification?  "Who  can  say,"  a  Scriptural  writer  asks, 
'*  Who  can  say  I  have  made  my  heart  clean  ?  I  am  pure  from  my  sin  ?  "  {Dean 
Vaughan.)  Final  blessedness  of  the  saints  : — I.  The  previous  condition  of  the 
PERSONS  HERE  PRESENTED  TO  John's  NOTICE.  One  unacquaintcd  with  God's  ways,  or 
with  the  history  of  our  race,  would  have  been,  perhaps,  ready  to  conclude  that,  in 
their  journey  hither,  their  path  had  been  strewed  with  flowers  and  gladdened 
with  perpetual  sunshine.  This  we  ourselves  would  be  apt  to  desire.  But  the 
ways  of  God  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  as  our  thoughts.  The 
zeal  of  saints  for  the  truth  of  God;  their  opposition  to  the  sinful  practices 
which  abounded  around  them ;  their  diligence  in  the  cultivation  of  holy  affec- 
tions ;  and  their  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  private  and  public  duties — all  stand- 
ing forth  in  marked  contrast  with  the  maxims  and  customs  of  a  world  lying  in 
wickedness — have  ever  exposed  them  to  innumerable  trials,  to  reproaches,  and 
sufferings.  In  addition  to  the  causes  of  tribulation  which  we  have  now  specified 
as  the  peculiar  lot  of  the  Christian,  I  mention  farther  the  remains  of  sin  within  him. 
II.  The  means  by  which  they  have  attained  their  present  state.    III.  The 

BLESSEDNESS  OF  WHICH  THESE  SAINTS  ARE  REPRESENTED  AS  PARTAKERS.     {JoS.  GlaySOn.) 

The  worshippers  in  the  heavenly  temple  : — I.  The  temple  here  spoken  of.  It  is  a 
heavenly  temple ;  a  holy  place,  standing  not  on  this  perishable  world,  but  on  the 
everlasting  hiUs  of  heaven.  All  other  temples  have  been  erected  by  man,  but  this 
temple  has  been  built  by  Jehovah  Himself,  to  be  the  eternal  dwelling  place  of  His 
Church,  and  the  seat  of  His  own  glorious  throne.  The  most  glowing  descriptions 
that  language  can  convey,  and  the  most  exalted  conceptions  to  which  our  imagina- 
tions can  reach,  fall  infinitely  short  of  that  dazzling  splendour  which  fills  the 
courts  of  the  living  God.  The  world  which  we  inhabit,  though  defiled  by  sin  and 
under  the  curse  of  God,  has  yet  so  much  beauty  and  magnificence  in  it,  that  we  are 
often  delighted  and  astonished  as  we  contemplate  its  scenes.  What,  then,  must  be 
the  glory  of  that  world  which  has  never  felt  the  polluting  touch  of  sin,  which  wag 
prepared  before  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were  laid?  Happy  are  they  who 
dwell  in  such  a  temple !  Blessed  is  the  man  who  is  but  a  doorkeeper  in  such  a 
house !  II.  The  happy  beings  who  are  the  worshippers  in  this  splendid  temple. 
1.  The  former  condition  of  these  worshippers.  (1)  It  was  an  earthly  condition. 
They  were  not,  like  the  angels,  always  in  this  house.  They  were  natives  of  an 
apostate  world.  (2)  Their  condition,  too,  was  a  sinful  one.  There  is  not  one  among 
them  who  was  not  a  transgressor  while  on  earth,  and  who  has  not  to  this  very 
hour  a  remembrance  of  his  guilt.  (3)  They  were  also  in  an  afflicted  condition. 
Many  of  them  came  here  out  of  a  state  of  peculiar  distress  and  suffering,  2. 
Their  present  condition.  (1)  It  is  a  state  of  peace,  a  state  of  freedom  from  pain 
and  sorrow.  The  billows  of  adversity  which  once  filled  them  with  fear  still 
swell  and  rage,  but  they  are  all  raging  far  beneath  them,  and  can  never  again 
toss  them  with  their  waves.  (2)  It  is  also  a  state  of  purity.  "  They  have  washed 
their  robes,"  &c.  They  were  indeed  continually  contracting  fresh  defilement  as 
long  as  they  remained  on  earth,  and  were  constrained  to  wash  again  and  again 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

in  the  same  fountain  that  cleansed  them  at  first ;  but  if  this  fountain  had  left  the 
unpardoned  guilt  of  only  one  sin  upon  their  souls,  that  one  sin  would  have 
disqualified  them  for  the  pure  services  of  the  habitation  of  God,  and  have  barred 
for  ever  its  sacred  doors  against  them.  This  free  and  full  pardon  of  sin  is  not, 
however,  the  only  blessing  which  the  heavenly  worshippers  have  obtained  through 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  The  same  fountain  that  freed  them  from  the  guilt 
of  sin,  washed  away  sin  itself,  and  freed  them  from  its  power.  Not  that 
they  were  at  once  brought  into  this  state  of  perfect  purity.  Years  passed 
away  before  some  of  them  were  completely  sanctified,  and  made  meet  to  minister 
among  the  saints  in  light;  and  they  were  all  harassed  to  their  dying  hour,  in 
a  greater  or  less  degree,  with  the  struggling  corruptions  of  their  evii  hearts.  But 
sin  could  not  follow  them  beyond  the  grave.  (3)  The  state  of  these  worshippers 
in  the  temple  of  God  is  one  of  triumph.  They  have  "  palms  in  their  hands."  3. 
The  greatness  of  their  number.  Satan  does  not  number  among  his  subjects  all  the 
inhabitants  of  our  globe.  The  Eedeemer  has  a  people  on  the  earth.  Who  can  tell 
how  many  an  humble  Christian  has  been  travelling  to  the  land  of  rest,  while 
almost  aU  around  him,  and  even  the  honoured  instrument  that  first  turned  his 
soul  to  God,  have  been  ignorant  of  his  faith  ?  Lesson :  1.  The  gospel  of  Christ 
does  not  promise  to  its  followers  any  exemption  from  the  calamities  of  life.  2. 
How  great  is  the  contrast  between  the  present  and  the  future  condition  of  the 
followers  of  Jesus  I  3.  A  loud  call  to  self-examination.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 
White  robes  : — I.  The  white  robes  of  innocence.  The  devil  stains  our  souls.  The 
world,  too,  stains  them.  Alas!  we  stain  them  by  our  own  folly  and  fault.  U. 
The  white  robes  of  projvuse.  These  are  the  baptismal  robes.  III.  The  white 
ROBES  OF  CLEANSING.  God  gives  US  Hot  One  start  alone  in  life ;  He  gives  us  many. 
We  make  our  promises,  and  we  break  them.  But  God  never  bids  us  give  op  hope. 
Try  to  do  better.  Lift  up  your  hearts.  IV.  The  white  robes  of  victory.  It  will 
not  always  be  striving  here.  It  will  not  always  be  staining  our  robes  and  cleansing 
them  anew,  and  then,  alas  !  staining  them  once  more.  If  we  persevere,  we  shall 
win.  It  is  not  failing  to  succeed  which  is  so  bad,  but  failing  to  try.  And  all 
who  try,  however  feeble  they  may  be,  however  often  they  may  give  in  to  the  forces 
against  them,  shall  at  the  last  "  stand  .  .  .  clothed  with  white  robes,"  &c,  {J.  E.  C. 
Welldon,  M.A.)  The  human  population  in  heaven  : — I.  Their  earthly  life  was 
MARKED  BY  GREAT  TRIAL.  1.  This  should  tcach  US  Contentment  under  our  trials. 
2.  This  should  inspire  us  with  magnanimity  under  our  trials.  II.  Their  celestial 
CIRCUMSTANCES  ARE  PRE-EMINENTLY  GLORIOUS.  1.  Their  appearance.  2.  Their 
employment.    3.  Their  companionship.    4.  Their  blessedness.    HI.  The  difference 

BETWEEN     THE    EARTHLY    AND    HEAVENLY     CONDITION     IS    ATTRIBUTABLE    TO    ChRIST. 

1.  They  were  originally  polluted.  2.  The  self-sacrifice  of  Christ  has  a  purifying 
influence.  3.  Their  cleansing  by  this  influence  had  taken  place  when  on  earth. 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  sainted  in  heaven : — I.  The  beings  to  whom  attention  is 
DIRECTED.  They  were  not  the  unfallen,  in  other  words,  the  natives  of  that  better 
country :  they  were  redeemed  human  spirits.  They  were  born  of  human  parentage, 
and  nursed  upon  a  human  breast.  Their  first  expression  on  coming  into  existence 
was  a  wail,  and  their  last,  perhaps,  a  groan.  And  between  those  periods  they  had 
known  their  share  of  human  suffering.  If  they  had  suffered,  they  had  also  sinned. 
No  lingerers  on  the  margin  of  wrong,  no  prodigals  of  a  day,  they  had  wandered 
into  a  far  country,  and  theirs  had  been  the  alienation  of  years.  And,  if  they  had 
Binned,  they  had  repented  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  their  hearts  had 
turned  in  longing  towards  their  Father's  house.  Nor  had  their  experience  ended 
here.  Young  Christians,  in  the  first  joy  of  forgiveness,  are  apt  to  think  heaven 
very  near  to  them — that  the  celestial  shores  will  soon  loom  upon  their  view.  In 
passing  through  a  Christian  career,  there  are  trials  to  be  endured.  Men  were  they 
•*  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy."  Into  their  labours  we  have  entered.  The 
harvests  of  their  life  we  reap.  "  They  came  out  of  great  tribulation."  Again,  they 
went  to  heaven  by  the  way  of  death.    H.  Their  position  and  glorious  appearance. 

1.  They  are  before  the  throne  of  God.  The  meaning  of  the  throne  of  God  we  know 
not.  ^  Heaven  is  said  to  be  His  throne,  and  earth  His  footstool.  The  presence  of 
His  infinite  nature  is  diffused  throughout  all  things  ;  but,  purged  from  the  grossness 
of  earth,  the  glorified  have  a  more  vivid  sense  of  His  presence  than  is  given  us. 

2.  Then  notice  their  glorious  appearance:  "Clothed  in  white  robes."  (1)  As 
being  typical  of  their  purity.  No  evil  is  there  lurking  within  the  blessed,  and  they 
shrink  not  beneath  the  Divine  scrutiny.  (2)  White  robes  are  significant  of 
triumph.    (3)  White  robes  are  significant  of  rest.    The  man  who  has  laboured 


CHAP.vn.]  REVELATION.  375 

throws  aside  the  garments  worn  in  toil,  and  puts  on  others  in  which  to  repose.     In 
this  world,  the  condition  of  the  Christian  is  not  that  of  rest  but  of  labour.     HE. 
The  employment  of  the  redeemed.    A  very  natural  thought  is  that  contained  in 
the  line  of  the  American  poet,  when,  speaking  of  a  departed  friend,  he  says : 
♦'  Day  after  day  we  think  what  she  is  doing."     The  rest  of  heaven  is  not  that  of 
death,   but  of  infinite  life.     The  repose  of  the   redeemed  does  not  consist  in 
cessation  from  employ,  but  rather  in  the  constant  prosecution  of  congenial  labour. 
Multiform  will  be  the  character  of  life  in  heaven,     1.  There  will  be  social  life. 
There  the  golden  chain  of  love  will  link  all  souls  together,  binding  them  to  the 
throne  of  God.     There  a  feeling  of  common  love  will  flow  through  every  heart. 
All  will  be  at  home.     2.  There  will  be  an  intellectual  life.     The  glory  of  man  is  his 
mind.     To  cultivate  this  stands  among  the  highest  duties  of  the  present  life.     The 
present  is  the  infancy  of  our  being,  but  there  is  before  us  a  majestic  maturity.     3. 
The  employment  of  heaven  will  be  religious.     In  this,  more  than  even  his  intellec- 
tual nature,  man  is  capable  of  unlimited  improvement.     Even  in  this  life  no 
bounds  can  be  set  to  faith,  and  hope,  and  love,  so  will  it  be  in  the  future.     Oh,  it 
overwhelms  us  to  think  of  the  position  of  unfallen  spirits,  our  brain  grows  dizzy  from 
the  height,  our  eyes  dazzle  in  the  excess  of  glory.    Yet  is  there  no  altitude  where 
created  being  now  stands,  but  what  man  may  attain  to  in  the  upward  career  of  his 
moral  progress,  and  for  ever ;  and  for  ever  will  he  continue  to  advance  through  the 
infinitudes  of  his  nature's  possibilities.     {S.  Clarke.)         The  blessed  state  of  the  re- 
deemed : — I.  The  condition  out  of  which  the  bedeemed  have  come.     1.  They  came 
out  of  a  state  of  tribulation.    "  Man  is  born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward."    (1) 
Disease,  perhaps,  sows  its  poisonous  seeds  in  his  frame.     (2)  Death  bereaves  him 
of  those  who  were  the  desire  of  his  eyes.     (3)  Adverse  providences  involve  him  in 
disappointment  and  indigence  ;  the  malice  of  men,  in  vexation  and  disgrace ;  and 
his  own  errors  and  imprudence  in  inextricable  difficulties.     (4)  Existence  itself  may 
become  a  burden  through  a  complication  of  calamities.     (5)  It  is  generally  thought, 
however,  that  there  is  here  an  allusion  to  those  sorrows  which  are  peculiar  to 
Christians.    Like  Stephen,  they  winged  their  way  from  martyrdom  to  the  presence 
of  God.     2.  They  came  out  of  a  state  of  impurity.     The  earth  on  which  they  dwelt 
is  one  wide  scene  of  disobedience  and  rebellion  against  the  Majesty  of  the  universe. 
The  taint  of  moral  pollution  adheres  to  all  its  intelligent  inhabitants,  and  introduces 
disorder  into  its  very  frame.    11.  The  means  by  which  the  redeemed  have  been 
ADVANCED  TO  GLORY.     1.  By  Washing  their  robes,  and  making  them  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb,  they  acquired  a  title  to  be  before  the  throne.    2.  By  washing 
their  robes,  and  making  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  they  acquired  a 
xneetness  to  be  before  the  throne.    They  are  freed  from  their  inability  to  love  and 
enjoy  God ;  they  are  blessed  with  an  incipient  and  growing  meetness  for  heaven. 
m.  The  nature  of  the   felicity  to   which  they  are   exalted.     1.  They  are 
raised  to  an  exalted  station.    Those  before  the  throne  of  God  witness  His  glory  in 
its  brightest  manifestations,  and  enjoy  the  most  intimate  communion  with  the 
Father  of  their  spirits.    The  near  sight  which  they  obtain  of  God  gives  them  more 
distinct  apprehensions  of  His  nature — produces  more  complete  assimilation  to  His 
image,  and  fills  with  livelier  joy.     The  servants  who  stood  in  the  presence  of  Solomon 
must  have  caught  something  of  the  wisdom  of  their  master ;  and  those  who  are 
before  the  throne  of  God,  cannot  fail  to  advance  in  everything  heavenly  and  divine. 
2.  They  are  engaged  in  the  most  exalted  employments.    3.  They  are  freed  from  all 
the  infirmities,  imperfections,  and  sufferings  of  the  present  life.     4.  They  make 
continual  advances  in  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  God.    {J.  Kirkwood,  M.A.) 
All  Saints^  Day  a  witness  of  grace  : — Putting  aside  those  festivals  in  the  Church's 
year  which  speak  to  us  of  the  life  and  death  of  our  Blessed  Lord,  there  is  no 
festival  so  sublime  as  that  which  we  keep  to-day.    We  commemorate  to-day,  not 
the  life  of  any  one  servant  of  God,  but  the  life  and  example  of  all ;  of  those  whose 
very  names  we  know  not,  save  that  we  know  that  they  are  written  in  the  Book 
of  Life.    There  is  a  threefold  lesson   which   speaks   to   all  of   us  through   this 
festival.    1.  The  lesson  of  faith.    Especially  is  this  a  festival  which  tells  of  faith, 
inasmuch  as,  above  all  others,  it   bridges   over  the   gulf   which    separates   this 
world  from  the  world  beyond  the  grave.    This  life  is  to  the  future  state  what 
the  bud  is  to  the  flower,  the  blade  in  the  ear  to  the  full  corn.    This  is  a  truth 
of  especial  importance  to  us  to-day,  when   we   commemorate  the  faithful  dead, 
whose  warfare  is  accomplished.    For  it  teaches  us  that  there  is  a  real  fellow- 
ship between  them  and  us ;  that  their  relation  to  us  is  not  done  away  by  death ; 
that  their  souls  are  not  sleeping  idly ;  that  they  are  living  more  truly,  and  in  a 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

nobler  sense,  than  we  ourselves.  In  this  world,  men  of  noble  birth  desire — and  a 
right  feeling  it  surely  is — to  keep  the  brightness  of  their  name  untarnished,  not  to 
disgrace  the  title  which  their  fathers  bore.  "  My  ancestors,"  such  an  one  will  say, 
"  were  brave  and  pure ;  they  helped  to  vindicate  liberty ;  I  will  try  to  be  not  less 
brave,  not  less  upright,  not  less  generous  and  true,  than  they."  Canst  thou 
remember  this,  0  Christian,  and  forget  of  what  spiritual  lineage  thou  art  come  ?  so 
noble,  so  pure,  so  ancient,  that  by  its  side  the  noblest  title  of  this  world  is  but  of 
yesterday  ?  that  thou  art  of  the  communion  of  God's  saints,  and  they  thy  fathers 
and  ancestors  in  the  faith  ?  Canst  thou  remain  cowardly,  remembering  that 
they  were  brave?  2.  But  again,  the  doctrine  of  this  festival  is  a  witness  for 
Christian  endurance.  It  is  difficult  not  to  feel  sad  when  we  think  what 
multitudes  of  our  fellow-creatures  are  living  sordid  burdened  lives,  whose  earthly 
course  seems  little  else  than  a  constant  round  of  suffering  and  care.  Yet  let  us 
observe,  that  wherever  a  ray  of  light  shines  in  on  this  mystery  of  suffering,  it  is 
from  the  blessed  thought  of  a  life  unseen.  Or,  take  the  case  of  one,  whose  life  is 
often  burdened  by  a  consciousness  of  sin — who  finds  himself  compassed  with 
infirmity ;  who  is  often  wearied  of  this  constant  struggle  against  besetting  sins,  "  Oh, 
blessed  day,"  such  an  one  may  well  say,  "  when  this  strife  shall  cease  ;  when  God  in 
His  pardoning  mercy  shall  make  me  to  become  that  which  I  long  and  pray  to  be." 
3.  But  again,  this  blessed  festival,  inasmuch  as  it  thus  throws  rays  of  brightness 
on  the  sorrows  of  earth,  teaches  us  a  lesson  of  final  perseverance  and  spiritual  joy. 
We  need  to  remember  that  in  the  dreariest  November,  the  gloomiest  days  of  the 
decaying  year,  there  still  stands  out  a  festival  of  summer  gladness,  telling  of  that 
meeting  beyond  the  grave,  where  no  parting  shall  ever  mar  the  unity  of  perfect 
love ;  that  gathering  on  the  eternal  shore,  as  when  the  apostles  beheld  on  the  shore 
of  the  Lake  of  Galilee  the  presence  of  their  risen  Lord.  {J.  S.  Bartlett,  M.A.) 
All  Saints^  Day: — We  are  not  the  first  travellers;  we  are  followers  of  those  who 
have  inherited  the  promises ;  and,  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  there  is  one  long  line  of 
precursors  all  looking  back  to  assure  us  that  the  proposed  path  is  the  right.  Shall 
it  then  be  questioned,  that  the  greatest  confirmation  for  faith  is  to  be  obtained  from 
the  memories  of  the  worthies  who  have  tried  and  verified  the  Christian  religion  ? 
If  there  were  a  flaw  in  its  proofs,  it  must  have  been  long  ago  detected :  if  there 
were  forgery  in  its  documents,  it  must  have  been  long  ago  exposed.  And  now  how 
mighty  are  the  external  evidences  of  Christianity — evidences  which  the  labours  and 
events  of  centuries  have  piled  up  as  an  impregnable  bulwark.  It  is  enough  for 
my  private  conviction,  that  Christianity  is  eighteen  hundred  years  old.  But 
this  only  applies  generally  to  the  truth  of  Christianity.  Suppose  me  convinced 
of  its  truth,  then  how  is  my  faith  strengthened  by  the  memory  of  those  who 
have  gone  before  me  to  heaven?  We  reply  at  once,  that  whatever  man's 
theoretical  persuasion  that  Christianity  is  from  God,  there  will  be  nothing  like 
a  practical  exhibition  of  its  energy  to  prevail  on  him  to  put  faith  in  its  dis- 
closures. The  great  object  of  Christianity  is  to  induce  me  to  throw  aside  all 
dependence  on  my  own  moral  strength,  and  to  trust  implicitly  to  the  merits  of 
a  Surety.  If  I  will,  indeed,  do  this,  I  shall  find  myself  strengthened  for  conflict 
with  my  own  evil  nature,  and  at  last  made  more  than  a  conqueror  over  sin  and  the 
grave.  Yet  there  may  be  misgiving,  and  if  we  were  the  first  to  put  the  promises  tc 
the  proof,  we  might  almost  be  pardoned  for  hesitating  ere  we  dared  take  them  to 
ourselves.  The  very  greatness  of  the  thing  promised,  and  the  smallness  of  the 
condition  prescribed,  might  cause  us  to  question  whether  we  had  not  been  deceived 
in  concluding  the  Bible  divine.  And,  therefore,  oh,  for  the  history  of  men  who 
have  made  the  experiment,  and  proved  by  experience  that  believers  in  Christ 
gain  all  which  is  promised  1  Here  it  is  that  we  are  vastly  advantaged  by  being 
followers  instead  of  forerunners  in  the  Christian  course.  You  cannot  show  me 
a  promise  in  the  Bible  of  whose  fulfilment  I  cannot  bring  you  evidence  in  the 
registered  experience  of  some  believer  in  Christ.  Does  the  promise  refer  to  support 
in  affliction  ?  Then  what  is  that  voice  that  rolls  in  upon  us  from  the  caves  of  the 
earth,  where  the  persecuted  have  taken  refuge — "  God  is  a  very  present  help," 
a  most  "  strong  tower  "  to  all  who  flee  to  Him  for  refuge  ?  Is  the  promise  that 
of  immortality — glorious  announcements  that  entrance  shall  be  ministered 
abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  God  and  Saviour  ?  Indeed,  you 
may  tell  me  that  no  biography  can  exhibit  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  I 
cannot  track  the  burning  flight  of  the  emancipated  spirit  delivered  from  the 
flesh,  and  launched  into  immortality.  We  own  this.  But,  nevertheless,  we  can 
show  you  that  these  promises  have  sustained  men  in  the  very  hour  of  dissolution. 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  87? 

And  though  this  does  not  show  you  that  the  promises  are  made  good  after  death, 
yet  proving  them  accomplished  up  to  the  very  moment  at  which  our  inspection 
must  cease,  proving  that  they  die  not  when  everything  that  has  not  in  it  the 
breath  of  immortality  does  die,  we  call  it  nothing  better  than  evasion,  if  you 
would  plead  the  want  of  evidence  of  its  fulfilment,  because  we  cannot  with  our  eyes 
of  sense  pierce  the  deep  secrets  of  futurity.  Now,  hitherto  we  have  spoken  only  of 
that  confirmation  of  faith  which  is  derivable  from  the  experience  of  the  righteous 
whom  we  this  day  commemorate  ;  but  let  us  now  briefly  consider  how  we  may  bo 
strengthened  also  in  patience ;  for  those  who  are  "  clothed  in  white  robes  "  are 
they  who  "came  out  of  great  tribulation."  The  fact  that  afflictions  have  been  the 
portion  of  the  faithful  should  remove  all  surprise  that  we  ourselves  have  to  wrestle 
with  sorrow  ;  the  fact  that  God  hath  not  forsaken  the  faithful,  but  brought  good 
out  of  evil,  should  scatter  all  fears  that  we  may  be  left  to  perish  in  our  distress. 
And  what  will  they  reply  if  we  ask  them  whether  they  regret  what  they  suffered  for 
Christ,  or  whether,  if  they  had  to  live  over  again,  they  would  wish  to  pass  through 
the  same  painful  discipline  ?  Oh  !  for  melodious  sounds  in  which  to  syllable  their 
answers.  The  harshness  of  human  speech  ill  suits  the  music  of  their  whispers.  They 
tell  you  with  one  voice,  one  peal  of  grateful  acknowledgment,  that  the  "  sufferings  of 
this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  "  revealed  in  them,  (fl, 
Melvill,  B.D.)  Saints  made  from  sinners  : — Professor  Hy.  Drummond  addressing 
a  meeting,  said  that  as  he  walked  through  the  city  that  morning,  he  had  noticed  a 
cloud  like  a  pure  snow-white  bank  resting  over  the  slums.  Whence  came  it? 
The  great  sun  had  sent  down  its  beams  into  the  city,  and  the  beams  had  gone 
among  the  puddles,  even  the  nauseous  puddles  and  drawn  out  of  them  what  they 
needed,  and  taken  it  aloft,  and  purified  it,  and  there  it  was,  above  the  city  a  cloud 
as  white  as  snow !  "  And  God,"  said  the  professor,  "  can  make  His  saints,  who 
walk  in  white,  out  of  material  equally  unfavourable  ;  He  can  make  a  white  cloud 
out  of  a  puddle,  He  can  make  saints  out  of  the  most  depraved."  {J.  H.  Jowett, 
M.A.)  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation. — T?ie  ministroy 
tion  of  suffering  : — Let  us,  in  some  few  points,  contrast  suffering  on  earth  with  its  fruits 
in  heaven.  1.  Earthly  suffering  seems  to  come  either  as  a  vengeance  or  as  a  calamity 
upon  men.  It  is  still  a  surprise  until  we  have  been  long  wonted  to  it.  But  the 
heavenly  side,  as  disclosed  in  the  apocalyptic  vision,  shows  that  suffering  ordinarily 
comes  neither  as  a  vengeance  nor  as  a  calamity ;  for,  although  we  may  understand 
that  God  sometimes  employs  suffering  for  purposes  of  punishment,  yet  such  an 
employment  of  it  is  special.  Suffering  is  intercalated  upon  the  course  of  nature,  and 
is  part  of  a  universal  experience.  Storms  may  be  most  destroying,  overflowing  the 
land,  tearing  up  foundations,  sweeping  away  bridges,  and  submerging  harvests ;  but 
this  result  of  storms  is  exceptional.  The  fall  of  rain  and  the  sweep  of  winds  are  a 
part  of  the  economy  of  mercy.  It  is  not  for  destruction,  but  for  benefit.  And  so 
sufferings  may,  at  times,  in  the  hands  of  God,  be  punitive,  but  ordinarily  they  are 
not.  Suffering  is  intended  to  make  us  let  go  of  things  that  are  lower,  and  to  rise  a 
grade  higher.  Here  it  seems  as  if  God  were  angry ;  but  in  heaven  it  is  seen  that 
He  was  dealing  in  mercy.  Here  it  seems  as  if  great  disaster  had  overwhelmed  us ; 
but  there  the  breaking  of  the  cloud  over  us  appears  as  the  waters  of  a  bath  from 
which  we  shall  emerge  purer,  cleaner,  and  more  manly.  2.  Suffering  seems  to 
some  contrary  to  the  course  of  nature ;  an  interruption  and  violation  of  natural 
order;  but  the  revelation  of  the  effects  of  suffering  upon  the  future  state  shows 
that  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  course  of  nature.  It  would  seem  rational  to 
suppose  that  God  built  the  enginery  of  the  human  mind  for  happiness ;  that  the 
way  of  growth  ought  not  to  be  through  bafflings ;  that  men  should  not  find  theur 
stability  by  overthrow,  and  their  liberty  by  restraint.  At  first  view  everything 
apparently  tends  towards  freedom  and  full  development.  Men  faQ  to  see,  however, 
that  while  there  is  one  tendency  toward  liberty,  there  is  another  toward  restraint. 
If  anything  can  be  shown  by  the  indications  and  facts  of  nature,  it  is  that  man 
never  grows  to  a  man's  full  estate  without  the  ministration  of  suffering ;  and  that 
suffering  is  a  part  of  nature,  or  it  could  not  be  universal.  3.  The  contrast 
between  the  earthly  appearance  of  suffering  as  something  that  weakens  and 
beats  us  down,  and  the  glorious  light  of  the  heavenly  side  is  very  striking ;  for 
while  on  earth  suffering  seems,  in  all  its  immediate  tendencies,  to  take  away 
from  man,  it  is,  in  point  of  fact,  adding  to  him.  It  seems  to  beat  him 
down  ;  but  when  we  look  forward  to  the  full  disclosure,  we  find  that  it  is  building 
him  up.  While  the  storm  pelts,  men  shrink.  While  the  thunder  sounds, 
they   Blink   down.     While  the    tempest   rages,  it  is  as  if    they    were  ruined. 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vir. 

But  when  the  violence  abates  a  little,  they  begin  to  lift  up  their  head,  and  to 
perceive  that  it  was  not  all  dark,  that  it  was  not  all  thunder,  that  it  was  not  aJl 
fceating,  that  there  was  an  element  of  good  in  it ;  and  gradually  they  learn  the 
sweet  bounty  and  benefit  that  God  meant  to  bestow  upon  them  by  afflictions.    4. 
The  seeming  cruelty  of  much  of  suffering,  and  the  unnaturabaess  of  it,  are  con- 
trasted with  great  relief  with  this  vision  of  the  final  state  of  those  who  have 
suffered  in  this  world.     The  fatherliness  and  benevolence  of  suffering  does  not 
appear  in  its  mere  earthly  relations.    In  heaven  it  is  clearly  pictured.     There  we 
Bee  what  it  has  wrought  out.    Human  nature  is  very  much  like  some  elements  of 
vegetation.    In  tapioca,  one  of  the  most  harmless  of  all  articles  of  food,  there  is 
•one  of  the  most  deadly  of  all  poisons.    But  the  poison  is  of  such  a  volatile  nature, 
that  when  it  is  subjected  to  heat  it  escapes,  and  leaves  only  the  nutriment  of  the 
Etarch.    I  think  that  the  heart  of  man  originally  is  full  of  poison,  but  that,  when 
it  is  tried  by  affliction,  little  by  little  the  poison,  the  rancour,  the  virus  exhales,  and 
leaves  all  the  rest  wholesome  indeed.    5.  Earthly  suffering  seems  to  Weaken,  to 
discourage  them,  and  to  destroy  them ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  it  does  not  really  destroy 
or  weaken  them.    That  part  in  us  which  suffering  weakens  is  usually  that  very  part 
which  ought  to  be  weakened.    The  great  trouble  in  turning  flax  into  thread  or  cloth  is 
caused  by  that  which  gives  the  green  plant  its  very  power ;  for  when  the  flax  is 
growing,  it  needs  two  things — one  is  its  ligneous  or  woody  structure,  and  the  other 
is  its  gluten.    But  when  it  has  grown  enough,  and  man  wants  it  to  make  garments, 
to  furnish  the  queen  in  the  palace  and  the  peasant  in  the  cottage,  he  must  get  rid 
of  these  two  things.    And  how  is  the  flax  separated  from  them?    It  is  plucked  and 
thrown  into  the  field,  that,  xmder  the  influence  of  repeated  rains  and  dews,  the 
wood  may  rot ;  then  the  flax  is  taken  and  put  through  the  brakes,  until  every 
particle  of  the  stiffness  and  strength  that  it  had  is  destroyed,  and  all  but  the  stringy 
fibres  can  be  shaken  to  the  winds ;  then   it  is  subjected  to  certain  chemical 
processes  by  which  the  gluten  is  taken  away ;  and  not  till  then  is  it  in  a  proper 
condition  to  be  carried  to  the  spinning-wheel  and  the  loom,  and  manufactured  into 
materials  for  use.   So  it  is  with  men.    There  are  a  great  many  qualities  which  they 
need  up  to  a  certain  point,  but  which  beyond  that  are  a  disadvantage  to  them.    We 
need  a  given  amount  of  self-will  and  independence ;  but  after  these  qualities  have 
been  carried  to  a  certain  point,  the  necessity  for  them  measurably  ceases,  and  there 
must    be    superinduced  on  them  opposite  qualities.    For  man  is  made  up  of 
contraries.    He  is  to  be  as  firm  as  iron,  and  as  yielding  as  silk ;  he  is  to  be 
persevering,  and  yet  most  ready  to  give  up  ;  he  is  to  be  as  steadfast  as  a  mountain, 
and  yet  easy  to  be  entreated ;  he  is  to  abhor  evil,  and  yet  to  love  with  an  ineffable 
love ;  he  is  to  be  courageous,  and  yet  to  have  that  fear  of  the  Lord  which  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom.    Certain  qualities,  when  they  have  served  their  purpose, 
must  give  place  to  opposite  qualities.    Afflictions,  under  the  supervision  of  Divine 
Providence,  are  working  out  in  those  that  are  exercised  thereby  beneficent  results ; 
80  that  suffering,  while  it  seems  frequently  to  be  wasting  and  destroying  men,  is 
only  wasting  and  destroying  that  part  of  them  which  they  are  better  without  than 
with.     6.  Suffering  on  earth  seems  to  set  men  apart  from  their  fellows.     Sometimes 
it  puts  them  into  obscurity.    It  is  an  experience  full  of  solitude,  voluntary  and  yet 
inevitable.    Every  heart  knows  its  own  bitterness.    There  is  a  delicacy  in  grief 
often.    And  though  sometimes  it  is  clamorous  and  vocal,  oftener  it  is  silent.    But 
there  is  a  process  quietly  going  on,  though  it  may  not  be  apparent,  by  which  those 
who  seem  to  be  separated  in  the  present  shall  in  the  future  be  gathered  together  by 
Borrow.     Those  that  weep  apart  on  earth  shall  joy  together  in  heaven.     Those  who 
in  their  sorrows  are  cast  out  from  the  sympathies  of  their  fellow-men  shall  be 
gathered  into  the  fellowship  and  sympathy  of  the  heavenly  host.    This  separation 
and  disintegration  are  only  apparent.    Keally,  it  is  a  preparation  for  fellowship  in 
the  world  to  come.     {H.   W.  Beecher.)        The  memory  of  grief  and  wrong : — 
Whether  a  race  of  finite  and  imperfect  beings  could  have  been  trained  for  any 
worthy  end,  or  have  reached  a  state  of  conscious  happiness,  without  the  ministry 
of  suffering,  we  are  not  competent  to  say.    Whether  this  be  the  case  or  not,  it  ia 
certain  that  very  many  of  our  happiest  experiences,  and  of  our  best  frames  of 
mind  and  traits  of  character,  are  to  be  traced,  if  not  to  the  direct  agency,  at  least 
to  the  memory,  of  grief  and  wrong.    I  might  remind  you,  in  the  first  place,  that 
the  lowest  degradation  into  which  a  human  being  can  sink  is  a  state  in  which  there 
is  no  retentiveness,  nay,  hardly  a  transient  consciousness,  of  painful  emotion.    Let 
a  child,  born  in  sin,  be  cast  in  very  infancy  upon  the  bleak  world,  without  shelter, 
education,   or  guidance,  exposed  to  the  pelting  of  the  elements,  spurned  and 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  379 

buffeted  at  every  hand's  turn,  that  child  becomes  in  his  very  infancy  ahnost 
invulnerable  to  every  outward  influence,  and  incapable  of  feeling  neglect  or  injury, 
but  in  this  process  he  grows  up  an  absolute  brute.  He  is  incapable  of  attachment 
and  of  gratitude.  Gentleness  cannot  tame  him,  nor  can  severity  awe  him.  As  the 
frozen  limb  must  be  made  sensitive  to  pain,  before  it  is  capable  of  healthy  circula- 
tion or  free  motion,  the  first  step  towards  making  him  happy  will  be  to  unseal  the 
fountain  of  sorrow.  He  must  weep  before  he  can  enjoy.  Take  next  the  case  of 
one  who  has  fallen  into  loathsome  degradation  from  a  favoured  and  happy  early 
lot.  That  fall  was  not  without  frequent  and  severe  suffering,  probably  not  without 
full  as  much  wrong  received  as  committed.  But  the  degraded  being  has  lost  his 
sensibility.  Bags,  hunger,  blows,  the  alms-house,  the  prison-cell,  have  become 
congenial ;  and  the  traces  of  every  new  hardship  or  infliction  are  like  those  of  the 
arrow  in  the  air.  Nor  yet  can  you  excite  penitence  or  remorse  by  any  moral 
representation,  however  pungent  or  attractive,  of  the  evil  and  misery  of  guilt  or  the 
loveliness  of  virtue.  You  must  go  back  to  the  days  of  innocence — to  the  earliest 
steps  in  the  evil  path.  You  must  awaken  the  remembrance  of  obsolete  wrong  and 
sorrow.  You  must  recall  the  prodigal's  first  wretched  pilgrimage  from  the  father's 
house.  Let  us  pass  now  to  experiences  that  lie  more  within  our  own  sphere  of 
consciousness,  and,  first,  to  domestic  happiness.  We  can  hardly  be  aware  how 
much  of  the  joy,  how  much  of  the  purity  and  tenderness,  of  our  home  relations 
springs  from  the  very  events  which  we  most  dread,  or  from  the  shadow  or  appre- 
hension of  them.  Two  young  hearts  are  plighted  to  each  other  in  the  most  fervent 
love,  and  enter  on  their  united  life  under  the  most  prosperous  auspices  and  with  the 
highest  hopes.  Let  everything  answer  to  their  anticipations — let  their  life  flow  on 
without  grief  or  fear,  and  their  love  is  either  suddenly  exhaled,  or  gradually 
frittered  away.  They  grow  mutually  intolerant  of  their  necessary  differences  of 
taste,  opinion,  and  feeling.  If  they  remain  without  mutual  discord  or  dislike,  it  is 
through  the  negative  power  of  passive  good  nature,  while  the  heart-ties  are  all  the 
while  growing  weaker,  so  that  their  dissolution  would  be  more  and  more  slightly 
and  transiently  felt.  But,  with  their  first  weighty  cares  or  solicitudes,  they  are 
drawn  into  an  intimacy  of  feeling  closer  than  they  had  ever  imagined  before. 
A  similar  view  presents  itself  with  regard  to  our  religious  characters.  Could  those  of 
us,  who  are  endeavouring  to  live  in  the  fear  of  God  and  the  love  of  Christ,  trace 
back  the  growth  of  the  religious  life  in  our  hearts,  we  should  find  that,  while  the 
germ  was  there  before  care  or  sorrow  had  taken  strong  hold  upon  us,  yet  in  many 
instances  its  first  decided  development  and  rapid  increase  were  in  connection  with 
pain,  perplexity,  or  grief.  It  was  the  clouding  over  of  earthly  prospects,  that 
opened  to  us  a  clear  and  realising  view  of  heaven.  It  was  the  failure  of  fond  hopes 
that  sealed  our  determination  to  lay  up  treasures  where  hope  cannot  fail.  It  was 
the  falling  away  of  objects  of  our  most  confident  dependence,  that  cast  us  upon  the 
Most  High  as  our  only  enduring  refuge  and  support.  I  have  spoken  of  the 
sheltered  scenes  of  home,  and  of  the  interior  life  of  the  soul.  In  the  outward 
relations  of  society,  we  are  equally  indebted  to  the  ministry  of  affliction.  How 
many  are  the  pure  and  virtuous  friendships,  now  sources  of  unalloyed  gladness  and 
improvement,  which  had  their  commencement  in  a  common  grief,  or  in  a  burden  of 
solicitude  or  sorrow,  which  one,  whom  previously  we  had  not  known  how  to  prize, 
hastened  to  bear  with  us,  or  we  with  him !  In  old  age  we  can  also  trace  the  genial 
influence  of  sorrow.  As  the  cloud,  that  has  flashed  its  angry  lightnings  and  poured 
its  desolating  showers,  retreats  fringed  with  gold  and  crimson,  and  spanned  with 
the  glorious  bow  of  God's  unchanging  promise,  so  do  the  griefs  that  have  been  the 
heaviest  and  the  most  cheerless,  when  they  lie  in  the  remote  horizon  of  the  past, 
glow  with  celestial  radiance  and  Divine  beauty.  As  the  aged  Christian  looks  back 
on  the  conflicts  and  sorrows  of  earlier  years,  every  cloud  has  its  rainbow,  every 
retreating  storm  dies  away  in  whispers  of  peace.  It  is  the  softened,  painless 
memory  of  trial  and  of  grief  that  feeds  the  spirit  of  patient,  cheerful  resignation, 
reconciles  the  soul  to  dissolution  as  it  draws  near,  and  sustains  the  willingness  to 
depart,  the  desire  to  be  with  Christ.  I  have  spoken  chiefly  of  the  sorrows  that 
come  to  us  by  the  direct  appointment  of  Providence.  Are  there  any  of  us  who  can 
look  back  on  wrong  and  injury  done  to  us  by  our  fellow-men  ?  Even  this,  if  we 
were  wise,  we  would  not  wish  to  forget.  Far  more  noble  is  it  to  remember  in  full 
and  yet  forgive,  to  retain  our  sensitiveness  unimpaired,  and  yet  to  take  the  offending 
brother  to  our  hearts  as  if  he  had  done  us  no  wrong.  Thus  only  can  we  make  the 
wounds  of  carelessness,  unkindness,  envy  or  malice,  permitted,  though  not  wrought 
by  Providence,  coincide  in  their  blessed  ministry  with  the  griefs  that  flow  from  the 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

hand  of  God.  Thus  do  we  turn  our  enemy  into  a  benefactor,  by  making  him  the 
unconscious  instrument  of  calling  out  in  our  hearts  traits  more  elevated,  Christlike, 
Godlike,  than  without  his  agency  we  could  have  put  into  exercise.  Finally,  the 
connection  in  which  our  text  stands  leads  us  to  extend  the  benign  ministry  of 
sorrow  to  the  world  where  sorrow  is  unknown.  The  frequent  trials  of  the  present 
state,  its  disappointed  hopes,  defeated  plans,  withered  joys,  may,  far  along  in  the 
heavenly  life,  supply  the  term  of  comparison,  reveal  the  measure  of  our  happiness, 
quicken  the  flow  of  adoring  gratitude,  and  sustain  a  fuU  consciousness  of  the 
feUcity  in  which  we  are  embosomed.  {A.  P.  Peabody.)  Why  the  heavenly  robes 
are  white : — I.  What  did  these  white  robes  mean  ?  1.  The  white  robes  show 
the  immaculate  purity  of  their  character.  White  signifies  perfection ;  it  is  not  so 
much  a  colour  as  the  harmonious  union  and  blending  of  all  the  hues,  colours,  and 
beauties  of  light.  In  the  characters  of  just  men  made  perfect  we  have  the  combi- 
nation of  all  virtues,  the  balancing  of  all  excellences,  a  display  of  all  the  beauties 
of  grace.  Are  they  not  like  their  Lord,  and  is  He  not  all  beauties  in  one  ?  2,  By 
"  white  robes  we  also  understand  the  fitness  of  their  souls  for  the  service  to  which 
they  are  appointed ;  they  were  chosen  before  all  worlds  to  be  kings  and  priests 
unto  God,  but  a  priest  might  not  stand  before  the  Lord  to  minister  until  he  had  put 
on  his  appointed  linen  garments  ;  and  therefore  the  souls  which  have  been  taken 
up  to  heaven  are  represented  in  white  robes  to  show  that  they  are  completely  fitted 
for  that  Divine  service  to  which  they  were  ordained  of  old,  to  which  the  Spirit  of 
God  called  them  while  they  were  here,  and  in  which  Jesus  Christ  leads  the  way, 
being  a  Priest  for  ever  at  their  head.  3.  "  White  robes  "  also  signify  victory.  I 
should  think  that  in  almost  every  nation  white  has  indicated  the  joy  of  triumph. 
True,  the  Eomans  adopted  purple  as  their  imperial  colour,  and  well  they  might,  for 
their  victories  and  their  rule  were  alike  bloody  and  cruel ;  but  the  Christ  of  God 
sets  forth  His  gentle  and  holy  victories  by  white  :  it  is  on  a  "  white  cloud  "  that  He 
shall  come  to  judge  the  world,  and  His  seat  of  judgment  shall  be  "the  great  white 
throne."  4.  White  is  also  the  colour  of  rest.  Well  may  the  redeemed  be  thus 
arrayed,  for  they  have  finally  put  off  the  garments  of  toil  and  the  armour  of  battle, 
and  they  rest  from  their  labours  in  the  rest  of  God.  5.  Chiefly,  white  is  the  colour 
of  joy.  Almost  all  nations  have  adopted  it  as  most  suitable  for  bridal  array,  and  so 
therefore  these  happy  spirits  have  put  on  their  bridal  robes,  and  are  ready  for  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  U.  How  did  they  come  by  thosk  white 
GARMEKT8?  1.  Those  characters  were  not  so  pure,  or,  in  other  words,  those 
garments  were  not  so  white  by  nature.  They  are  washed,  you  see,  and  therefore 
they  must  once  have  been  stained.  Original  sin  has  stained  the  character  of  all  the 
sons  of  Adam.  Do  not  think  of  one  saint  who  has  gone  to  his  reward  above  as 
being  in  any  way  different  in  nature  from  yourselves ;  they  were  aU  men  of  like 
passions  with  us,  men  who  had  within  them  the  same  tendencies  to  sin.  But 
it  might  be  suggested  that  perhaps  they  came  to  their  rest  by  a  cleaner  way  than 
that  which  now  lies  before  us.  Possibly  there  was  something  about  their  surround- 
ings which  helped  them  to  keep  their  garments  white.  No,  it  was  not  so ;  they 
passed  along  the  road  of  tribulation,  and  that  tribulation  was  not  of  a  less  trying 
kind  than  ours.  Their  road  was  just  as  miry  as  ours,  and  perhaps  even 
more  so.  How  this  ought  to  assist  us  to  feel  that  albeit  our  pathway  is  one 
in  which  we  meet  with  innumerable  temptations,  yet  inasmuch  as  all  the  glorified 
have  come  up  white  and  clean  from  it,  by  virtue  of  the  atoning  blood,  even  so  shall 
we.  2.  Their  garments  came  to  be  white  through  a  miracle  of  grace,  because  they 
came  through  the  great  tribulation,  where  everything  tended  to  defile  them.  I  do 
not  think  that  the  text  refers  to  some  one  great  persecution,  but  to  the  great  conflict 
of  the  ages  in  which  the  seed  of  the  serpent  perpetually  molests  and  oppresses  the 
seed  of  the  woman.  The  enmity  takes  all  sorts  of  shapes,  but  from  the  beginning 
even  until  now  it  is  in  the  world.  Now  the  white  robed  ones  had  come  out  of  that 
continuous  and  general  conflict  uninjured:  like  the  three  holy  children  who  came 
out  of  the  furnace  with  not  so  much  as  the  smell  of  fire  upon  them.  Some  of 
them  had  been  slandered :  men  of  the  world  had  thrown  handfuls  of  the  foulest 
mud  upon  them,  but  they  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white.  Others  of 
them  had  come  out  of  remarkable  temptations  from  men  and  devils ;  they  were 
tried  by  the  most  defiling  of  temptations,  but  they  overcame  through  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  and  were  delivered  from  every  polluting  trace  of  the  temptation  by 
the  efficacy  of  the  atoning  sacrifice.  It  was  by  the  operation  of  the  blood  of  Christ, 
and  by  nothing  else,  that  the  glorified  saints  were  made  clean.  3.  Some  of  the 
trials  of  the  saints  are  evidently  intended,  by  those  who  are  the  instruments  of  them, 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  381 

to  make  them  sin.  Tribulation  has  a  tendency  to  create,  even  in  good  men,  new 
Bins  :  sins  into  which  they  have  never  fallen  before.  "  Brother,"  thou  sayest*  "  I 
shall  never  repine  against  God."  How  knowest  thou  that?  Thou  sayest,  "I 
have  never  done  so  unto  this  hour."  Art  thou  not  in  health  and  strength  ?  Why, 
then,  shouldst  thou  murmur  ?  But  suppose  the  Lord  were  to  strip  thee  of  all  these 
things,  0  man,  I  fear  me  thou  mightest  murmur  as  others  have  done.  In  some  men 
tribulation  works  a  very  fierce  temptation  to  distrust.  4.  So,  too,  great  trials  are 
wonderfully  apt  to  reveal  the  weakness  of  our  graces  and  the  number  of  our 
infirmities.  Spiritual  storms  make  a  man  discover  what  utter  weakness  he  is,  and 
then  he  is  wise  to  fly  to  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Oh,  what  a  sweet  restorative  is 
found  in  the  atoning  sacrifice  !  HI.  What  lesson  comes  out  of  this  ?  1.  I  would 
say  to  you,  first,  meditate  on  it.  A  sight  of  Christ  in  His  agony  is  a  wondrous 
cure  for  our  agonies.  2.  But  the  chief  thing  is  this — in  all  times  of  tribulation 
the  great  matter  is  to  have  the  blood  of  Christ  actually  applied  to  the  soul. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sufferings  of  the  redeemed: — God's  Word  does 
not  conceal,  but,  on  the  contrary,  rather  forewarns,  that  the  road  to  Heaven 
is  one  of  trial.  Christ  prepared  His  people  for  the  highway  thither  being 
hedged  with  tribulation.  "  Beloved,"  says  St.  Peter,  "  think  it  not  strange  concern- 
ing the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try  you,  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened  unto 
you,  but  rejoice."  These  trials  are  the  ladder-steps  by  which  the  immortal  spirits 
in  this  vision  attained  their  bliss.  We  can  almost  imagine  ourselves  listening  to 
their  varied  testimony.  ••  God  laid  me,"  would  be  the  experience  and  retrospect  of 
one,  "  on  a  bed  of  sickness.  I  was  living  a  life  of  engrossing  worldliness.  I  was 
taking  my  health  as  a  thing  of  course.  I  had  no  thought  of  death.  He  who  gave 
me  the  abused  talent  stretched  me  on  a  couch  of  pain.  Year  after  year  I  was 
familiarised  with  the  dim  night-lamp — the  sleepless  vigils — the  aching  head.  But 
He  allured  me  into  the  wilderness  that  He  might  speak  comfortably  unto  me.  I 
now  praise  Him  for  it  all.  Through  the  chinks  of  the  battered  earthly  tabernacle 
were  admitted  the  first  rays  of  the  heavenly  glory.  In  the  solitary  night-watches 
my  lips  were  first  tuned  for  the  heavenly  song."  "  I  was  reposing  in  the  sunshine  of 
earthly  prosperity,"  would  be  the  testimony  of  another.  "  The  fabled  horn  of 
plenty  exhausted  its  ample  stores  in  my  lap.  Kiches  increased ;  ah !  I  set  my 
heart  upon  them ;  my  closet,  my  Bible,  my  family,  were  sacrificed  in  the  demon 
scramble.  At  an  unexpected  moment  the  crash  came — the  whole  fabric  of  a  life- 
time (the  golden  fabric)  fell  to  the  ground.  Seated  amid  empty  coffers,  and  dis- 
mantled walls,  and  blighted  hopes,  I  was  led  to  bring  the  perishable  into  emphatic 
contrast  with  the  eternal.  I  too  thank  my  God  for  it  all.  But  for  that  simoom- 
blast  which  swept  over  me,  burying  the  hoarded  treasures  of  a  vain  existence,  I 
would  have  died  the  fool  that  I  lived."  "  I  was  an  idolater  of  my  family,"  another 
would  tell.  *'  I  was  leaning  too  fondly  and  tenderly  on  some  cherished  prop — some 
gourd  in  the  earth-bower  of  my  happiness.  The  prop  gave  way — the  gourd 
withered.  But  as  some  gentle  spirit  (be  it  that  of  husband,  or  wife,  or  child,  or 
brother,  or  sister)  winged  its  flight  to  the  realms  of  glory,  it  brought  me,  as  I  was 
never  before,  into  near  and  holy  contact  with  the  Unseen.  The  tie  snapped  on 
earth  bound  me  to  the  throne  of  God.  These  thorns  inserted  in  the  earthly  nest 
drove  me  to  the  wing,  and  suffered  me  not  to  stay  my  flight  until  I  had  reached  the 
golden  eaves  of  the  heavenly  home!"  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D,)  The  richer 
flowerings  of  character  caused  by  trial : — It  is  said  that  gardeners  sometimes,  when 
they  would  bring  a  rose  to  ricller  flowerings,  deprive  it  for  the  season  of  light  and 
moisture.  Silent  and  dark  it  stands,  dropping  one  faded  leaf  after  another,  and 
seeming  to  go  down  patiently  to  death.  But  when  every  leaf  is  dropped,  and  the 
plant  stands  stripped  to  the  uttermost,  a  new  life  is  even  then  working  in  the  buds, 
from  which  shall  spring  a  tender  foliage  and  a  brighter  wealth  of  flowers.  So,  often 
in  celestial  gardenings,  every  leaf  of  earthly  joy  must  drop  before  a  new  and  divine 
bloom  visits  the  soul.  Character  formed  by  tribulation : — I  saw  a  beautiful  vase, 
and  asked  its  story.  Once  it  was  a  lump  of  common  clay  lying  in  the  darkness. 
Then  it  was  rudely  dug  out  and  crushed  and  ground  in  the  mill,  and  then  put  upon 
the  wheel  and  shaped,  then  polished  and  tinted  and  put  into  the  furnace  and 
burned.  At  last,  after  many  processes,  it  stood  upon  the  table,  a  gem  of  graceful 
beauty.  In  some  way  analogous  to  this  every  noble  character  is  formed.  Common 
clay  at  first,  it  passes  through  a  thousand  processes  and  experiences,  many  of  them 
hard  and  painful,  until  at  length  it  is  presented  before  God,  faultless  in  its  beauty, 
bearing  the  features  of  Christ  Himself.  Spiritual  beauty  never  can  be  reached 
without  cost.    The  blessing  is  always  hidden  away  in  the  burden,  and  can  be  gotten 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

only  by  lifting  the  burden.  Michael  Angelo  used  to  say,  as  the  chippings  flew  thick 
from  the  marble  on  the  floor  of  his  studio  :  "  While  the  marble  wastes  the  image 
grows."  {J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  Tribulation  ministers  to  manhood  : — You  may  in 
the  conservatory  rear  the  trailing  vine  or  rear  the  tropical  plant,  but  put  into 
it  hardy  English  oak,  or  the  tall  Norwegian  pine,  and  they,  within  the  con- 
servatory, would  die — their  life  is  exposure.  Give  them  the  heaven,  the  wind 
of  heaven  in  their  branches ;  give  them  the  dew  and  the  rain  of  heaven  ou  their 
leaves:  give  them  the  great  spacious  earth  beneath  into  which  they  can  send 
their  roots  in  search  of  moisture,  and  in  search  of  strength ;  and  they  will  live, 
and  become  things  of  beauty  and  joy  for  ever.  So  let  man  in  the  grace,  and 
by  the  strength  of  God,  face  life ;  stand  in  front  of  it,  with  all  its  trouble,  with  all 
its  tempest,  with  all  its  sorrow,  with  all  its  suffering  1  The  tribillation  will  work 
patience,  make  the  more  of  a  man  of  him,  make  him  the  more  able  to  stand  in 
the  presence  of  God  as  a  servant  approved.     [A.  M.  Fairbairn,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-17.  Therefore  axe  they  before  the  throne  of  Ck)d. — The  worship  and 
privileges  of  the  heavenly  temple : — I.  What  is  the  nature  of  that  worship  which 
IS  offered  to  the  Lord  in  His  holy  temple  in  heaven  ?  We  may  obtain  an 
imperfect  answer  to  this  inquiry  by  contrasting  the  services  of  its  priests  with  the 
polluted  offerings  of  the  servants  of  God  below.  1.  In  contrasting  the  worship  of 
these  two  worlds  we  may  observe,  first,  that  the  worship  of  heaven  is  uninterrupted, 
constant.  They  who  worship  there  never  need  repose.  There  is  no  weariness  to 
put  a  stop  to  their  service,  nor  any  cares  and  anxieties  to  distract  and  pollute  it. 
2.  The  worship  of  the  heavenly  world  is  also  pure.  All  who  are  engaged  in  it  are 
holy  worshippers.  Their  number  is  immense ;  they  form  a  great  multitude ;  but 
not  one  formalist,  not  one  deceiver,  not  one  hypocrite  can  be  found  amongst  them. 
And  not  only  are  all  the  worshippers  pure,  their  worship  itself  is  free  from  all 
mixture  of  imperfection  and  sin.  There  is  no  blemish  either  in  the  priest  or  in  the 
sacrifice ;  all  is  "  holiness  to  the  Lord."  3.  Their  worship,  too,  is  fervent.  No 
coldness  of  feeling,  no  deadness  of  love  distresses  their  souls.  4.  Hence  the  worship 
they  offer  is  a  delightful  worship.  All  the  difficulties  of  our  service  will  have  passed 
away,  and  every  act  of  worship  will  be  elevating  to  the  spirit,  and  bring  with  it  an 
unspeakable  and  glorious  joy.  5.  The  service  of  heaven  is  also  a  united  service. 
They  worship  in  the  same  temple,  and  are  all  engaged  in  the  same  work  ;  the  same 
spirit  lives  in  every  soul,  and  the  same  song  is  heard  from  every  mouth.  6.  The 
worship  of  heaven  is  humble.  In  the  midst  of  all  their  glory  the  redeemed  saints 
appear  in  the  heavenly  temple  in  the  character  of  creatures  and  of  sinners.  We  see 
no  presumption  or  self-exaltation  in  their  worship,  no  unholy  familiarity.  11.  The 
privileges  which  these  heavenly  worshippers  enjoy.  1.  The  dignity  of  their 
station  in  this  temple.  (1)  To  be  before  the  throne  of  God  implies  that  they  are 
admitted  to  the  enjoyment  of  close  communion  with  Him ;  that  they  are  brought 
into  His  immediate  presence,  and  have  an  intimate,  enlarged,  and  continual  inter- 
course with  Him ;  that  they  talk  with  Jehovah  as  a  man  talks  with  his  friend. 
(2)  To  stand  before  the  throne  of  God  implies  also  a  participation  of  His  glory  and 
happiness,  an  entering  into  His  blessedness.  2.  The  text  tells  us  also  of  the  rich 
provision  which  is  made  for  all  the  wants  of  the  heavenly  worshippers.  As  the 
priests  in  the  Jewish  temple  not  only  dwelt  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  but  partook 
of  the  sacrifices  which  were  offered  therein,  so  the  priests  in  Jehovah's  temple  above 
find  in  it  all  the  spiritual  provision  their  souls  can  desire.  Their  happiness  consists 
in  having  all  their  spiritual  desires  kept  in  unceasing  exercise,  and  in  having  them 
fully  gratified.  They  still  thirst  after  the  water  of  life,  and  it  is  supplied  to  them 
largely  from  those  rivers  of  pleasure  which  flow  around  the  throne  of  Jehovah.. 

(1)  The  happiness  which  results  from  this  provision  made  for  their  souls  is  uninter- 
rupted and  unmixed.     Nothing  can  enter  their  habitation  to  disturb  or  mar  it. 

(2)  Their  happiness,  too,  is  everlasting.  They  are  not  supplied  out  of  a  cistern  which 
may  be  broken  or  exhausted,  but  from  a  fountain  which  can  never  fail.  Lessons: 
1.  No  man  can  be  happy  in  heaven  who  has  not  first  learned  to  delight  in  the  worship 
of  God.  Death  will  make  no  material  alteration  in  our  tastes  and  desires.  What 
we  love  in  time  we  shall  love  in  eternity.  What  is  hateful  to  us  now,  will  be  hateful 
to  us  then.  We  must  have  a  relish  for  the  happiness  of  angels  now,  or  we  shall  be 
utterly  incapable  of  enjoying  it  hereafter.  2.  The  great  importance  and  blessedness 
of  the  worship  of  God  here  on  earth.  3.  How  desirable  is  death  to  the  spiritual 
and  heavenly-minded  worshipper  of  God.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Man  in  heaven  : — 
L  OuB  spiritual  heaven.    Its  great  and  representative  idea  is  worship,  in  which 


CHAP,  yn.]  REVELATION,  383 

■we  reach  at  one  bound  the  his:hest  conception  of  our  nature — humanity  perfected, 
humanity  in  its  highest  con.i.  Jon,  and  humanity  in  its  highest  act.  1.  The  condi- 
tion or  character  of  the  worshippers  is  described.  Christ,  in  the  sanctifying  influ- 
ences of  His  sacrificial  work,  was  the  reason  of  their  heaven.  The  condition  of  their 
spiritual  heaven,  therefore,  was  the  perfection  of  the  spiritual  part  of  their  nature. 
It  was  not  the  locality  merely — not  the  mere  presence  of  God — not  the  employment, 
the  robe,  the  palm,  the  harp,  the  worship  :  it  was  the  perfect  moral  sympathy  of 
their  spirits  with  holiness,  the  holiness  of  God.  2.  Their  moral  victory.  "  They 
came  out  of  great  tribulation."  (1)  Kemark  how  strikingly  the  two  aflOirmations  are 
brought  into  conjunction.  Their  position  before  the  throne  is  in  the  same  sentence 
ascribed  to  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  to  the  moral  results  of  their  tribulation,  that 
is,  to  the  meritorious  cause,  and  to  the  efficacious  instrument.  In  our  ordinary  logio 
we  are  apt  to  deem  one  agency  exclusive  of  another.  "  It  is  God  who  works  in  us," 
therefore,  we  conclude  we  need  not  work.  The  logic  of  Scripture  is  "  Therefore  let 
us  work."  (2)  The  natural  and  uniform  tendency  of  affliction  to  produce  tenderness 
and  sanctity  of  heart.  In  the  light  of  human  experience  we  feel  no  surprise  at  this 
sequence  of  "  tribulations  and  glory,"  of  "  Hght  afflictions,"  and  an  "  exceeding  great 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  And  the  beatitude  that  is  described  here — exemption 
from  hunger  and  thirst,  and  all  the  evils  of  which  they  stand  as  the  representatives 
— is  quite  congruous  to  our  thoughts  and  feelings,  with  the  tribulation  that  preceded. 
3.  Their  worship  itself.  In  heaven  they  only  praise,  they  sing  a  new  song  ;  the  old 
song  of  lamentation,  the  wail  of  sorrow,  the  misery  of  sin  is  forgotten.  (1)  Their 
worship  is  immediate.  The  worship  of  '*  faith  is  lost  in  sight,"  the  worship  of 
symbols  in  the  thing  signified ;  they  **  see  the  King  in  His  beauty."  (2)  It  is  united 
and  cathohc.  There  is  but  one  robe,  one  palm,  one  song,  one  Father's  house,  one 
glorious  Model  to  which  all  are  to  be  conformed.  (3)  The  constancy  of  heavenly 
worship.  "  They  serve  Him  day  and  night."  "  They  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying, 
Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty."  God's  work  hinders  not  His  rest,  neither 
does  the  service  and  worship  of  the  glorified.  Their  praise  is  but  the  utterance  of 
their  love  ;  and  the  constant  utterance  of  love  is  its  rest  and  joy.  (4)  The  fervour 
of  their  worship.  Oh  !  how  unlike  our  cold  and  formal  service  here — our  words,  our 
acts  of  mechanical  conformity,  of  unspiritual  temper,  of  unloving  prompting.  (5) ; 
Its  purity  and  joy.  They  who  ascribe  the  heavenly  sanctus,  themselves  are  holy,  i 
They  "  see  God,"  because  they  are  •'  pure  in  heart."  There  is  no  blemish  in  their 
sacrifice,  no  drawback  in  their  joy  ;  they  have  '*  come  to  Zion  with  songs,  and  ever- 
lasting joy  upon  their  heads,  and  sorrow  and  sadness  have  fled  away."  (6)  Its 
perfect  satisfaction.  "  The  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed 
them,  and  lead  them  to  living  fountains  of  waters."  As  on  earth,  so  in  heaven, 
their  dependence  is  on  Him ;  "  they  live,  yet  not  they,  it  is  Christ  who  liveth  in 
them."  n.  Such  is  the  spiritual  heaven  of  our  spiritual  humanity.  Of  the 
MATERiAii  HEAVEN  of  our  material  humanity  we  can  say  but  little,  and  that  only  in 
negations.  "  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more ;  neither  shall 
the  sun  light  on  them,  nor  any  heat."  No  painful  want,  no  painful  infliction,  finds 
its  way  into  that  kingdom  of  blessedness.  As  it  realises  all  the  good  that  we  can 
crave,  it  excludes  all  the  evil  that  we  can  deprecate.  The  condition  and  necessity 
of  probation,  and  therefore  of  discipline  will  be  ended ;  the  effects  of  sin  will  be 
destroyed ;  character  will  be  perfected ;  reward  will  be  realised ;  our  heavenly 
Father's  hand  will  wipe  every  tear  from  the  eye,  and  pluck  every  thorn  from  the 
heart.  Such  is  the  glorious  heaven  for  humanity,  both  soul  and  body,  which  the 
seer  beheld,  such  the  multitude  before  the  throne.  {H.Allon,  D.D.)  The  heavenly 
happiness  : — L  It  is  partly  constituted  by  an  exemption  from  all  those  pains 

AND  sorrows  which   EMBITTER   AND   POISON    THE    CUP    OF  EARTHLY    FELICITY.       1.    It  iS 

exempted  from  error,  and  consequently  from  suffering  upon  this  account.  2.  It  is 
exempted  from  sin,  and  aU  its  attendant  train  of  evils.  3.  It  is  exempted  from  the 
snares  to  which  we  are  exposed  in  this  world,  and  the  sufferings  to  which  we  are 
subjected  by  falling  into  them.  4.  It  is  exempted  from  temptations,  and  all  their 
attendant  dangers  and  mischiefs.  5.  It  is  exempted  from  the  disappointments  to 
which  mankind  are  exposed  in  this  life.  6.  It  is  exempted  from  the  real  and 
unavoidable  calamities  to  which  mankind  are  subjected  in  this  world,  and  which 
constitute  a  large  proportion  of  human  misery.     H.  It  is  completed  by  the  union 

OF  ALL  those  INGREDIENTS  WHICH  CAN  IMPROVE  OR  SECURE  THE  BLISS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY 

INHABITANTS.  1.  The  visioH  and  enjoyment  of  God,  and  the  resemblance  and  con- 
formity of  our  nature  to  the  Divine.  2.  The  enlargement  of  our  faculties,  and  the 
employment  of  these  upon  objects  suitable  to  and  worthy  of  them.     3.  A  progressive 


S84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

improvement  in  knowledge  and  goodness.     4.  The  society  of  angels,  and  of  the 
spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,  and  especially  of  those  virtuous  persons  with  whom 
we  were,  in  this  world,  connected  by  the  ties  of  reciprocal  love  and  friendship. 
{W.  Duff,  M.A.)        The  redeemed  in  heaven: — I.  The  redeemed  in  heaven  occupy 
THE  MOST  ELEVATED  POSITION.     They  are  "before  the  throne."    A  throne  is  the 
emblem  of  regal  authority.     In  heaven  there  is — 1.  A  permanent  consciousness  of 
the  supreme  rule.      2.  An  exalted  consciousness  of  the  supreme  rule.      11.  The 
redeemed  in  heaven  abe  engaged  in  the  grandest  service.      "And  serve  Him 
day  and   night."     They  serve   Him  in   every  department  of  action.      HI.  The 
redeemed  in  heaven  are  blessed  with  the  loftiest  companionship.     "  He  that 
eitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  amongst  them."    What  will  it  be  to  have  God — 
the  source  of  all  wisdom,  purity,  and  blessedness — as  our  constant  companion  ? 
(Homilist.)         The  happiness  of  the  saints  in  heaven: — I.  The  happiness  of  the 
saints  in  perpetual  communion  with  God  in  His  temple  above.     1.  Let  us  consider 
the  happiness  of  the  saints  in  that  part  of  their  celestial  worship  which  is  internal 
and  spiritual ;  and  in  general  we  must  frequently  recall  to  our  minds  the  imperfec- 
tion of  our  present  discoveries,  and  remember  that  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  what  the  Lord  hath 
laid  up  for  them  that  love  Him."    There  may,  for  anything  we  know,  be  discoveries, 
and  by  consequence,  acts  of  worship,  and  dispositions  of  mind  corresponding  to 
them,  totally  different  in  kind  from  anything  we  are  now  capable  of,  as  well  as 
higher  in  degree.     Of  these  we  must  be  absolutely  silent.     Whatever  acts  of  worship 
we  have  now  any  experience  of  shall  then  be  performed  to  far  greater  perfection, 
and  with  infinitely  greater  joy.     (1)  Acts  of  adoration.     By  these  I  understand  the 
immediate  contemplation  of  the  glorious  excellence  of  the  bivine  nature,  and  the 
exercise  of  those  affections  of  soul  which  correspond  to  it.     (2)  Acts  of  gratitude 
and  praise.     (3)  Acts  of  desire.     There  is  much  of  this  in  the  disposition  of  the 
people  of  God  on  earth ;  they  say  with  the  prophet  (Isa.  xxvi.  8).     And  as  every 
agreeable  object  is  the  more  desired  the  more  it  is  known,  so  the  clear  discovery 
that  is  made  in  heaven  of  the  glory  and  excellence  of  God,  and  the  delightful 
communications  of  His  love,  must  still  increase  our  desire  of  further  and  further 
degrees  of  it ;  and  there  is  a  fulness,  both  in  the  Divine  nature  and  benignity,  that 
can  never  be  exhausted.     (4)  Acts  of  trust  and  subjection.    2.  Let  us  now  consider 
the  worship  of  the  saints  in  heaven,  as  it  is  external  and  sensible.    This  is  the 
temple  of  God  in  which  His  servants  shall  serve  Him,  in  which  we  may  suppose  the 
general  assembly  of  the  Chm'ch  of  the  first-born  meet  together  for  the  joint  celebra- 
tion of  their  Creator  and  Eedeemer's  praise.    And  surely  if  in  this  lower  world  and 
that  part  of  the  creation  which  is  at  present  subjected  to  our  view,  there  is  so  much 
order  and  beauty,  so  much  splendour  and  magnificence,  though  it  be  the  abode  of 
guilty  creatures  under  manifest  tokens  of  Divine  displeasure,  what  must  be  the 
unclouded  lustre  and  perfect  beauty  of  that  place  where  the  glory  of  Almighty  God 
is  peculiarly  displayed,  and  which  was  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the  objects  of 
His  special  love  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  ?    But  the  external  circumstance 
which,  in  my  apprehension,  will  contribute  most  to  the  delight  and  happiness  of  the 
saints  in  their  heavenly  worship,  will  be  their  union  and  society  in  it.     {J.  Wither- 
spoon,  D.D.)       The  pleasures  of  heaven  and  the  service  of  earth  : — The  crucial  word  of 
the  passage  is  just  the  one  no  person  would  so  think  of,  viz.,  "  therefore,"  indicating 
the  connection  between  life  here  and  hereafter,  and  showing  that  the  nexus  is  never 
broken.    I.  That  their  submission   to  a  SACRiFiciAii  life   has  its  reward   in 
BESTOWAL  OF  DiviNE  POWER.     "  He  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  shall  spread  His 
tabernacle  over  them."    It  is  paradoxical  that  a  sacrifice  is  the  way  to  a  throne  and 
strength.    It  would  be  peculiar  in  any  sphere  but  one.     The  heart,  however,  only 
gains  power  as  it  ceases  to  be  free.    We  must  be  imprisoned  by  the  mighty  power 
of  love  before  we  can  be  free.    How  is  it  refined  ladies  as  hospital  nurses  can  go 
through  scenes  which  would  make  men  blush  ?    Because  they  are  bound  in  the 
fetters  of  an  intense  love  of  humanity.    H.  Their  temporary  crushing  of  will 
WAS  rewarded  by  its  being  made  chronic  and  habitual.     "  Came  out  of  great 
tribulation,"  therefore  "  Serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple."    The  popular 
idea  that  calamities  of  life  are  sent  to  prepare  us  for  heaven  by  way  of  contrast  is 
pre-eminently  false.     They  are  rather  sent  to  prepare  us  for  the  life  of  heaven  by 
resemblance.    Heaven  is  veritably  service.    A  little  girl  of  my  acquaintance  was  the 
subject  of  protracted  suffering,  and,  questioned  as  to  her  conception  of  its  purpose, 
surprised  me  by  replying,  not  in  the  direction  of  contrast,  but  in  that  of  resemblance. 
•' Don't  you  know,"  said  she,  "I  am  preparing  to  be  a  ministering  spirit?"    It  is 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  885 

coming  out  of  great  tribulation  which  fits  us  for  service.  I  am  much  impressed  by 
the  fact  that  the  Children  of  Israel  never  journeyed  when  the  cloud  rested  over 
the  tabernacle.  Nor  should  we ;  but  rather  rest  until  the  cloud  be  lifted.  III. 
Their  sacrificial  life  was  rewarded  by  their  receiving  a  new  organ  of  vision, 
viz.,  a  sacrificially  pure  heart.  "  They  have  washed  their  robes,"  and  have  a  front 
pew ;  "  Therefore  are  they  before  the  throne."  If  our  spirits  be  bathed  in  suffering, 
we  shall  ever  after  regard  it  not  as  accidental,  but  as  habitual.  Sacrifice  is  the 
type  after  which  the  world  is  climbing,  as  illustrated  in  Abraham  on  Moriah, 
Jacob  at  Bethel,  and  Moses  in  Midian.  We  go  to  Christ  through  Egypt  and 
the  wilderness  of  Sinai.  We  do  not  expect — or  should  not — to  get  new  robes,  but 
washed  robes.  Creation  now  waits  for  the  seventh  morning,  which  will  come 
when  men  have  "washed  their  robes  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  (G.  Matheson, 
D.D.)  And  serve  Him  day  and  night. — Service  in  heaven : — When  you  come 
to  think  about  it  your  hearts  revolt  from  the  heaven  which  is  set  forth  in  the 
sentimental  hymns.  Having  nothing  to  do  may  be  very  pleasant  for  a  while,  but  it 
would  be  very  intolerable  for  an  eternity.  Heaven  is  a  place  of  sweet  activities. 
The  redeemed  are  serving  God  day  and  night  before  His  throne.  I.  The  highest 
life  is  A  LIFE  OF  PERPETUAL  SERVICE.  The  reward  which  God  confers  upon  His 
faithful  ones  is  ability  and  permission  to  serve,  and  when  He  calls  them  from  the 
lower  to  the  higher  places,  the  higher  honour  is  that  they  are  enabled  and  privi- 
leged to  serve  more.  In  God's  view  rank  is  deterjnined  by  the  measure  of  service. 
It  is  strange  how  the  world  has  reversed  this  principle  in  its  conceptions  of  rank  and 
dignity.  We  speak  of  service  with  a  sort  of  disdain,  and  of  servants  as  inferior 
persons.  You  would  find  thousands  of  people  ashamed  to  be  seen  with  soiled  hands, 
where  you  would  find  one  ashamed  of  living  an  utterly  profitless  life.  And  we  often 
pay  the  greatest  respect  to  men  and  women  who  are  of  so  little  good  to  the  world 
that  almost  the  best  service  they  could  render  would  be  to  remove  themselves  out  of 
it  as  speedily  as  possible.  What  a  curious  spectacle  this  must  present  to  those  wLo 
look  down  upon  the  earthly  life  from  above.  In  days  to  come,  when  Christ  shall 
truly  rule  in  the  hearts  of  men,  they  will  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  there  was  ever 
a  time  when  hats  were  doffed  and  knees  were  bow6d  to  selfish  and  unserviceable 
lives.  And  even  now  if  we  look  with  Christ's  eyes,  we  shall  think  the  most  ignorant 
ploughman  who  earns  his  daily  bread  a  far  nobler  being,  and  of  more  exalted  rank 
than  the  cultured  voluptuary  who  neither  uses  hands  nor  brain  to  serve  his  fellows 
and  make  the  world  a  little  better  than  he  found  it.  We  shall  honour  the  meanest 
workman  more  than  the  noblest  of  society's  indolent  darlings.  We  shall  be  as  much 
ashamed  of  living  unserviceable  lives  as  of  being  detected  in  some  glaring  felony. 
The  homes  on  earth  which  most  resemble  heaven  are  those  in  which  from  the  father 
down  to  the  youngest  child,  every  loved  and  loving  one  is  serving  and  being  served 
by  each  and  all ;  where  love  is  always  giving,  yet  receiving  more  than  it  gives ; 
where  all  are  servants,  and  because  servants,  masters;  where  all  are  happy  because 
all  are  ministering  to  the  joy  of  others.  11.  The  highest  life  is  a  life  of  service  in 
THE  TEMPLE,  OT  rather  of  temple  service.  There  is  no  temple,  because  it  is  all 
temple.  And  all  the  service,  of  whatever  kind  it  is,  all  the  work,  all  the  ministry  of 
love  there  is  emphatically  temple  service,  not  necessarily  singing,  praising,  preach- 
ing, or  anything  of  that  kind,  but  temple  service,  because  the  atmosphere,  the 
thought,  the  motives,  the  emotions  are  sacred,  holy,  and  divine  ;  because  everything 
is  done  in  view  of  Him  who  sits  upon  the  throne.  There  is  the  very  spirit  of  the 
sanctuary  in  it  all.  There  is  the  gladness  and  the  praisefulness  of  the  sanctuary  in 
it  all.  And  here  again  we  find  the  model  for  our  lives  below.  The  highest  life  on 
earth  is  a  life  made  up  entirely  of  temple  service — a  life  in  which  we  do  all  things 
from  the  least  to  the  greatest  in  the  same  spirit  in  which  we  sing  hymns  and  offer 
prayers  honestly,  reverently,  and  purely,  as  in  the  sight  of  God  and  our  Master 
Jesus  Christ.  IH.  The  highest  life  is  a  life  of  work  inspired  by  love,  by  love  and 
not  by  necessity.  They  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more.  For  the  Lamb 
doth  feed  them  and  lead  them  to  living  fountains  of  water.  We  regard  labour  as  a 
curse  because  it  is  a  necessity.  There  is  no  choice  where  need  drives.  It  is  the 
hunger  and  thirst  that  make  us  bondsmen.  We  must  toil  to  satisfy  want.  But 
in  the  highest  life  they  work  not  to  get  their  needs  supplied,  but  because  those  needs 
have  been  supplied ;  not  to  secure  wages,  but  because  the  wages  have  been  sweetly 
and  abundantly  paid  ;  not  to  make  their  robes  white  and  clean,  but  because  Christ 
has  washed  them  until  they  shine  like  lustrous  snow.  In  a  word  their  service  is 
inspired  by  gratitude,  devotion,  love ;  and  that  service  never  tires.  Day  and  night 
they  serve  Him  in  His  temple.    Much  of  our  earthly  service  may  be  made  of  this 

25 


386  THE  BIBLKAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

kind — nay,  all  of  it  in  a  certain  sense.  In  all  that  we  do  there  may  be  the  willing, 
thankful,  rejoicing  spirit,  a  feeling  of  infinite  indebtedness  to  God  for  His  great  gifts 
and  His  great  love,  which  gives,  as  it  were,  wings  to  the  feet  that  are  engaged  in 
common  labour.  (J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.)  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall 
dwell  among  them. — The  Divine  presence  in  heaven : — I.  Heaven  is  the  place  of 
God's  special  pbesence.  It  is  the  beginning  of  our  happiness  to  have  His  presence 
with  us  here,  and  it  wiU  be  the  consummation  of  it  to  be  for  ever  with  Him  in  the 
world  to  come.  The  Psalmist  took  this  view  of  it,  for  he  said,  "  Whom  have  I  in 
heaven  but  Thee?  "  It  is  further  called  "  appearing  in  God's  presence  "  ;  "  stand- 
ing before  Him";  "  bowing  before  His  throne";  "abiding  in  His  tabernacle  " ; 
"  dwelling  in  His  house  for  ever";  "beholding  His  face";  "being  for  ever  with 
the  Lord  " ;  "  seeing  the  King  in  His  beauty  "  ;  "  sitting  with  Christ  on  His  throne." 
II.  The  natube  of  the  Divine  presence  in  heaven.  On  earth  the  believer  enjoys, 
in  a  certain  sense,  the  presence  of  his  God.  Not  only  His  essential  presence,  not 
only  His  presence  in  nature,  where  His  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  are  clearly 
displayed ;  not  only  His  presence  in  providence  in  overruling  the  unbridled  passions 
of  men,  in  improving  the  framework  of  society ;  not  only  His  presence  in  the 
appointed  means  of  grace,  but  a  special  presence ;  a  presence  which  he  can  feel  and 
enjoy,  but  which  he  cannot  fully  explain ;  a  presence  which  though  secret  and 
invisible,  is  real,  influential,  and  blessed.  The  presence  referred  to  in  the  text  is 
more  than  His  essential  presence.  His  essential  presence  is  as  really  on  earth,  and 
in  hell,  as  it  is  in  heaven ;  for  it  fills  heaven  and  earth,  nor  can  the  heaven  of 
heavens  contain  it.  It  is  also  more  than  His  special  gracious  presence  by  His  Spirit, 
for  though  the  saints  have  this  on  earth,  they  are  said  to  be  absent  from  the  Lord. 
The  presence  of  God  in  the  text  means — 1.  A  wonderful  display  of  His  natural  and 
moral  perfections — His  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  mercy,  with 
all  other  attributes  which  constitute  Him  such  a  glorious  being.  Now  in  conse- 
quence of  the  weakness  of  our  powers,  and  the  obscurity  of  providence  and  other 
mediums  through  which  they  are  contemplated,  these  perfections  are  but  dimly  seen 
and  inadequately  appreciated  in  the  present  state.  2.  A  wonderful  display  of  His 
regal  glory.  He  is  to  dwell  among  them  sitting  upon  His  throne ;  that  is,  sur- 
rounded with  the  ensigns  of  regal  glory.  (1)  It  sets  forth  the  absolute  sovereignty 
of  God  and  His  dominion  over  all  in  heaven,  and  hence  Isaiah  saw  the  Lord  sitting 
upon  His  throne,  high  and  lifted  up.  His  sovereignty  is  seen  there  in  greater 
perfection  and  grandeur  than  anywhere  else.  (2)  It  sets  forth  His  peculiar  glory 
and  majesty,  which  are  manifested  in  heaven  more  luminously  than  anywhere 
besides.  (3)  It  sets  forth  further,  that  there  the  deepest  homage  and  respect  is  paid 
unto  Him.  HI.  The  manner  in  which  this  presence  is  manifested.  1.  Here  we 
have  His  presence  in  creatures,  providences,  and  ordinances ;  but  in  heaven  He  will 
be  seen  immediately  without  the  intervention  of  means.  The  mind  wiU  there  be 
perfectly  free  from  everything  which  here  dims  and  interrupts  its  visions  of  the 
glory  of  God.  There  is  no  sin  there  to  weaken  and  becloud  its  powers,  nor  any 
temptation  to  draw  off  the  affections.  There  the  light  of  glory  has  burst  in  upon 
the  soul,  and  the  perfection  of  its  holiness  secures  its  devout  and  unceasing  con- 
templation of  spiritual  realities.  The  body,  too,  will  then  be  fashioned  hke  unto 
the  glorified  body  of  Christ ;  and  instead  of  hindering  and  beclouding  the  spiiit  as  it 
does  now,  it  will  greatly  aid  the  soul  in  her  Divine  contemplations.  And  then 
shadows  wiU  be  exchanged  for  realities.  2.  He  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  shall 
dwell  among  them,  or,  as  in  another  place,  in  the  midst  of  them ;  so  that  He  is 
equally  accessible  to  all,  and  His  glory,  as  from  a  centre,  diffuses  its  splendours  over 
the  whole  assembly  of  heaven.  Here  some  believers  live  in  the  sunshine  and  some 
in  the  shade ;  but  it  is  a  most  delightful  thought  that  the  immediate  and  distinct 
vision  of  God  in  heaven  is  not  the  special  privilege  of  the  few,  but  is  common  to  all 
that  people  the  realms  of  bliss,  both  angels  and  men.  3.  The  presence  of  God  in 
heaven  is  a  fixed  and  abiding  presence,  for  He  shall  dwell  among  them.  Not  as  He 
frequently  does  now,  like  a  wayfaring  man  who  only  turns  aside  for  the  night,  but 
He  will  be  always  in  our  eye,  for  we  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord,  and  shall  always 
behold  the  face  of  our  Father  in  heaven.  IV.  The  influence  of  this  Divine 
presence  upon  the  eternal  state  of  the  redeemed.  As  the  presence  of  the  sun 
warms,  enlightens,  fructifies,  and  blesses  the  earth  ;  so,  only  in  a  far  higher  and 
more  important  sense,  does  the  presence  of  God  shed  the  most  delightful  influences 
upon  the  whole  region  and  family  of  heaven.  1.  It  will  advance  their  moral  perfec- 
tion. 2.  It  will  secure  and  promote  their  eternal  happiness.  The  visible  and 
immediate  presence  of  God  will  banish  aU  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  progressive 


CHAP.vn.]  .  REVELATION.  387 

happiness  of  the  redeemed,  just  as  the  presence  of  the  sun  banishes  darkness,  cold- 
ness, and  gloom.  Then  this  immediate  presence  of  God  not  only  banishes  all  that 
is  opposed  to  the  happiness  of  the  saints,  but  it  is  productive  of  positive  happiness. 
It  is  the  presence  of  His  approving  smile  that  makes  heaven,  for  there  He  rejoices 
over  Kis  people  with  joy  :  He  rests  in  His  love.  He  joys  over  them  with  singing.  Oh, 
what  bliss  to  live  in  the  smile  of  a  reconciled  God !  {Wm.  Gregory.)  Three 
tabernacles  (with  John  i.  14;  Kev.  xxi.  3) : — The  word  rendered  "dwelt,"  in  these 
three  passages  is  a  peculiar  one.  It  literally  means  "  to  dwell  in  a  tent,"  or,  if  we 
may  use  such  a  word,  "  to  tabernacle,"  and  there  is  no  doubt  a  reference  to  the 
tabernacle  in  which  the  Divine  presence  abode  in  the  wilderness  and  in  the  land  of 
Israel  before  the  erection  of  the  temple.  I.  First,  then,  we  have  to  think  for  a  moment 
of  THAT  TABERNACLE  FOR  EARTH.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt,  as  in  a  tent, 
amongst  us."  The  human  nature,  the  visible,  material  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  in 
which  there  enshrined  itself  the  everlasting  Word,  which  from  the  beginning  was 
the  Agent  of  all  Divine  revelation,  that  is  the  true  temple  of  God.  We  have  to  be 
content  with  a  recognition  that  the  manner  is  beyond  our  fathoming,  and  to  accept 
the  fact,  pressed  upon  our  faith  that  our  hearts  may  grasp  it  and  be  at  peace.  God 
hath  dwelt  in  humanity.  The  everlasting  Word,  who  is  the  forthcoming  of  all  the 
fulness  of  Deity  into  the  realm  of  finite  creatures,  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among 
us.  But  the  tabernacle  was  not  only  the  dwelling  place  of  God,  it  was  also  and, 
therefore,  the  place  of  revelation  of  God.  So,  in  our  text,  there  follows  :  "  we  beheld 
His  glory."  And  how  did  that  glory  make  itself  known  to  us  ?  By  miracle  ?  Yes  ! 
But,  blessed  be  His  name,  miracle  is  not  the  highest  manifestation  of  C  h -ist's  glory 
and  of  God's.  The  uniqueness  of  the  re^ elation  of  Christ's  glory  in  God  does  not 
depend  upon  the  deeds  which  He  wrought.  For,  as  the  context  goes  on  to  tell,  the 
Word  which  tabernacled  among  us  was  "  full  of  grace  and  truth,"  and  therein  is  the 
glory  most  gloriously  revealed.  Still  further,  the  tabernacle  was  the  place  of  sacri- 
fice. So  in  the  tabernacle  of  His  flesh  He  offered  up  the  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for 
ever.  In  the  offering  up  of  His  human  life  in  continuous  obedience,  and  in  the 
offering  up  of  His  body  and  blood  in  the  bitter  passion  of  the  Cross,  He  brought  men 
nigh  unto  God.  Therefore,  because  of  all  these  things,  because  the  tabernacle  is 
the  dwelling-place  of  God,  the  place  of  revelation,  and  the  place  of  sacrifice,  there- 
fore, finally  is  it  the  meeting  place  betwixt  God  and  man.  In  Christ,  who  by  His 
Incarnation  lays  His  hand  upon  both,  God  touches  man  and  man  touches  God. 
We  who  are  afar  off  are  made  nigh,  and  in  that  true  tabernacle  which  the  Lord 
pitched  and  not  man  we  meet  God  and  are  glad.  The  temple  for  earth  is  "  the 
temple  of  His  body."  II.  We  have  the  tabernacle  for  the  heavens.  In  the  con- 
text we  have  a  vision  of  the  great  multitude  redeemed  out  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  "  standing  before  the  throne  and  before  the  Lamb,  arrayed  in  white  robes, 
and  palms  in  their  hands."  The  palms  in  their  hands  give  important  help  towards 
understanding  the  vision.  We  are  not  to  think  of  the  Roman  palm  of  victory,  but 
of  the  Jewish  palm  which  was  borne  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  What  was  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles  ?  A  festival  established  on  purpose  to  recall  to  the  minds  and 
to  the  gratitude  of  the  Jews  settled  in  their  own  land  the  days  of  their  wandering 
in  the  wilderness.  Part  of  the  ritual  of  it  was  that  during  its  celebration  they 
builded  for  themselves  booths,  or  tabernacles  of  leaves  and  boughs  of  trees  under 
which  they  dwelt,  thus  reminding  themselves  of  their  nomad  condition.  Now  what 
beauty  and  power  it  gives  to  the  words  of  my  text,  if  we  take  in  this  allusion  to  the 
Jewish  festival.  The  great  multitude  bearing  the  palms  are  *•  keeping  the  feast," 
memorial  of  past  wilderness  wanderings ;  and  "  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall 
spread  His  tabernacle  above  them  "  ;  as  the  word  might  be  here  rendered.  That  is 
to  say.  He  Himself  shall  build  and  be  the  tent  in  which  they  dwell ;  He  Himself  shall 
dwell  with  them  in  it.  He  Himself,  in  closer  union  than  can  be  conceived  of  here, 
shall  keep  them  company  during  that  feast.  III.  Look  at  that  final  vision  which  we 
have  in  these  texts,  which  we  may  call  the  tabernacle  for  the  renewed  earth. 
"  Behold  the  Tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  wiU  tabernacle  with  them." 
The  climax  and  the  goal  of  all  the  Divine  working,  and  the  long  processes  of  God's 
love  for  and  discipline  of  the  world,  are  to  be  this,  that  He  and  men  shall  abide 
together  in  unity  and  concord.  That  is  God's  wish  from  the  beginning.  We  read 
in  one  of  the  profound  utterances  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs  how  from  the  beginning 
the  "  delights  "  of  the  Incarnate  Wisdom  which  foreshadowed  the  Incarnate  Word 
"  Were  with  the  sons  of  men."  And,  at  the  close  of  all  things,  when  the  vision  of 
this  final  chapter  shall  be  fulfilled,  God  will  say,  settling  Himself  in  the  midst  of  a 
redeemed  humanity,  "  Lo !  here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it.     This  is  My 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

rest  for  ever."  He  will  tabernacle  with  men,  and  men  with  Him.  We  know  not, 
and  never  shall  know  until  experience  strips  the  bandages  from  our  eyes,  what  new 
methods  of  participation  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  new  possibilities  of  intimacy 
and  intercourse  with  Him  may  be  ours  when  the  .veils  of  flesh  and  sense  and  time 
have  all  dropped  away.  New  windows  may  be  opened  in  our  spirits,  from  which 
we  shall  perceive  new  aspects  of  the  Divine  character.  New  doors  may  be  opened 
in  our  souls  from  out  of  which  we  may  pass  to  touch  parts  of  His  nature,  all  im- 
palpable and  inconceivable  to  us  now.  And  when  all  the  veils  of  a  discordant 
moral  nature  are  taken  away,  and  we  are  pure,  then  we  shall  see,  then  we  shall 
draw  nigh  to  God.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16, 17.  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst. — Heaven  below : — I.  The 
PERFECTION  OF  THE  PROVISION  which  is  cujoyed  in  heaven.  1.  The  glorified  dwell 
under  the  shadow  of  God.  It  is  for  this  reason  that "  the  sun  shall  not  light  on  them, 
nor  any  heat,"  because  they  dwell  in  God.  Oh,  what  a  dwelling-place  that  will  be  J 
2.  Next,  we  are  assured  that  they  shall  have  all  their  necessities  prevented.  "  They 
shall  hunger  no  more."  To  be  supplied  when  we  hunger  is  the  mercy  of  earth :  nevei 
to  hunger  at  all  is  the  plenitude  of  heaven.  God  shall  so  fill  the  souls  of  His  redeemed 
that  they  shall  have  no  longings :  their  longings  shall  be  prevented  by  their  constant 
satisfaction.  3.  Further,  as  we  read  we  discover  a  third  blessing,  namely,  that  every 
overpowering  influence  is  attempered — "  Neither  shall  the  sun,"  &c.  To  us  even 
"  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire  "  while  we  are  here ;  but  in  the  saints  there  remaineth 
nothing  to  consume.  The  light  of  God  is  not  too  bright  for  eyes  that  Christ  hath 
touched  with  heaven's  own  eyesalve.  Blessed,  indeed,  are  they  who  shall  behold  the 
King  in  the  ivory  palaces  above !  4.  When  it  is  added,  "  Nor  any  heat,"  we  learn 
that  injurious  influences  shall  cease  to  operate.  By  our  surroundings  here  we  are 
troubled  with  many  heats.  The  very  comforts  of  life,  like  warm  weather,  tend  to 
dry  us  up,  A  man  may  have  gold,  a  man  may  have  health,  a  man  may  have  pros- 
perity and  honour  till  he  is  withered  like  the  heath  in  the  desert  in  the  day  of  drought. 
Unless  a  dew  from  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  the  branch  of  the  prosperous  he  wiU  be 
parched  indeed.  We  have  need  of  grace  whenever  God  gives  uff  blessings  of  a 
temporal  kind.  But  no  heat  of  that  sort  shall  happen  to  saints  in  heaven :  they  can 
be  rich,  and  honoured,  and  perfectly  beautiful,  and  yet  under  no  temptation  to  self- 
exaltation.  5.  "  Neither  shall  they  thirst  any  more  "  ;  they  shall  feel  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  such  an  all-satisfying,  aU-sufl&cient  portion  that  their  desires  can  go  no 
further.  In  the  fair  haven  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  my  spirit  abide 
for  ever.  11.  The  description  oi*  the  provider.  Who  is  this  that  feeds  them  ?  It  is 
the  Lamb.  1.  Does  it  not  teach  us,  first,  that  our  comfort  and  life  must  come  from  our 
incarnate  Saviour — the  Lamb  ?  The  expression  is  very  peculiar.  It  is  written,  "  The 
Lamb  shall  shepherd  them."  This  is  an  accurate  interpretation.  How  is  that?  A 
shepherd,  and  that  shepherd  a  Lamb !  Here  is  the  truth  which  the  words  contain, 
— He  that  saves  is  a  man  like  ourselves.  He  that  provides  for  His  people  is  Himself 
one  of  them — "  For  which  cause  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  The 
Lamb  is  their  hope,  their  comfort,  their  honour,  their  delight,  their  glory.  2,  Does 
it  not  mean  more  than  that  ?  "  The  Lamb  "  surely  refers  to  sacrifice.  The  glorified 
drink  the  deepest  draughts  of  delight  from  the  fact  that  God  was  made  flesh,  and 
that  in  human  flesh  He  offered  perfect  expiation  for  human  guilt.  3.  "The Lamb" 
must  refer  to  the  meekness  of  character,  the  lowliness  and  condescension  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  earth  was  "  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter."  He 
was  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  The  character  of  our  Lord,  then,  brings  our  spirit 
all  that  it  needs ;  but  yet  this  is  not  all :  the  text  speaks  of  "the  Lamb  which  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne  "  as  feeding  them.  Think  of  that,  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of 
the  throne.  Can  you  put  these  two  things  together,  a  sacrifice  and  a  throne  ?  He 
that  stooped  to  be  made  sin  for  us  is  now  supreme  sovereign.  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords.  Think  of  that  and  be  comforted.  Our  Eepresentative  is  glorified.  Our 
covenant  Head,  our  second  Adam,  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  III.  The  manner 
op  providing.  In  two  ways  the  saints  in  heaven  enjoy  it — the  Lamb  that  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them.  Go  over  this,  and  think 
first  of  the  feeding  of  them.  The  Greek  word  is  "  shall  shepherdise  them."  In 
heaven  Jesus  is  a  shepherd  ruling  over  all  His  flock  with  a  happy,  genial,  sympathetic 
sovereignty,  to  which  they  yield  prompt  and  glad  obedience.  Here  He  has  under- 
shepherds,  and  He  hands  out  the  food  by  our  poor  instrumentality ;  and,  alas !  some- 
times we  are  found  incapable,  or  forgetful ,  and  the  flock  is  not  fed :  but  it  is  never  so 
in  heaven,  for  the  Lamb  Himself  maintains  the  pastorate,  and  acts  the  shepherd  in 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION. 


a  maimer  which  none  of  us  can  emulate.  Then  it  is  added,  "  He  shall  lead."  You 
may  read  it,  "  He  shall  guide  them  to  fountains  of  waters  of  life  "  ;  it  is  but  a  varia- 
tion of  the  same  thought.  Now,  even  in  heaven  the  holy  ones  need  guiding,  and  Jesus 
leads  the  way.  As  eternity  goes  on,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Saviour  will  be  in- 
dicating fresh  delights  to  His  redeemed.  "  Come  hither,"  saith  He  to  His  flock,  "  here 
are  yet  more  flowing  streams."  He  will  lead  them  on  and  on,  by  the  century,  aye,  by 
the  chiliad,  from  glory  unto  glory,  onward  and  upward  in  growing  knowledge  and 
enjoyment.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Heaven  above,  and  heaven  below  (with  Isa.  xlix. 
10) : — In  the  New  Testament  text  we  have  the  heavenly  state  above ;  and  in  the 
Old  Testament  text  we  have  the  state  of  the  Lord's  flock  while  on  the  way  to  their 
eternal  rest.  Very  singular  is  the  sameness  of  the  description  of  the  flock  in  the  fold 
and  the  flock  feeding  in  the  ways.  The  verses  are  almost  word  for  word  the  same. 
When  John  would  describe  the  white-robed  host,  he  can  say  no  more  of  them  than 
Isaiah  said  of  the  pilgrim  band,  led  by  the  God  of  mercy.  I.  The  heavenly  state 
ABOVE.  1.  The  supply  of  every  need.  "  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any 
more."  The  unrenewed  man  is  always  thirsting ;  but  Christ  can  stay  this  even  now, 
for  He  saith,  '•  He  that  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst." 
There  is  not,  in  all  the  golden  streets  of  heaven,  a  single  person  who  is  deshing  what 
he  may  not  have,  or  wanting  what  he  cannot  obtain,  or  even  wishing  for  that  which 
he  has  not  to  his  hand.  Oh,  happy  state  !  They  are  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God. 
2.  The  removal  of  every  ill.  Thus  saith  the  Spirit,  "  Neither  shall  the  sun  light  on 
them,  nor  any  heat."  We  are  such  poor  creatures  that  excess  of  good  soon  becomes 
evil  to  us.  Hence  we  need  guarding  from  dangers  which,  at  the  fijst  sight,  look  as 
if  they  were  not  perilous.  3.  The  leading  of  the  Lamb.  4.  The  drinking  at  the 
fountain  is  the  secret  of  the  ineffable  bUss.  "  The  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne  shall  feed  them,  and  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  waters."  We  are  com- 
pelled to  thirst  at  times,  and,  alas !  we  stop  at  the  very  puddles  by  the  way,  and 
would  refresh  ourselves  at  them,  if  we  could.  This  will  never  happen  to  us  when 
"we  reach  the  land  where  flows  the  river  of  the  water  of  life.  There  the  sheep  drink 
of  no  stagnant  waters,  or  bitter  wells,  but  they  are  satisfied  from  living  fountains  of 
waters.  In  the  home  couuiry  souls  have  no  need  of  the  means  of  grace,  for  they 
have  reached  the  God  of  grace.  11.  The  heavenly  state  below.  I  think  I  have 
heard  you  saying,  "Ah !  this  is  all  about  heaven;  but  we  have  not  yet  come  to  it. 
We  are  still  wrestling  here  below."  Well,  if  we  cannot  go  to  heaven  at  once,  heaven 
can  come  to  us.  Isaiah  painted  our  Lord's  sheep  in  his  presence  on  the  way  to 
heaven,  and  John  drew  the  same  flock  in  the  glory  with  the  Lamb :  and  the  fact  that 
the  pictures  are  so  much  alike  is  full  of  suggestive  teaching.  Here  are  the  same 
ideas  in  the  same  words.  1.  First,  here  is  a  promise  that  every  want  shall  be 
supphed.  ♦*  They  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst."  If  we  are  the  Lord's  people  and  are 
trusting  in  Him,  this  shall  be  true  in  every  possible  sense.  You  shall  have  no  anxious 
thought  concerning  what  you  shall  eat,  and  what  you  shall  drink,  but,  mark  you,  if 
you  should  know  the  trials  of  poverty,  and  should  be  brought  very  low  in  temporal 
things,  yet  the  Lord's  presence  and  sensible  consolations  shall  so  sustain  you  that 
spiritually  and  inwardly  you  shall  know  neither  hunger  nor  thirst.  Our  Lord  can 
so  adapt  our  minds  to  our  circumstances,  that  the  bitter  is  sweet,  and  the  burden  is 
light.  2.  Then,  next,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  having  every  evil  removed  from  you 
while  yet  in  this  wilderness.  "  Neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  smite  them,"  Suppose 
God  favours  you  with  prosperity;  if  you  live  near  to  God  you  will  not  be  rendered 
proud  or  worldly-minded  by  your  prosperity.  3.  Further,  it  is  said,  that  on  earth  we 
may  enjoy  the  leading  of  the  Lord.  See  how  it  is  put :  "  For  He  that  hath  mercy  on 
them  shall  lead  them."  Here  we  have  not  quite  the  same  words  as  in  the  Revelation, 
for  there  we  read,  "  The  Lamb  that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  lead  them." 
Yet  the  sense  is  but  another  shade  of  the  same  meaning.  Oh,  but  that  is  a  sweet 
name,  is  it  not  ?  "  He  that  hath  mercy  on  them."  He  has  saved  them,  and  so  has 
had  mercy  on  them.  Yes,  that  is  very  precious,  but  the  word  is  sweeter  still — "  He 
that  hath  mercy  on  them,"  He  that  is  always  having  mercy  on  them,  He  that  follows 
them  with  mercy  all  the  days  of  their  lives.  He  that  continually  pardons,  upholds, 
supplies,  strengthens,  and  thus  daily  loadeth  them  with  benefits.  4.  But  now  the 
last  touch  is  the  drinking  at  the  spring-head.  We  were  not  surprised  to  find, 
in  our  description  of  heaven,  that  the  Lamb  led  them  to  the  fountains  of  waters ;  but 
we  are  delighted  to  find  that,  here  below,  "  even  by  the  springs  of  water  shall 
He  guide  them."  You  can  even  now  live  upon  God  Himself,  and  there  is  no 
living  comparable  to  it.  You  can  get  beyond  all  the  cisterns,  and  come  to  the 
river  of  the  water  of  life,  even  as  they  do  in  heaven.     To  Uve  by  second  cauaea 


390  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

is  a  very  secondary  life :  to  live  on  the  First  Cause  is  the  first  of  li-ving.  (Ibid.) 
All  Souls^  Day  : — The  imagery  is  Oriental.  To  a  dweller  in  the  East,  the  first 
essential  is  protection  from  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  from  the  radiating  heat  that 
pours  forth  in  the  evening ;  the  one  blasting  the  energies  at  noonday,  the  other 
enervating  the  spirits  at  the  coming  of  the  night ;  and  then  waters  to  drink  in  a 
thirsty  land.  1.  Let  us,  then,  enlarge  our  thought,  and  say,  The  life  of  the  dead 
is  a  protected  life.  Think  of  the  great  multitude  that  stands  before  God  to-day. 
Think  of  the  little  children  brought  into  this  world  all,  warped  and  twisted,  so  that 
they  never  knew  how  to  play.  Think  of  the  young  that  have  grown  up  with  the 
promise  of  joy,  only  to  see  the  cup  of  happiness  dashed  from  their  lips.  Think  of 
the  lives  that  have  been  misunderstood — the  lives  that  have  gone  on  day  by  day 
doing  their  duty,  sacrificing  themselves,  seeking  only  for  what  was  noble  and  pure 
and  of  good  report,  and  all  the  time  misunderstood,  unappreciated,  without  sym- 
pathy, left  to  bear  the  burden  and  the  heat  of  the  day  alone.  Think  of  those  who 
have  lain  for  years  and  years  on  the  bed  of  sickness.  Think  of  the  women  that 
have  borne  great  burdens — burdens  not  only  of  misapprehension,  of  misunder- 
standing, but  of  cruel  brutality.  Think  of  the  multitudes  that  have  risen  day  by 
day  only  to  labour  and  toil,  and  have  lain  down  at  night  too  feeble,  too  weary,  too 
much  oppressed,  for  any  thought  of  God,  crushed  by  the  burden  and  the  labour  of 
life.  Now  the  word  of  St.  John  is  that  from  all  these  things  they  are  protected. 
A  life  free  from  care  and  responsibility,  and  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day.  This 
is  the  first  thought  that  St.  John  would  impress  upon  us  in  regard  to  the  life  of  the 
dead.  Nevermore  can  those  things  that  are  so  hard  for  us  light  on  them.  All 
Souls'  Day  should  be  full  of  joy  for  the  protected  life  of  the  dead.  But  that  is  not 
all.  "  They  hunger  no  more ;  and  the  Lamb  doth  lead  them,"  &c.  2.  A  life  of 
satisfaction ;  a  Mfe  in  which  every  wish  and  aspiration  of  the  soul  is  gratified. 
What  a  life  is  that  1  I  hke  to  think  of  the  great  multitude  of  God's  children  who 
have  entered  into  that  new  world  and  into  that  new  life,  seeking  such  different 
things  because  their  needs  are  so  different.  One  soul  seeks  only  for  rest ;  and  that 
is  given  it.  Another  soul  needs  peace  and  harmony  after  the  long  struggle  to  make 
peace  on  earth.  Another  has  been  frightened,  and  longs  for  the  sense  of  safety, 
and  that  is  given.  Another  has  all  through  life  been  thirsting  for  the  sight  of  the 
Eternal  Beauty,  which  no  picture,  no  statue,  no  flaming  of  the  sky  at  sunset,  could 
adequately  express.  "  "We  shall  see,"  said  the  prophet  long  ago,  speaking  for  these 
artistic  souls — "  we  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty."  Others  have  found  the 
satisfaction  of  their  souls  in  "  the  sound  of  the  harpers  playing  on  the  harps." 
The  great  multitude  whose  souls  have  been  stirred  by  music,  and  yet  in  the  most 
glorious  symphony,  in  the  noblest  chorus,  have  always  felt  the  human  discord  that 
underlay  the  harmony — there  they  are  satisfied,  there  the  perfect  harmony  of  the 
Eternal  Life  soothes,  invigorates,  and  inspires  them.  Others  have  laid  hold  of  the 
tree  of  the  knowledge  of  life.  All  through  life  they  hungered  for  knowledge,  and 
yet  all  getting  of  knowledge  was  the  getting  also  of  sorrow.  There  it  is  changed. 
There  the  tree  of  life  is  seen  to  be  the  tree  of  knowledge.  Drinking  deep  of  the 
Divine  life,  filling  themselves  with  the  life  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  these  souls  have 
found  that  not  through  knowledge  did  they  gain  life,  but  that  through  life  they 
have  gained  knowledge.  Oh,  how  wonderful  it  is  to  think  of  this  vast  expansion  of 
humanity,  as  the  flower  expands  that  has  been  transplanted  into  a  more  genial 
clime  1  It  is  good  to  think  of  the  lives  that  are  satisfied  to-day,  as  they  stand 
before  the  throne  of  God,  and  are  led  by  the  Lamb  to  the  living  fountains  of  waters. 
The  life  satisfied ;  the  life  rejoicing  in  the  knowledge  of  the  thing  that  it  has 
dreamed  of  as  impossible  ;  the  life  rejoicing  in  the  knowledge  that  every  hope  that 
has  shot  across  its  sky  was  the  witness  of  a  reality  which  God  had  prepared  for 
them  that  love  Him.  Full  salvation.  Sin  has  fallen  away  like  some  filthy  garment, 
and  the  soul  stands  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  and  the  glory  of  the  King  clothes 
it,  and  it  finds  its  satisfaction  in  beholding  His  beauty.  And  how  has  all  this  come 
to  pass  ?  "  The  Lamb  shall  lead  them  forth."  The  spirit  of  Jesus  is  typified  by 
the  Lamb.  The  spirit  of  perfect  sacrifice  is  meant  by  the  Lamb.  And  that  spirit 
has  entered  into  the  lives  of  these  men  and  women  and  children.  It  is  the  new 
spirit  that  has  taken  possession  of  them  in  the  new  life  that  has  made  the  pro- 
tection and  the  eternal  satisfaction.  It  opens  up  before  us  the  thought  of  the 
endless  progress  of  the  dead.  They  are  being  led  by  the  Lamb.  And  now  turn 
back  from  this  picture  of  the  life  of  the  dead  to  that  other  one  with  which  we  are 
so  much  more  familiar,  which  we  may  call  the  death  of  the  living.  We  are  not 
protected.    On  us  the  sun  does  light  and  the  heat  does  burn ;  with  us  the  sorrow 


CHAP.vn.]  REVELATION.  891 

and  sin,  and  suffering  and  pain,  and  misunderstanding  and  cruel  suspicion,  and 
unkindness  and  weariness,  and  discouragement  and  hopelessness  exist.  How 
sad  it  all  is  I  How  dark  the  picture  is,  as  compared  with  the  glory  that  is 
revealed  by  the  other !  And  I  think  it  is  because  of  this  picture,  that  men  so 
often  ask  themselves,  Things  being  as  they  are,  how  is  it  possible  that  the  dead 
should  have  perfect  joy?  Now  St.  John  entered  into  that  mystery.  And  he  has 
not  pretended  that  their  joy  is  complete.  He  did  believe  that  their  life  was 
protected.  He  did  believe  that  they  were  being  satisfied  day  by  day,  because  they 
were  following  the  Lamb.  But  he  adds,  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  off 
their  faces."  Tears !  Yes,  tears  in  that  glorious  life — tears  must  be  there,  because 
of  the  incompleteness  of  human  Ufe.  It  is  inevitable  that  they  should  sorrow.  It 
is  no  less  inevitable  that  their  sorrow  should  be  comforted  of  God.  Only  standing 
tefore  the  throne  of  God  there  comes  the  eternal  comfort  that  must  always  come 
with  the  remembrance  of  power  and  wisdom  and  goodness.  And  so  their  tears  are 
wiped  away.  It  is  not  a  life  without  sorrow.  It  is  a  life  comforted  of  God.  And 
what  is  their  word  to  us  ?  It  is — Follow  the  Lamb.  Strive  to  have  the  spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ.  For  they  that  have  that  spirit  have  now  the  foretaste  of  the  life  of  the 
dead.  Follow  the  Lamb,  for  in  following  Him  and  striving  to  have  His  spirit  there 
comes  the  satisfaction  that  the  soul  can  find  in  no  other  way  ;  and  all  the  joy  and 
beauty  and  glory  of  life  is  found  to  have  its  interpretation  and  its  fuU  realisation 
in  the  beauty  of  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Leighton  Parks,  D.D.)  The  Lamb 
.  .  .  shall  feed  them. — The  eternal  folding  of  the  flock  : — L  The  Shepherd.  It  is 
evidently  the  vision  of  a  pastoral  scene  which  is  now  in  the  eye  of  the  Apostle  of 
Patmos.  1.  The  description  implies  that  there  will  be  a  continual  remembrance 
on  the  part  of  the  ransomed  of  the  death  and  sufferings  of  their  Shepherd.  A 
Lamb  slain  I  Strange  symbol,  in  the  place  where  suffering  never  enters,  and  death 
is  unknown  I  2.  A  second  truth  we  may  gather  from  this  figure  of  the  Lamb 
leading  the  ransomed  in  the  heavenly  world  is,  the  perpetuity  of  Christ's  exalted 
human  nature.  It  is  not  as  a  kingly  Shepherd  He  leads,  but  as  one  of  the  flock 
Himself — wearing  their  nature.  He  is,  and  ever  will  be  "  that  same  Jesus," 
unchanged  and  unchangeable.  II.  Let  us  pass  now  from  the  glorified  Leader  to 
the  glorified  flock.  1.  All  the  joys  of  the  ransomed  flock  will  be  associated  with 
the  love  and  companionship  of  their  Shepherd.  He  feeds — He  leads — He  wipes 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes ;  and  in  a  previous  verse  (15),  under  a  different 
figure,  it  is  said,  *'  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them."  Heaven 
would  be  no  heaven  without  Jesus.  "  Leading  "  them,  "  feeding  "  them, — wiping  the 
very  tear-drops  from  their  eyes.  What  figurative  language  could  express  more  intimate 
fellowship  and  communion  !  The  fellowship  of  the  believer  and  his  Saviour  on  earth 
— alas !  how  fitful,  intermittent,  transient !  "In  Thy  presence  there  is  fulness  of  joy." 
2.  This  description  would  seem  to  denote  an  infinite  progression  in  the  joys  and  felici- 
ties of  the  ransomed  flock.  The  Shepherd  is  seen  leading  them  from  pasture  to  pas- 
ture, from  fountain  to  fountain,  higher  and  yet  higher  up  the  hills  of  God.  The 
heavenly  pilgrim  will  be  attaining  ever  new  views  of  God — new  unfoldings,  and 
revelations 'of  the  Divine  purposes — new  motives  for  the  ceaseless  activities  of  his 
holy  being.  Heaven  wUl  thus,  in  the  language  of  the  old  divines,  be  "  a  rest 
without  a  rest."  "  They  rest."  "They  rest  not."  3.  The  figurative  language  of 
the  evangelist  further  indicates  that  there  will  be  an  unfolding  of  the  Shepherd's 
wisdom  and  faithfulness  in  His  earthly  dispensations.  God  is  represented  as 
wiping  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes.  As  if,  when  they  entered  glory,  some  linger- 
ing tears  were  still  there.  As  if  the  eye  had  not  recovered  from  the  night  of  earthly 
weeping.  As  in  a  forest,  after  a  drenching  thunder-shower,  every  bough,  and  blade, 
and  leaf  is  dripping  with  rain ;  for  a  considerable  time  after  the  sun  has  shone  out, 
and  the  sky  is  blue,  and  the  birds  of  the  grove  are  singing,  the  lingering  drops  gem 
the  branches  and  sprinkle  the  sward.  But  the  sun  is  up :  and  his  genial  rays  are 
drinking  up  the  moisture — nature's  tear-drops.  One  by  one  they  evaporate, 
slowly,  gradually  ;  and  the  refreshed  forest  rejoices,  and  basks  in  the  sun's  radiance. 
So  with  the  great  Sun  of  Deity  in  heaven.  One  by  one  earth's  remaining  tears 
vanish  before  the  radiance  of  that  Sun  of  Wisdom  and  Love.  4.  Yet  once  more, 
this  description  would  seem  to  indicate  that  there  will  be  a  variety  and  diversity  in 
the  joys  of  Heaven,  suited  to  the  various  capacities  and  tastes  of  the  redeemed.  It 
is  not  to  one  fountain  to  which  the  Lamb  is  said  to  lead  them ;  they  are  "  living 
fountains  of  waters."  Like  the  four-branched  river  in  the  first  earthly  Eden,  there 
will  be,  from  the  one  great  river  of  Deity,  streams  which  make  glad  the  city  of  God. 
The  pastures  will  be  different.      We  delight  to  think  of  the  flock  of  heaven— each 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

member  of  it  perfect  in  the  full  measure  of  its  own  bliss — but  each  under  the  Shep- 
herd's eye,  thus  following  the  pasture,  or  climbing  the  mountain-steep,  or  browsing 
by  the  streamlet,  it  most  loves.  And  yet  all  the  fold,  in  these  separate  and 
distinctive  ways,  combining  to  glorify  their  Shepherd-King.  {J.  R.  Macduff,  B.D.) 
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears. — No  more  tears: — The  principal  sources  of  the 
tears  shed  upon  earth  by  those  whose  character  resembles  that  of  the  multitude 
whom  John  beheld  may  be  reduced  under  the  four  following  heads :  I.  The  firmest 
spirit  is  hable  to  be  discomposed  by  the  consequences  op  that  intimate  connection 
WHICH  SUBSISTS  BETWEEN  THE  SOUL  AND  THE  BODY.  Life  is  oftcu  embittered  by  a 
constitutional  debility,  or  by  accidental  violence;  by  the  acute  pains  of  some 
diseases,  by  the  effects  of  those  exertions  and  indulgences  that  were  prompted  by 
health  and  vigour ;  and  by  the  growing  infirmities  of  years  of  that  dissolution  from 
which  nature  recoils.  But  they  who  are  before  the  throne  of  God  have  received,  in 
place  of  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle,  a  building  of  God.  II.  Independently 
of  bodily  distress,  we  abb  exposed  to  numbekless  sorrows  by  the  degree  in  which 
EiTEBNAii  OBJECTS  AFFECT  CUB  HAPPINESS.  Many  are  hardly  able  with  sweat  and 
toil  to  earn  that  measure  of  the  good  things  of  life  which  is  necessary  for  sub- 
sistence. Some  fail  in  every  scheme  which  they  form  to  better  their  fortunes :  at 
one  time,  the  visitation  of  heaven,  at  another,  the  imprudence,  the  treachery,  or  the 
malice  of  man,  snatches  from  them  the  fruit  of  their  labours.  But  when  the  great 
plan  of  the  Divine  government  with  regard  to  the  human  race  shall  be  accomplished, 
there  will  be  no  further  need  for  that  seemingly  unequal  dispensation,  which, 
although  the  source  of  many  tears,  is,  in  mercy  and  love,  employed  by  the  Father 
of  mankind,  to  administer  correction  to  their  vices,  to  afford  a  trial  and  a  display 
of  their  virtues,  and  to  carry  forward  purposes  too  important  and  too  remote  for 
their  apprehension.  The  sufferings  of  the  righteous  will  no  longer  form  part  of 
that  discipline  which  the  imperfection  of  human  nature  requires ;  nor  will  the 
unmerited  success  of  the  wicked  be  continued,  as  an  instrument  of  good  to  those  to 
whom  it  appears  to  bring  evil.  III.  A  third  source  from  which  the  tears  of  good 
men  flow  is  that  kind  affection  which  God,  who  is  love,  hath  planted  in  the 
HUMAN  breast.  Although  this  principle  be  the  solace  of  life,  although  it  create 
those  pleasing  attentions  and  toils  without  which  the  repetition  of  the  same  scenes 
would  become  wearisome,  and  the  labour  of  life  intolerable ;  yet,  in  the  mixed  state 
in  which  we  are  called  to  exercise  kind  affection,  it  multiplies  our  cares  and 
anxieties,  and  it  often  fills  our  hearts  with  anguish.  The  objects  of  our  affection 
are  not  allowed  to  remain  with  us  always,  and  there  is  no  time  when  we  hold  them 
secure.  The  living  sometimes  inflict  the  most  cruel  wounds  upon  an  affectionate 
heart.  But  the  tears  which  flow  from  the  distresses,  the  departure,  or  the  improper 
behaviour  of  others,  shall  be  wiped  away  from  the  eyes  of  those  who  are  before  the 
throne.  In  the  city  of  the  living  God  there  is  no  aflfliction  that  demands  the 
tribute  of  sympathy  from  those  who  are  unable  to  give  any  other  reHef;  no 
depraved  mind  that  proves  unworthy  of  the  affection  of  which  it  had  once  been  the 
object ;  no  painful  separation  of  kindred  spirits ;  the  people  are  all  righteous,  and 
the  pure  spiritual  joy  of  righteousness  and  benevolence  gladdens  the  whole  company 
of  the  redeemed.  IV.  If  the  servants  of  God  were  able  in  this  state  to  attain 
the  perfection  of  virtue,  they  might  bear  with  composure  bodily  distress,  the 
difficulties  of  their  outward  state,  but  the  best  of  the  children  of  men  are  bowed 

DOWN  UNDEB  THE  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  VAIN  THOUGHTS,  OP  IDLE  WORDS,  AND  OP  UNPROFIT- 
ABLE ACTIONS.  But  God  shall  wipe  away  the  tears  of  sin  from  the  eyes  of  those 
who,  knowing  this  bitterness,  do  indeed  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness ;  for 
the  day  is  coming  when  they  shall  be  faultless.  There  will  then  be  no  sophistry  to 
mislead  the  understanding,  no  false  appearance  of  good  to  excite  improper  desires, 
no  example  of  vice  to  allure  imitation;  there  will  then  be  no  remainder  of 
corruption  to  afflict  and  humble  the  spirit,  no  grovelling  appetite  to  war  against  the 
soul,  no  mean  passion  to  tarnish  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Conclusion :  1.  If  all 
tears  are  to  be  wiped  away  hereafter,  it  follows  that  religion  does  not  profess  to 
wipe  them  away  here.  2.  If  we  believe  that  the  time  is  coming  when  our  tears 
shall  be  wiped  away,  let  us  prize  the  gospel  of  Christ,  which  hath  given  us  this 
blessed  hope.  3.  This  description  of  the  happiness  of  heaven,  like  every  other 
which  the  Scriptures  contain,  reminds  us  of  the  necessity  of  a  virtuous  life.  (G.  Hill, 
B.D.)  The  viinistry  of  tears : — 1.  It  is  the  ministry  of  tears  to  keep  this  world 
from  being  too  attractive.  You  and  I  would  be  willing  to  take  a  lease  of  this  life 
for  a  hundred  million  years,  if  there  were  no  trouble.  After  a  man  has  had  a  good 
deal  of  trouble,  he  says,  "  Well,  I  am  ready  to  go.    If  there  is  a  house  somewhere 


CHAP,  vn.]  REVELATION.  393 

whose  roof  doesn't  leak,  I  would  like  to  live  there.  If  there  is  an  atmosphere  some- 
where that  does  not  distress  the  lungs,  I  would  like  to  breathe  it.  If  there  is  a 
society  somewhere  where  is  no  tittle-tattle,  I  would  like  to  live  there.  If  there  is  a 
home-circle  somewhere  where  I  can  find  my  lost  friends,  I  would  like  to  go  there." 
2.  It  is  the  ministry  of  trouble  to  make  us  feel  our  complete  dependence  upon  God. 
We  lay  out  great  plans,  and  we  like  to  execute  them.  It  looks  big.  God  comes  and 
takes  us  down.  As  Prometheus  was  assaulted  by  his  enemy,  when  the  lance  struck 
him  it  opened  a  great  swelling  that  had  threatened  his  death,  and  he  got  well.  So 
it  is  the  arrow  of  trouble  that  lets  out  great  swellings  of  pride.  We  never  feel  our 
dependence  upon  God  until  we  get  trouble.  We  do  not  know  our  own  weakness,  or 
God's  strength,  until  the  last  plank  breaks.  It  is  contemptible  in  us,  when  there  i& 
nothing  else  to  take  hold  of,  that  we  catch  hold  of  God  only.  3.  It  is  the  ministry 
of  tears  to  capacitate  us  for  the  office  of  sympathy.  The  priests  under  the  old 
dispensation  were  set  apart  by  having  water  sprinkled  on  their  hands,  feet,  and 
head ;  and  by  the  sprinkling  of  tears  people  are  now  set  apart  to  the  office  of  sympathy. 
Where  did  Paul  get  the  ink  with  which  to  write  his  comforting  Epistle  ?  Where  did 
David  get  the  ink  to  write  his  comforting  Psalms  ?  Where  did  John  get  the  ink  to 
write  his  comforting  Revelation  ?  They  got  it  out  of  their  own  tears.  When  a 
man  has  gone  through  the  curriculum,  and  has  taken  a  course  of  dungeons, 
and  imprisonments,  and  shipwrecks,  he  is  qualified  for  the  work  of  sympathy. 
{T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Heaven  tearless  : — In  heaven  there  are — I.  No  anxieties. 
In  that  world  there  is  **  no  more  curse."  There,  too,  sickly  bodies  will  never  be 
seen.  There  the  head  shall  languish  and  ache  no  more.  The  eyes  shall  no  longer 
refuse  to  see,  nor  the  ears  to  listen.  There  no  paralysis  cripples.  There  no  nerves 
tremble  and  are  afraid.  The  inhabitant  of  that  bright  city  shall  no  more  say,  "  I 
am  sick."  There  all  labour  and  anxiety  for  provision  for  yourselves  and  families 
will  be  ended.  II.  No  bereavements.  Our  Saviour  tells  you  that,  if  you  are 
amongst  "  the  children  of  the  resurrection,"  you  and  your  departed  relatives  who 
loved  Christ  shall  meet  again,  and  that  thenceforward  neither  they  nor  you  wiU 
"die  any  more."  There  are  no  graves  in  heaven.  III.  No  sin  in  others.  IV. 
No  sin  in  ourselves.     (C.  Clayton,  M.A.)        No  tears  in  heaven: — I.  Tears  are  to 

FILL   THE   EYES   OF   BELIEVERS   UNTIL  THEY  ENTER   THE   PROMISED   REST.      HoW  numcr- 

ous,  too,  are  the  tears  of  unbelief !  We  manufacture  troubles  for  ourselves  by 
anticipating  future  ills  which  may  never  come.  Tears  of  repentance,  we  cannot 
carry  thither  with  us.  Tears  for  Christ's  injured  honour.  These  are  holy  drops, 
but  they  are  all  unknown  in  heaven.  Tears  of  sympathy :  when  we  "  weep  with 
those  that  weep  "  we  do  well ;  these  are  never  to  be  restrained  this  side  the  Jordan. 
II.  Even  here  if  we  would  have  our  tears  wiped  away  we  cannot  do  better  than 
BEPAiE  to  our  God.  He  is  the  great  tear  wiper.  God  can  remove  every  vestige  of 
grief  from  the  hearts  of  His  people  by  granting  them  complete  resignation  to  His 
wUl.  Our  selfhood  is  the  root  of  our  sorrow.  He  can  also  take  away  our  tears  by 
constraining  our  minds  to  dwell  with  delight  upon  the  end  which  all  our  trials  are 
working  to  produce.  He  can  show  us  that  they  are  working  together  for  good. 
Moreover,  He  can  take  every  tear  from  our  eye  in  the  time  of  trial  by  shedding 
abroad  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  in  our  hearts  more  plentifully.  He  can  make  it 
clear  to  us  that  Christ  is  afflicted  in  our  affliction.  The  Lord  can  also  take  away 
all  present  sorrow  and  grief  from  us  by  providentially  removing  its  cause.  Provi- 
dence is  full  of  sweet  surprises  and  unexpected  turns.  Still,  the  surest  method  of 
getting  rid  of  present  tears,  is  communion  and  fellowship  with  God.    HE.  The 

REMOVAL  OF  ALL  TEARS  FROM  THE  BLESSED  ONES  ABOVE.   1.  All  OUtward  CaUSeS  Of 

grief  are  gone.  Poverty,  famine,  distress,  nakedness,  peril,  persecution,  slander,  aU 
these  shall  have  ceased.  2.  Again,  all  inward  evils  wUl  have  been  removed  by  the 
perfect  sanctification  wrought  in  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  No  evU  of  heart,  of 
unbelief  in  departing  from  the  living  God,  shall  vex  them  in  Paradise;  no 
suggestions  of  the  arch  enemy  shaU  be  met  and  assisted  by  the  uprisings  of  iniquity 
within.  3.  All  fear  of  change  also  has  been  for  ever  shut  out.  They  know  that 
they  are  eternally  secure.  Saints  on  earth  are  fearful  of  falling.  No  such  fears 
can  vex  the  blessed  ones  who  view  their  Father's  face.  4.  Why  should  they  weep, 
when  every  desire  is  gratified  ?    (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.) 


894  *     THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 


CHAPTER  Vm. 

Vkbs.  1-13.  The  seventh  seal . . .  sUence  in  heaven.— T/ie  silence  of  heaven  ;— 
1.  The  silence  of  meditation.  There  is  a  blessing,  which  we  know  not  yet,  in 
thought.  In  this  busy  human  life  it  is  hard  to  think.  **  The  world  is  too  much 
with  us."  It  drowns  the  "  stUl  small  voice  "  of  God.  But  in  heaven  thought  will  no 
more  be  disturbed.  There  will  be  no  unsolved  perplexities,  no  distracting  fancies. 
The  plan  of  Creation  and  Eedemption  will  be  unfolded.  The  discords  of  earth 
■wiU  be  resolved  in  the  celestial  harmony.  II.  The  silence  op  adoration.  When 
■we  see  God  as  He  is,  we  shall  praise  Him  as  we  ought.  The  cloud  which 
spreads  between  Him  and  us  shall  be  done  away.  We  shall  enter  into  that 
rapture  of  worship  which  finds  no  voice  in  words.  Our  soul  will  lose  itself  in 
the  infinite  bliss  of  communion  with  Him  who  is  its  Father  and  its  God.  IH.  The 
silence  of  fruition.  All  the  voices  of  earth  are  only  so  many  cryings  for  something 
that  is  not  of  earth,  but  of  heaven.  They  are  expressions  of  a  Divine  dissatisfaction 
with  the  limitations  of  our  human  life.  Is  there  not  something  that  we  all  desire 
and  cry  out  for — to  be  rich,  perhaps,  or  successful,  or  happy,  or  good  ?  And  wiU 
it  not  always  be  a  desire,  never  fulfilled  ?  Could  the  dearest  wish  of  our  heart 
be  granted  to-day,  another  wish,  still  dearer,  would  arise  to-morrow.  Every  new 
day  dawns  with  a  fresh  purity  upon  our  lives,  but  in  the  evening  it  is  stained 
with  failure  and  sin.  We  are  always  sighing  for  a  holiness  which  is  always 
unattained  and  unattainable.  Nay,  the  blessings  which  God  gives  us  do  not  last 
long.  Over  all  our  life  there  hangs  the  shadow  of  death.  We  are  always  dreading 
to  speak  that  saddest,  tenderest  word  on  earth,  '•  Farewell."  There  is  "  silence  in 
heaven,"  because  there  is  no  loss  nor  any  boding  fear  of  parting  still  to  come. 
They  who  live  in  the  Divine  Presence  are  sheltered  from  the  storms  of  time.  They  are 
safe  for  ever  and  ever.  [J.  E.  C.  Welldon,  M.A.)  Thirty  minutes  in  heaven : — I.  God 
AND  ALL  HEAVEN  THEN  HONOURED  SILENCE.  The  full  powcr  of  silcnce  many  of  us  have 
yet  to  learn.  We  are  told  that  when  Christ  was  arraigned  "  He  answered  not  a 
word."  That  silence  was  louder  than  any  thunder  that  ever  shook  the  world.  Ofttimes, 
when  we  are  assailed  and  misrepresented,  the  mightiest  thing  to  say  is  to  say 
nothing,  and  the  mightiest  thing  to  do  is  to  do  nothing.  11.  Heaven  must  be  an 
EVENTFUL  AND  ACTIVE  PLACE.  It  could  afford  Only  thirty  minutes  of  recess.  The 
celestial  programme  is  so  crowded  with  spectacle  that  it  can  afford  only  one  recess 
ih  all  eternity  and  that  for  a  short  space.  HI.  The  immortality  op  a  half-hour. 
Oh,  the  half -hours  I  They  decide  everything.  I  am  not  asking  what  you  wiU  do  with 
the  years  or  months  or  days  of  your  liie,  but  what  of  the  half -hours.  Tell  me  the 
history  of  your  half -hours,  and  I  will  tell  you  the  story  of  your  whole  life  on  earth 
and  the  story  of  your  whole  life  in  eternity.  Look  out  for  the  fragments  of  time. 
They  are  pieces  of  eternity.  IV.  My  text  suggests  a  way  op  studying  heaven 
BO  THAT  we  can  BETTER  UNDERSTAND  IT.  The  word  "  ctemity  "  that  we  handle  so 
much  is  an  immeasurable  word.  Now,  we  have  something  that  we  can  come  nearer 
to  grasping,  and  it  is  a  quiet  heaven.  When  we  discourse  about  the  multitudes  of 
heaven,  it  must  be  almost  a  nervous  shock  to  those  who  have  all  their  lives  been 
crowded  by  many  people,  and  who  want  a  quiet  heaven.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Silence  in  heaven  : — ^Are  such  seasons  of  quietude — of  calm  and  holy  anticipation 
— needful  to  be  observed  there — and  shall  we  wonder  that  they  are  appointed  unto 
ns  here  ?  You  will  observe  that  to  almost  all  things  there  are  these  parentheses. 
Nature  very  seldom  does  her  work  without  a  cessation,  where  all  seems  lost  and 
dead.  A  winter  always  lies  between  the  autumn  sowing  and  the  spring-time 
shooting.  There  are  very  few  providences  which  happen  to  man  without  delays, 
which  seem  as  if  they  had  broken  their  courses.  Promises  seem  very  slow  of  foot 
in  their  travel.  And  it  is  generally  long  to  our  feelings — after  the  prayer  has  gone 
up — before  the  answer  falls.  Peace  does  not  always  come  quickly — even  to  the 
strongest  faith.  And  grace  does  not  succeed  to  grace — nor  to  joy — in  one  unbroken 
series.  Life  is  full  of  pause.  And  these  prefaces  of  God's  works — these  introduc- 
tions— these  heraldings  of  the  great  approaches — these  subduings  of  soul — these 
times  to  make  ready :  they  are  only  the  reflections  of  that  which  St.  John  saw 

Eassing  within  the  veil :  "  There  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space  of  half  an 
our."  Let  us  cultivate  the  heavenly  power  of  "silence."  Let  us  pray  for  the 
angelic  gift  of  •'  sUence."  It  is  what  we  all  want.  There  are  many  voices — in 
continuous  stream — speaking  in  the  world  ;  some  from  within,  some  from 
without ;  voices   in  the  sublime  and  in  the  lofty  things  around  us ;  voices  in 


CHAP.  VIII.]  REVELATION,  395 

very  common  things,  and  every  little  passing  event ;  but  you  do  not  hear 
them.  Why?  There  is  not  "silence"  enough  in  the  breast.  Be  more  still.  Listen 
for  the  whispers  of  God,  and  see  whether  earth,  and  heaven,  and  your  own 
heart  also,  do  not  talk  sweetly  to  you  all  the  day,  and  all  the  night,  about 
spiritual  things  I  I  advise  every  one — who  wishes  to  be  a  true  worshipper, 
and  to  improve  his  communion  with  God — to  exercise  complete  "silence."  The 
spiritual  life  would  often  be  much  the  better  for  more  of  a  devout  "silence." 
May  it  not  be  that  there  is,  sometimes,  more  filial  love  and  confidence  in  the 
prayer  that  does  not  speak,  and  cannot  speak,  than  in  any  oral  prayer  ?  And 
there  are  some  seasons  which  specially  invite  the  piety  of  "silence."  Such  a 
time  is  those  early  days  of  deep  sorrow:  "I  was  as  a  dumb  man  that  openeth 
not  his  mouth."  Such  a  time  is  the  waiting,  before  we  begin  some  work  that 
God  has  given  us  to  do  for  Him — like  the  wilderness  to  Moses,  or  Elijah  in  Horeb. 
Such  a  time  is  the  moment  spent  with  God  before  we  make  an  answer.  Such  a 
time  is  the  few  minutes  before  prayer  ;  or  before  a  service  here  ;  or  before  the  Holy 
Communion.  Such  a  time  may  be  at  the  gates  of  glory.  For  it  is  a  pleasant 
thing  to  pass  the  threshold  of  eternity  "  silently."  Does  not  God — for  this  very 
reason — make  His  children  go  through — one  after  another — alone?  {J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  Soul-silence  : — I.  Soul-silence  often  follows  great  excitement. 
From  the  storms  of  remorse,  secular  anxieties,  and  social  bereavements,  the  soul 
of  the  genuinely  Christly  arises  into  a  "  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding," 
n.  Soul-silence  is  often  found  absorbing  worship.  1.  The  prayers  of  saints  on 
earth  are  of  great  practical  interest  in  the  spiritual  universe.  (1)  They  are  offerings 
that  are  acceptable  to  its  Supreme  Kuler.  (2)  In  rendering  them  acceptable  to 
God,  His  highest  spiritual  ministers  are  deeply  engaged.  2.  The  prayers  of 
saints  on  earth  exert  an  influence  on  the  things  of  time.  HI.  Soul-silence  often 
springs  from  high  expectancy.  What  wonderful  things  are  before  us  aU  !  Were 
we  earnestly  waiting  for  the  "manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,"  waiting  the 
advent  of  Him  who  is  to  wind  up  the  affairs  of  the  world,  how  silent  should  we  be  ! 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Silence  : — I.  The  silence  of  suppression.  "  While  I  kept 
silence,"  David  says ;  that  is,  while  I  suppressed  my  sense  of  sin,  and  sought  to 
check  and  coerce  the  tide  of  free  confession.  This  is  the  silence  of  our  fallen 
nature ;  our  abuse  of  God's  gift,  bestowed  upon  us  for  a  very  different  end.  If  any 
of  us  are  thus  silent  to  God,  let  not  night  close  upon  us  without  breaking  that 
silence:  if  conscience  accuses  us  of  sin,  let  it  be  heard  while  it  may:  if  any 
iniquity  of  ours  is  separating  between  us  and  God,  bring  it  to  Him,  and  spare  it 
not,  that  it  may  be  forgiven  for  Christ's  sake,  and  its  chain  removed  from  us  by 
His  Holy  Spirit.  IE.  The  silence  of  conviction.  First  there  has  been  that  sullen 
silence  of  which  we  have  spoken;  the  heart  locked  up,  and  refusing  to  empty 
itself  of  its  secret.  Then,  many  times,  the  first  silence  has  been  broken  by 
prevarications,  excuses,  and  self -justifications,  going  perhaps  even  to  the  length  of 
direct  falsehood.  Then,  in  process  of  time,  by  patient  hearing  and  inquiry,  these 
also  have  been  broken  down :  the  false  tongue  has  been  confuted  by  the  force  of 
truth,  and  every  refuge  of  lies  has  at  length  been  swept  away.  When  this  is  so, 
then  at  last  there  is  silence  ;  refreshing  by  comparison,  and,  in  this  life,  certainly 
in  young  life,  hopeful ;  till  it  comes,  there  is  no  hope,  because  the  soul  is  still 
trying  to  say  Peace  to  itself  fallaciously.  But  now  there  is  silence :  now  may 
punishment  try  its  remedial  power,  being  accompanied,  as  it  ever  ought  to  be,  with 
a  fuU  forgiveness.  Now,  too,  may  the  sinner,  humbled  in  himself,  before  others, 
and  before  God,  listen  with  livelier  interest  to  the  assurance  of  God's  forgiveness,  to 
the  comfort  of  the  blood  of  sprinkling  which  speaks  not  to  reproach  but  to  console. 
m.  The  silence  of  preparation.  Every  real,  certainly  every  great,  work  of  man 
is  prefaced  by  a  long  silence,  during  which  the  mind  is  concentrated  upon  the 
object,  and  possessing  itself  with  that  which  is  afterwards  to  be  produced.  What 
is  all  study  but  the  preUminary  to  some  work,  or  else  to  one's  life's  work  ?  It  is 
not  in  man  to  be  capable  of  always  giving  out,  without  long  processes  of  taking  in. 
This  is  the  secret  of  so  many  barren  and  unfruitful  ministries,  that  men  are  trying 
to  dispense  with  silence :  they  are  altogether  in  public,  never  in  solitude  :  they  are 
counting  their  exertions,  instead  of  weighing  them,  satisfied  if  they  are  always 
labouring,  without  forcing  themselves  to  prepare  for  labour  by  silent  study,  by 
silent  meditation,  by  silent  prayer.  IV.  The  silence  of  endurance  ;  that  of  him 
who  with  a  noble  self-restraint  refuses  to  avail  himself  even  of  a  plea  which  might 
avail  for  his  deliverance.  He  is  following  the  example  of  One  who  Himself  in  the 
very  crisis  of  His  earthly  fate  exhibited  in  its  fullest  glory  the  dignity  and  the- 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

majesty  of  silence.  V.  The  silence  of  disapprobation;  that  silence  by  which, 
perhaps  most  effectively  of  all,  whether  in  the  society  of  the  young  or  of  the  old,  a 
Christian  enters  his  protest  against  wrong,  and  acts  as  a  witness  for  the  truth. 
Who  has  not  seen  the  effect  of  silence,  of  a  Christian,  a  consistent  silence,  upon 
uncharitable  or  wicked  conversation  ?  Before  the  presence  of  disapprobation, 
however  unobtrusive,  evil  soon  shrinks,  cowers,  and  withdraws  itself.  "VI.  The 
SILENCE  OF  SELF-RESTBAiNT,  general  and  habitual,  or  else  special  and  particular. 
VII.  The  SILENCE  of  sorrow,  and  op  sympathy  with  SORROW.  1.  Grief  may  forget 
itself  (as  it  is  called)  for  the  moment  in  society,  and  sorrow  for  sin  may  spend  itself 
— alas !  it  often  does — in  fruitless  and  only  half-explicit  confessions  and  lamenta- 
tions to  man  :  but  these  are  dangerous  as  well  as  vain  remedies.  In  either  case,  be 
silent ;  only  add  the  words,  silent  before  God.  Let  Him  hear  aU  from  you,  and, 
to  speak  generally,  none  else.  2.  I  spoke,  too,  of  the  silence  of  sympathy.  Who 
has  not  suffered  from  the  officiousness  of  a  talking  sympathy?    VIII.  The  silence 

OP   AWE,  the   silence    OF   MEDITATION,  THE   SILENCE    OF  PRAYER,  YES,  THE    SILENCE   OP 

PRAISE.  IX.  The  silence  of  death.  The  silence  of  death  may  reign  around  the 
bed  from  which  a  living  soul  has  departed  and  on  which  a  dead  body  lies  alone.  But 
it  reigned  first  in  the  departing  soul  itself.  At  what  particular  point  in  the  illness 
isolation  began,  and  the  presence  of  friends  was  no  longer  felt  in  the  dying,  varies 
no  doubt  with  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and  certainly  can  by  none  be  defined :  but 
well  may  it  be  seen  that  after  a  certain  point  silence  and  solitude  have  taken 
possession,  that  there  is,  to  all  intents,  an  abstraction  from  things  around,  and  an 
absorption  in  things  within.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Silence  : — What  is  silence  ? 
Not  the  absence,  the  negation  of  speech,  but  the  pause,  the  suspension  of  speech. 
Speech  is,  we  all  admit,  one  of  God's  choicest  gifts  to  man,  for  the  employment 
of  which  man  is  specially  and  awfully  responsible.  Must  not  something  of  the 
like  sacredness  and  responsibility  belong  to  that  correlative  power — the  power  of 
silence  ?  As  if  to  impress  this  truth  upon  our  minds.  Scripture  invests  silence  with 
circumstances  of  peculiar  interest  and  awe.  Thus,  when  Solomon  dedicated  the 
Temple  to  Jehovah,  after  that  the  priests  had  arranged  all  the  sacred  furniture,  and 
completed  the  solemn  service  of  consecration,  there  was  silence,  and  during  that 
silence  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  in  the  form  of  a  cloud,  so  filled  the  whole  building 
that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  by  reason  of  the  cloud.  Thus,  again, 
in  the  text,  when  the  angel  "  had  opened  the  seventh  seal,  there  was  silence  in 
heaven  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour."  Very  wonderful  and  mysterious  is  this 
instance  of  sUence.  It  was  as  though,  upon  the  opening  of  the  mystic  seal,  events 
so  strange  and  amazing  were  to  follow  throughout  the  universe,  that  the  very  hosts 
of  heaven  were  compelled  to  suspend  their  worship  and  adoration  in  order  to 
behold  and  listen !  Now,  the  first  sort  of  silence  to  which  I  would  call  your 
attention  is  the  silence  of  worship,  of  awe,  and  reverence.  "  The  Lord  is  in  His 
holy  temple ;  let  aU  the  earth  keep  silence  before  Him."  Such  is  the  canon  for 
worship  laid  down  by  Habakkuk ;  and  it  is  a  canon  as  much  binding  upon  us  as 
upon  those  to  whom  it  was  originally  addressed.  When  we  come  up  to  the  house 
of  prayer,  there  to  meet  Christ  upon  the  mercy-seat — there  to  hear  His  voice 
speaking  to  us  in  the  read  and  spoken  Word — there  to  receive  Him  into  our  very 
souls  in  the  Sacrament  of  His  broken  Body  and  shed  Blood — we  are  bound  to 
observe  the  silence  of  awe  and  reverence.  Except  when  we  open  our  lips  to  join 
in  prayer  and  praise  to  God,  our  attitude  within  these  hallowed  walls  should  be 
that  of  silence,  of  those  who  are  impressed  with  the  sanctity  of  the  place,  and  who 
know  and  feel  that  the  Almighty  God  is  indeed  in  their  midst.  Yes  ;  and  it  would 
be  well,  could  we  put  more  of  this  holy  silence  into  our  religious  acts.  Our  religion 
shares  too  much  in  the  faults  of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  It  is  too  public,  too 
outspoken,  conducted  too  much  as  a  business ;  and  so  the  inner  and  contempla- 
tive element  is  too  much  lost  sight  of.  The  silence  of  self-examination,  the  silence 
of  the  heart's  unsyllabled  supplication,  the  sUence  of  meditation  on  the  mysteries 
of  redeeming  love — these  are  forms  of  silence  which  every  one  must  observe 
often  who  would  have  the  flame  of  spiritual  life  to  burn  bright  and  clear  in  his 
soul.  Then,  again,  there  is  the  silence  of  preparation.  Every  great  work  that 
has  ever  been  achieved  has  been  preceded  by  this — the  doer  making  himself  ready, 
by  thought  and  study,  for  action.  Every  great  achievement,  whether  in  the  moral 
or  the  intellectual  world,  has  been  in  a  sense  like  Solomon's  temple — it  has  risen 
noiselessly,  silently,  without  sound  of  axe  or  hammer.  Therefore  is  that  great 
primary  act  in  religion — the  conviction  of  sin — invariably  preceded  by  deep  and 
solemn  silence,  while  the  sinner  stands  before  God  self-accused  and  self-condemned. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  REVELATION.  397 

Therefore,  also,  is  silence  ever  present  at  all  the  more  solemn  passages  of  our  life. 
Sorrow — real,  genuine  sorrow — is  ever  silent.  A  cry — a  tear — what  relief  would 
these  be ;  but  they  must  not  intrude  into  the  sacred  ground  of  sorrow,  the  sorrow 
of  the  just — bereaved  widow  or  orphan.  And  so,  too,  sympathy  with  sorrow  is  ever 
silent.  Idle  words,  or  still  idler  tears — these  are  for  false  comforters,  like  those 
who  troubled  the  patriarch  Job ;  the  true  sympathy  is  the  sympathy  of  a  look — 
of  the  presence  of  silence,  not  of  uttered  consolation.  And  now  think  of  that 
last  silence — a  silence  that  we  must  all  experience,  and  for  which,  by  silence,  we 
must  prepare  now — the  silence  of  death.  What  exactly  the  sUence  of  death  is,  none 
but  the  dying  can  know.  May  we  have  known  what  it  was,  day  by  day,  to  be 
many  times  alone  with  that  God  who  must  then  be  alone  with  us,  to  judge  or  else 
to  save.  {Charles  H.  Collier,  M.A.)  Silence  in  heaven  : — Whatever  judgments 
come  down  upon  the  region  below,  they  are  seen  by  the  apostle  to  be  the  conse- 
quences of  activities  in  the  region  above.  No  stroke  falls  on  earth  that  is  not 
directed  in  heaven.  The  two  worlds  move  in  concert.  The  time-accomplishmenta 
of  one  world  correspond  to  the  time-appointments  of  another.  We  have  set  before 
us,  in  unmistakable  symbolism,  this  truth — That  in  the  developments  of  God's 
plans  in  providence,  there  are  times  of  comparative  quietude,  during  which  it 
seems  as  if  the  progress  of  things  was  stayed  awhile.  I.  What  is  intended  when 
WE  SPEAK  OF  PROGBESS  BEING  APPARENTLY  STAYED?  There  are  in  the  Word  of  God 
great  promises  and  prophecies  which  open  up  a  glorious  vision  for  the  future  days. 
There  have  been  also  great  events  which  have  excited  in  the  Church  of  God  the 
strongest  hopes,  and  which  ever  and  anon  form  a  restful  background.  To  such 
periods  there  succeed  long  years  in  which  either  no  appreciable  advance  is  made 
towards  the  inbringing  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth ;  or  if  in  one 
direction  some  progress  appears,  in  another  the  cause  of  righteousness  seems 
checked  afresh  by  new  developments  of  error,  folly,  and  sin.  The  prophets  of  God 
are  crying,  "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."  They  long  for  some  manifestation 
of  Divine  power  to  startle  man.  But  no.  Man  goes  on  sinning.  And  our  God 
seems  a  God  that  "does  nothing"  (Carlyle).  The  thunder  is  rolled  up.  The 
lightning  is  sheathed.  There  is  a  prolonged  lull.  There  is  "  silence  in  heaven." 
The  sceptic  makes  use  of  the  quietude  to  ask,  *'  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?  " 
The  careless  one  settles  down  at  his  ease,  and  cries,  "The  vision  that  he  seeth  is 
for  many  days  to  come."  Hollow  professors  desert  in  crowds,  and  go  over  to  the 
ranks  of  the  enemy.  And  still — still  there  is  "  silence  in  heaven."  No  voice  is 
heard  from  the  invisible  realms  to  break  in  upon  the  steady  course  of  this  earth's 
affairs,  or  to  arouse  and  convict  a  slumbering  world !  II.  What  does  this  silence 
MEAN?  What  does  it  mean?  1.  Negatively.  (1)  It  does  not  mean  that  this 
world  of  ours  is  cut  adrift  in  space,  or  that  the  human  famUy  are  left  fatherless 
and  lone.  (2)  Nor  does  it  mean  that  time  is  being  lost  in  the  development  of  the 
plans  of  God.  Catastrophes  are  not  the  only  means  of  progress.  (3)  Nor  does  it 
imply  that  God  is  indifferent  to  the  sin  which  He  is  ever  witnessing.  "  The  Lord 
is  not  slack,"  &c.  (4)  Nor  does  it  imply  that  God  is  working  on  any  other  plan 
than  that  which  He  has  laid  down  in  the  book.  (5)  Nor  does  the  silence  mean  that 
God  will  ultimately  let  sinners  escape  with  impunity  (Rom.  ii.  3,  4).  2.  Positively. 
(1)  We  are  not  to  expect  startling  providences  at  every  turn  of  life.  (2)  We  are  to 
be  guided  more  by  what  God  says  than  by  what  we  see  before  our  eyes.  The  book 
gives  principles  which  are  eternal.  (3)  There  are  other  sides  to,  and  other  forms  of, 
God's  working  than  those  which  startle  and  alarm.  (4)  By  the  silence  of  heaven 
God  would  test  His  people's  faith,  and  quicken  them  to  more  fervent  prayer. 
(5)  God  would  thus  teach  us  to  study  principles  rather  than  to  gaze  on  incident. 
III.  What  should  this  silence  teach  us  ?  and  what  effect  upon  us  should  / 
IT  have  ?  1.  Let  us  learn  anew  to  exercise  faith  in  the  spiritual  power  which  God 
wields  by  His  Spirit,  rather  than  in  the  material  energy  which  shakes  a  globe. 
2.  Let  us  use  heaven's  time  of  keeping  silence  as  a  time  for  breaking  ours  (Isa.  Ixii. 
1,  6,  7).  3.  Let  the  ungodly  make  use  of  the  space  given  for  repentance,  by  turning 
to  the  Lord  with  full  purpose  of  heart.  4.  Let  us  lay  to  heart  the  certain  fact, 
that,  although  judgment  is  delayed,  come  it  will.     {C.  Clemance,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  The  seven  angels  .  .  .  seven  trumpets. — Trumpets : — 1.  These  seven 
angels  stand  waiting  before  the  throne,  and  till  they  be  called  to  the  service  that  is 
subjoined,  they  go  not :  teaching  men  who  are  so  called  to  wait  in  like  manner  for 
the  Lord's  vocation  of  them,  and  not  to  run  before-  they  be  sent.  2.  Those  who 
are  thus  called  have  trumpets  given  them :  even  so  whom  the  Lord  calls  and 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

sends  out  to  any  work,  He  furnishes  them  with  gifts  meet  for  the  work,  which 
neither  man  nor  angel  can  have  until  the  same  be  given  them  from  above.  3.  By 
trumpets  the  Lord  forewarns  the  world  of  the  judgments  to  come  upon  them,  before 
they  come,  that  they  might  repent :  wherein  the  great  mercy  of  God  is  seen  to 
the  very  wicked,  forewarning  them  to  flee  from  His  wrath  to  come.  4.  As  by 
the  trumpets  of  these  angels  He  forewarned  the  world,  even  so  does  He  yet  by  the 
ministry  of  those  who  are  called  angels,  and  by  the  trumpets  of  the  law  and  gospel 
(Isa.  Iviii.  1).  {Wm.  Guild,  D.D.)  The  trumpet-symbol: — I.  God  has  a  message 
FOB  us.  n.  The  manner  of  that  message.  Such  truths  as  these  are  suggested 
by  this  trumpet-symbol.  1.  How  urgent!  It  is  no  mere  matter  of  indifference, 
but  Uf  e  and  death  hang  upon  it.  2.  How  warlike  !  The  trumpet-note  was  emphati- 
cally the  music  of  war.  3.  How  terrible !  The  hosts  of  Midian  fled  in  dismay 
when  the  blast  of  Gideon's  trumpet  burst  on  their  startled  ears.  And  God's  Word 
is  terrible  to  those  who  know  Him  not.  The  Bible  is  a  dreadful  book  to  the 
impenitent  man  when  awakened,  as  one  day  he  will  be,  to  his  real  condition  before 
God.  4.  How  animating  to  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  God  !  God's  Word  is  full  of 
heart-cheering  truth  to  all  them  that  trust  in  Him.  5.  How  joyful  was  the  sound 
when  it  proclaimed,  as  so  often  the  trumpet  did,  the  advent  of  some  glad  festival, 
some  "  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  the  jubilee  especially  !  6.  How  irresistible  is 
the  trumpet-sound  I  The  lofty,  massive  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down  flat  before  the 
trumpet-blast.     {S.  Conway ,  B.A.) 

Vers.  3-5.  Much  incense. — The  all-fragrant  incense: — I.  The  angel  an©  the 
ALTAB.  It  is  the  altar  that  stood  in  the  holy  place  that  is  here  referred  to  in  the 
third  verse,  not  the  brazen  altar ;  it  is  the  golden  altar,  the  altar  of  incense ;  the 
altar  of  prayer  and  praise ;  the  altar  at  which  the  priests  ministered,  and  where 
also  blood  was  sprinkled.  In  what  respects  it  differed  from  the  mercy-seat  (as  the 
place  of  prayer)  does  not  quite  appear.  At  this  altar  all  who  are  God's  priests,  all 
His  royal  priesthood,  officiate.  Here  specially  they  stand,  as  pleaders  with  God,  as 
intercessors  on  behalf  of  His  own  or  against  His  enemies.  To  this  altar  the  angel 
comes  (not  one  of  the  seven),  and  here  he  takes  his  stand  for  a  special  purpose. 
II.  The  angel  and  the  censer.  He  comes  to  act  as  priest ;  a  priestly  messenger 
from  God.  III.  The  angel  and  the  incense.  It  is  no  empty  censer  that  he 
holds ;  it  is  not  for  show  that  he  waves  it.  Incense  is  there ;  incense  not  his,  but 
supplied  by  another,  though  by  whom  is  not  said.  "  There  was  given  him."  It  is 
much  incense,  or,  literally,  "  many  incenses,"  out  of  which  were  to  come  innumerable 
wreaths  of  fragrant  smoke.  IV.  The  angel  and  the  fere.  The  angel  having 
emptied  the  censer  of  its  incense,  fills  it  with  fire ;  the  pouring  out  of  the  one  from 
the  censer  being  the  signal  for  the  coming  in  of  the  other  into  that  vessel  from 
which  the  incense  had  been  poured  out.  1.  Prayer  remains  often  long  unanswered. 
The  reasons  for  the  long  delay  are  often  far  beyond  our  reach  ;  but  in  the  end  they 
will  be  found  infinitely  wise  and  gracious.  2.  Prayer  is  not  lost.  It  lies  on  "  the 
golden  altar  which  is  before  the  throne."  We  lay  each  petition  there,  as  we  say, 
"for  Christ's  sake."  3.  Prayer  will  be  answered.  Delay  will  only  add  to  the 
fulness  of  the  answer,  and  increase  our  joy  when  it  comes.  And  it  will  come.  He 
is  faithful  that  promised.  He  cannot  deny  Himself.  4.  The  answer  will  come  in 
connection  with  Christ's  surpassing  excellence.  His  fragrance  is  to  be  cast  upon 
these  long-lying  prayers,  that  seem  without  life  or  motion,  and  they  shall  arise. 
5.  Prayer  is  often  answered  in  ways  we  little  thought  of.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Our 
prayers  presented  in  heaven : — I.  The  employment  in  which  pious  men  are  stated 
TO  ENGAGE.  1.  Prayer  is  the  habit  by  which  pious  men  on  earth  are  always 
prominently  distinguished.  There  is  not  one  in  the  universe  of  our  intelligent  race 
who  is  not  under  obligation  to  pray.  While  men  in  the  alienation  of  unconverted 
nature  violate  the  obligation,  and  indulge  in  passions  and  in  habits  which  are 
utterly  incompatible  with  its  performance,  men  on  the  other  hand,  who  have  been 
the  subject  of  renovating  influence,  are,  from  the  moment  of  receiving  it,  imbued 
with  the  principles  and  with  the  instincts  of  prayer.  2.  Prayer  thus  distinguishing 
pious  men  is  directed  for  important  and  comprehensive  objects.  It  commonly  has 
respect  to  temporal  objects,  craving  the  communication  of  temporal  benefits.  But 
these  must  always  be  secondary,  and  should  be  desired  with  a  reservation  to  the 
Divine  wisdom  as  to  whether  it  will  be  for  our  well-being  or  for  our  disadvantage 
to  receive  them.  And  then  the  prayers  of  the  saints,  when  rightly  offered,  must 
not  merely  be  personal,  directed  to  their  own  welfare,  but  intercessory,  directed  to 
the  welfare  of  others.     3.  Prayer  thus  distinguishing  pious  men,  and  directed  for 


CHAP.  VIII.]  REVELATION.  399 

important  and  comprehensive  objects,  is  always  attended  by  peculiar  characteristics 
— humility ;  a  deep  conviction  of  insignificance  in  the  presence  of  a  God  so  great, 
and  of  impurity  in  the  presence  of  a  God  so  holy.  II.  The  manner  in  which  that 
EMPLOYMENT  IS  COMMENDED  BEFOBE  GoD.  An  angel  is  represented  as  coming  and 
standing  at  the  altar ;  "  and  there  was  given  unto  him  much  incense,"  &c. 
1.  Observe,  first,  the  person.  There  is  satisfactory  evidence  to  identify  the  Saviour 
with  the  angel  who  is  here  presented  to  us.  It  is  He  who  takes  the  prayers  of  the 
saints  and  presents  them  before  the  throne.  2.  Notice  the  station.  He  is  represented 
as  coming  and  standing  at  the  altar,  "having  a  golden  censer,"  and  the  altar, 
moreover,  is  described  as  ••  the  golden  altar."  The  Jewish  priest  could  not  stand 
by  the  altar  of  incense  unless  he  had  first  of  all  offered  an  atonement  for  sin  :  and 
when  there  is  a  vision  of  our  Lord  Jesus  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession 
standing  by  the  golden  altar,  the  necessary  assumption  is,  that  He  too  had  first 
offered  an  atonement  for  sin.  3.  Observe  the  act.  It  is  stated  that  there  was 
given  to  Him  much  incense,  that  He  might  offer  it,  with  the  prayers  of  all  saints, 
upon  the  golden  altar  which  was  before  the  throne.  Here,  then,  is  the  exercise  of 
the  Saviour's  office  of  Intercessor  in  identification  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints ; 
and  it  is  a  most  sublime  and  a  most  thrilling  thought,  that  there  is  no  prayer 
offered  in  humility,  faith,  and  earnestness,  for  objects  which  are  coincident  with  the 
Word  of  God,  but  what  is  borne  upward  and  presented  by  the  Saviour  before  the 
throne  of  the  heavenly  Father.  And  whether  prayer  be  offered  in  the  midnight 
darkness  or  in  the  noontide  light — whether  prayer  be  offered  in  the  secret  chamber 
or  in  the  public  assembly — whether  prayer  be  offered  in  the  mansion  or  in  the 
cottage,  in  the  prison-house  or  in  the  palace,  in  the  tropics  or  at  the  poles,  it  rises 
upward,  becomes  interwoven  and  identified  with  the  much  incense  of  the  Saviour's 
merits,  and  so  penetrates  into  the  very  holiest  of  all.    in.  The  result  in  which 

THE   EMPLOYMENT   80   COMMENDED   MUST   TERMINATE.       1.    The   SUCCCSS   of   the  praycrS 

of  the  saints  is  invariable.  The  success  of  the  prayers  presented  on  this  occasion 
is  indicated  by  the  expression  that  "  the  smoke  of  the  furnace  ascended  up  before 
God  out  of  the  angel's  hand."  The  ascent  of  the  prayers,  mingled  with  the  incense, 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  angel  before  God  is  intended  to  signify  its  acceptance.  May 
we  not  deduce  this  fact  from  the  Divine  nature  of  our  Eedeemer  ?  Is  not  His  will 
one  with  the  will  of  the  Father  ?  and  must  not  what  He  deigns  to  present  in  His 
condescension  as  Mediator  before  the  Father  be  accepted  by  the  Father  in  connection 
with  Himself  ?  Then,  again,  may  not  this  fact  be  deduced  from  the  value  of  the 
atonement  which  He  has  offered  upon  the  Cross?  Is  that  defective?  Is  that 
presented  with  doubt  and  uncertainty  in  the  presence-chamber  of  the  celestial 
palace  ?  Has  it  not  been  sealed  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  by  His 
ascension  into  heaven  and  His  enthronement  in  royalty  there  ?  Is  it  possible  for 
the  Intercessor  to  plead  His  atonement  in  vain  ?  Then,  again,  this  fact  may  also 
be  deduced  directly  from  the  express  declaration  of  the  Sacred  Writings.  2.  The 
success  of  the  prayers  of  the  saints  shall  be  manifest.  "  The  angel  took  the  censer  and 
filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar,  and  cast  it  into  the  earth :  and  there  were  voices,  and 
thunderings,  and  lightnings,  and  an  earthquake  " — physical  signs  and  convulsions 
pronouncing  "  Amen  "  to  the  one  delightful  truth.  {J.  Parsons.)  Christ's  work  of 
intercession  in  heaven: — I.  It  is  a  work  fob  the  performance  op  which  He  is 
Divinely  commissioned.  "Another  angel,"  it  is  said,  "came  and  stood  at  the 
altar."  Who  this  angel  was  we  are  not  indeed  expressly  told.  However,  the 
work  in  which  the  angel  who  came  and  stood  by  the  altar  engaged,  was  proper  only 
to  one  person — to  Him  who  is  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus.  He 
is  another  angel,  not  only  distinct  from  the  seven  before  mentioned  who  stood  before 
God,  but  different  from  them  in  kind,  having  obtained  by  inheritance  a  more 
excellent  name  than  they ;  yet  He  participates  in  their  name,  too,  as  being  like 
them  a  commissioned  minister  of  Jehovah.  He  glorified  not  Himself  to  be  made 
an  High  Priest,  but  was  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron.  Of  Him,  as  well  as  of  the 
Spirit,  it  may  be  said  that  He  maketh  intercession  for  the  saints,  according  to  the 
will  of  God.  His  mediation  in  all  its  parts  is  the  discharge  of  a  trust  committed 
to  Him  by  that  very  Being  against  whom  we  had  rebelled.    H.  It  is  a  work  for 

THE   performance   OF   WHICH   He   IS   AMPLY   FURNISHED,    HAVING   THE   GOLDEN    CENSER 

AND  MUCH  INCENSE  GIVEN  HiM  TO  OFFER.  When  it  is  Said  that  there  was  given  to 
Him  much  incense,  we  are  not  to  conceive  that  the  offering  was  not  of  that  which 
was  His  own.  In  accordance  with  the  symbolical  rite  to  which  the  vision  is 
accommodated,  it  might  seem  to  be  put  into  His  hands  by  another.  But  this  act 
can  have  reference  only  to  the  assignment  to  Him  of  His  office,  or  to  His  being 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

endowed  with  all  requisite  qualifications  for  its  discharge.  A  body  was  prepared 
for  Him.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  given  Him  not  by  measure.  The  incense  was 
thus  provided,  which  He  was,  as  it  were,  to  kindle  and  make  to  rise  to  God  in 
sweet  odour  by  His  voluntary  humiliation.     HI.  It  is  a  work  which  insures  the 

ACCEPTANCE     OF     THE    PRAYERS     THAT    ARE     OFFERED     IN    HiS     NAME,     AND    FOR     THE 

BLESSINGS  OF  His  SALVATION.  The  fiist  sincere  prayer  for  mercy  and  grace  which 
is  intrusted  to  this  great  High  Priest,  in  the  faith  that  He  will  bring  it  with 
acceptance  before  the  throne,  makes  the  distinction  between  the  sinner  who  has  no 
part  in  Him,  and  the  man  who,  by  giving  himself  to  Christ,  has  been  numbered 
with  His  saints.  He  doubtless  intercedes  for  many  who  yet  know  not  His  name, 
nor  have  trusted  in  His  grace  ;  and  it  is  owing  to  His  interposition  on  their  behalf 
that  they  are  not  cut  off  in  their  sins,  but  in  His  time  brought  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  and  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect.  There  is  also,  we  may  admit,  a  direct 
intercession  of  Christ  for  His  people,  asking  for  them  blessings  besides  or  beyond 
what  they  are  led  to  ask  for  themselves.  We  often  know  not  what  we  ought  to 
pray  for,  what  would  be  really  good  for  us ;  but  He  knows  what  things  we  have 
need  of  ;  and  whatever  is  necessary  to  their  complete  restoration  to  holiness  and 
happiness,  will  be  included  in  His  requests  for  those  who  have  an  interest  in  His 
mediation.  But  we  may  learn  from  the  representation  here  given,  that  that  media- 
tion IS  not  to  be  conducted  in  such  a  way  as  to  dispense  with  their  own  prayers. 
IV.  This  work  He  carries  on  in  behalf  of  all  His  saints.  No  prayer  that 
rises  from  earth  reaches  the  throne  of  grace  but  that  which  He  presents.  But  none 
that  is  offered  in  His  name  is  forgotten  or  omitted  in  the  ministrations  of  this  great 
High  Priest.  His  understanding  is  infinite.  There  is  room  in  His  heart  for  all 
that  will  come  to  seek  refuge  there ;  among  the  unnumbered  millions  that  may  look 
to  Him  for  pity  and  help,  and  commit  their  cause  to  Him,  there  is  not  one  for 
whom  He  will  not  interest  Himself  as  much  as  if  his  case  alone  engaged  His 
sympathy.  {J.  Henderson,  D.D.)  Practical  lessons  drawn  from  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  intercession: — I.  It  should  impress  us  with  a  deep  sense  of  the  evil 
OF  sin.  That  there  is  involved  in  every  act  of  it  such  daring  presumption,  and  base 
ingratitude,  and  brutish  folly,  and  foul  malignity,  as  could  not,  but  for  the  much 
incense  offered  with  them  by  the  exalted  High  Priest,  have  been  otherwise  than  as 
a  smoke  in  his  nostrils,  a  fire  burning  all  the  day,  rendering  our  prayers  and  services 
offensive  to  Him  who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  provoking  the  eyes  of  His  glory. 
II.  It  affords  us  the  richest  encouragement  in  prayer.  Are  you  only  willing 
to  come  to  God  by  Christ,  to  owe  all  the  blessings  you  need  to  His  mediation  with 
Him  whom  you  had  offended  ?  He  is  ready  to  intercede  for  you,  and  we  know  that 
"  Him  the  Father  heareth  always."  Often  has  the  voice  of  human  eloquence  been 
roused  in  behalf  of  the  wretched  in  vain.  It  has  pleaded  the  woes  and  wrongs  of 
the  oppressed,  to  hearts  so  hardened  in  selfishness  and  cruel  in  hate  as  to  be  caUous 
to  the  most  pathetic  appeals ;  but  the  pleadings  of  this  great  Advocate  are  never 
unsuccessful.  The  justice  and  the  mercy  of  God  unite  in  conceding  all  that  He 
asks.  III.  It  shows  us  how  vain  and  superstitious  it  is  to  trust  in  departed 
SAINTS  OR  in  angels  TO  INTERCEDE  FOR  US.  Whatever  may  be  our  speculations  or 
conjectures  as  to  the  acquaintance,  which  saints  in  glory,  or  our  departed  friends  in 
particular,  may  have  with  things  done  on  earth,  or  the  interest  they  may  yet  take  in 
our  affairs ;  however  fondly  we  may  dream  at  times  that  they  may  be  employed,  as 
we  are  told  angels  are,  in  some  ministrations  in  behalf  of  those  whom  they  have 
left  in  this  vale  of  tears,  let  us  feel  assured  that  we  need  no  other  advocate  with 
the  Father  in  His  holy  place  on  high  than  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  Upon  Him 
alone  let  us  depend,  to  Him  directly  let  us  go,  and  say,  in  opposition  to  those  who 
would  point  us  to  other  intercessors,  "  To  whom  else  should  we  go? — He  hath  the 
words  of  eternal  life."  IV.  The  faith  of  Christ's  intercession  should  con- 
tribute TO  render  us  decided  and  undaunted  in  confessing  His  name,  and  in 
doing  the  work  to  which  He  calls.  Surely  you  have  nothing  to  apprehend  of 
ultimate  loss  or  injury  in  the  service  of  this  exalted  Kedeemer !  For  though 
you  should  have  to  suffer  a  while  for  His  name's  sake,  or  after  His  example,  it  is 
that  when  His  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  also  may  be  glad  with  exceeding  joy. 
And  while  you  have  committed  to  Him  the  keeping  of  your  souls,  you  need  not 
fear  for  aught  that  may  be  coming  on  the  earth.  He  will  keep  you  from  the  hour 
of  temptation  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world.  Does  He  not  pray  for  this,  not 
that  you  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world  ere  you  have  fulfilled  the  course  allotted 
for  you,  but  that  you  should  be  kept  from  the  evil,  that  your  faith  may  not  fail, 
that  you  may  be  sanctified  through  the  truth  revealed  in  God's  Word,  and  so 


CHAP.  Till.]  REVELATION.  401 

fitted  to  dwell  with  Him  at  last  in  the  mansions  He  hath  gone  to  prepare  for  you 
in  His  Father's  house.  You  need  not  in  any  case  tremble  for  the  interests  of  His 
Church ;  amid  the  agitations  which  seem  to  threaten  the  overthrow  of  all  human 
institutions,  and  the  convulsions  which  shake  and  affright  the  nations,  these  are 
secure  under  the  protection  of  her  exalted  Head.  (Ibid.)  Christ's  incense 
perfuming  the  prayers  of  all  saints : — I.  All  the  saints  are  devout  and  prayino 
PERSONS.  This  is  plainly  intimated  in  the  text,  where  we  read  of  the  prayers  of  all 
saints.  It  is  an  essential  part  of  their  character  as  saints  to  be  so.  It  is  a  branch 
of  their  daily '  business  to  pray  to  God.  The  history  of  the  saints  shows  this. 
Ever  since  God  hath  had  a  people  in  the  world  they  have  been  described  as  men 
that  "  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  ;  as  "  the  generation  of  them  that  seek 
Him."  It  is  said  that  "  every  one  that  is  godly  seeketh  the  Lord."  The  lives  of 
good  men  in  later  ages  show  this.  They  all  practised  devotion  and  recommended 
it  to  others.  The  saints  esteem  it  highly  reasonable  in  itself,  that  as  dependent 
creatures  they  should  own  their  dependence  upon  God  ;  that,  as  needy  creatures, 
they  should  seek  a  supply  of  their  wants  from  Him  ;  that  as  sinful  creatures  they 
should  implore  His  mercy  ;  and  as  weak  creatures  should  beg  grace  to  help  in  time 
of  need.  II.  There  are  ilany  imperfections  attending  the  prayers  of  the 
SAINTS.  This  is  implied  in  the  text,  where  we  read  of  "much  incense"  being 
offered  with  them.  It  is  supposed  they  were  sincere  ;  else  they  could  not  be  the 
prayers  of  saints,  nor  would  incense  have  been  added  to  them.  But  the  addition  of 
the  incense  plainly  intimates  that  they  were  imperfect  and  polluted,  and  of  them- 
selves unfit  to  be  received  by  a  pure  and  holy  God.  III.  It  is  the  intercession 
OP  Christ  which  renders  the  prayers  of  saints  acceptable  to  God.  These 
Christians  prayed  themselves,  and  Christ,  having  the  golden  censer  full  of  incense, 
intimates  that  He  prayed  likewise,  offering  His  own  prayers  with  theirs  and  for 
them.  He  seconds  and  enforces  their  petitions.  He  intercedes  that  those  sinful 
defects  which  cleave  to  their  prayers  may  be  pardoned  and  excused,  and  their 
imperfect  services  accepted  of  God.  These  prayers  of  Christ  are  enforced  by  a  just, 
proper,  and  effectual  plea ;  even  His  own  merit.  His  perfect  righteousness  and 
obedience,  even  unto  death,  which  are  so  pleasing  to  God,  that,  on  that  account, 
He  grants  mercy  to  men.  His  intercession  is  founded  on  ..hat  He  hath  done  and 
suffered ;  so  that  He  hath  a  just  claim  to  be  heard,  asking  nothing  but  what  He 
hath  already  purchased  for  His  people,  and  God,  by  His  promise  and  covenant, 
stands  engaged  to  bestow.  Now  to  this  intercession  of  Christ  it  is  owing  that  the 
prayers  of  the  saints  are  acceptable  to  God.  Application :  1.  They  who  do  not 
make  a  serious  business  of  prayer  are  not  saints.  2.  The  intercession  of  Christ 
will  not  excuse  the  neglect  of  prayer,  or  the  allowed  defects  of  it.  3.  How  glorious 
and  how  amiable  doth  Christ  appear  as  an  intercessor !  4.  What  deep  humility 
becometh  the  greatest  saints.  5.  Let  us  fix  our  dependence  on  the  intercession  of 
Christ  for  the  acceptance  of  our  prayers.  {Job  Orton,  D.D.)  Fire  of  the  altar. 
Fire  from  the  altar : — Fire  is  the  great  consumer.  It  always  bespeaks  wrath,  torture, 
and  destruction  to  the  wicked.  It  is  the  common  figure  of  Divine  terribleness 
toward  the  guilty — one  of  the  great  agents  in  the  administrations  of  the  great 
day.  And  when  the  sublime  Priest-Angel  of  heaven  turns  His  fire-filled  censer 
on  the  earth,  we  have  come  to  the  day  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven,  in  the  which  all 
the  proud  and  ungodly  shall  be  as  stubble  to  the  devouring  flames  (Mai.  iv.  1). 
This  fire  is  taken  from  the  altar.  It  is  one  of  the  fearful  characteristics  of  God's 
gracious  operations,  that  they  heighten  the  damnation  of  the  disobedient  and  the 
unbelieving.  It  is  not  Adam's  guilt,  for  there  is  full  remedy  in  Christ  against  that. 
It  is  not  the  condemnation  in  which  the  gospel  finds  them,  for  it  comes  with  a  full 
and  everlasting  reprieve.  But  here  is  the  mischief — that  when  the  great  and  costly 
salvation  of  God  is  carried  to  them  they  despise  it  and  make  light  of  it,  and  go 
their  way  as  if  it  were  nonsense  or  nothing.  Out  of  the  very  altar  of  sacrifice,  there- 
fore, comes  their  damnation.  It  is  the  saving  word  refused,  which  is  a  savor  of 
death  unto  death  in  them  that  perish.  Perdition  is  simply  abused  or  perverted 
grace.  It  is  the  same  censer,  filled  with  the  same  ingredients,  only  turned  down- 
ward in  the  case  of  those  who  believe  not.     {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  And  the  third  part  of  the  trees  was  burnt  np.— Restricted  judg- 
ment : — In  wrath  the  Lord  ever  remembers  mercy.  In  the  sounding  of  four  of  the 
seven  angels  this  idea  is  most  prominent.  Afflictions  of  various  kinds  are  seen 
to  rest  upon  the  earth,  but  they  are  confined  in  each  case  to  one-third.  It  is  not  a 
final  overthrow,  nor  is  it  a  vision  of  destruction.    In  the  disturbance  of  the 

26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

material  world  is  portrayed  the  upheaving  in  the  spiritual.  The  judgments  are 
chastisements — a  part  suffers  for  the  good  of  the  whole.  The  eye  is  plucked  out  to 
save  the  whole  body.  Here  a  portion — a  third  part — suffers  that  the  whole  perish 
not.  These  restricted  judgments  or  chastisements  of  the  Lord  have  their  great  use. 
I.  In  awakening  the  attention  of  men  to  theib  spibituaij  condition.  Truly  a 
voice  as  of  a  trumpet.  11.  In  stimulating  to  repentance.  III.  In  the  pre- 
vention of  further  sinfulness.  IV.  These  chastisements  have  their  final  use  as 
disciplinary  processes  in  advancing  righteousness.  That  which  applies  to  the 
individual  life  applies  also  to  the  life  of  tribes  and  nations  of  men.  *  To  these  the 
present  passage  relates.  Judgments  on  "the  third  part"  are  designed  to  be 
corrective  and  admonitory  to  the  whole.     {R.  Green.) 

Vers.  10, 11.  There  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven. — Apostasy  : — 1.  By  the  fall  of 
this  star  from  heaven,  we  see  that  apostasy  from  the  truth  in  pastors  is  a  Lucif erian 
sin,  and  they  thereby  are  like  unto  him.  2.  Where  saving  grace  is  not,  all  other 
gifts  and  endowments  soever  will  never  avail  to  preserve  from  apostasy,  and  make 
one  to  persevere.  3.  As  there  are  no  personal  gifts,  so  there  is  no  place  or 
succession  that  is  personal  only  thereto,  that  can  privilege  from  apostasy;  for 
here  we  see  a  star  for  light,  and  in  heaven  for  place,  yet  to  fall  from  heaven. 
4.  We  see  it  is  not  small  stars,  but  a  great  star  that  falleth  from  heaven ;  whereby 
we  see  whom  Satan  most  assaulteth,  viz.,  those  that  are  in  primest  places  and  of 
most  excellent  gifts.  5.  From  shining  as  a  heavenly  star,  by  apostasy,  we  see 
this  star  turns  to  be  only  as  a  burning  earthly  lamp :  whereby  we  are  taught  what 
a  change  sin  and  apostasy  makes  from  the  better  to  the  worse,  as  in  this  star  from 
heaven  to  earth,  from  standing  to  falling,  and  from  shining  to  burning  only ;  by 
fiery  ambition  and  bitter  contention  like  wormwood,  hating  most  of  any  the 
professors  of  that  truth  which  formerly  they  held.  (Wm.  Guild,  D.D.)  Brilliant 
bitterness  : — Commentators  say  that  the  star  Wormwood  of  my  text  was  a  type  of 
Attila,  king  of  the  Huns.  He  was  so  called  because  he  was  brilliant  as  a  star, 
and,  like  wormwood,  he  embittered  everything  he  touched.  A  more  extraordinary 
character  history  does  not  furnish  than  this  man,  Attila,  the  king  of  the  Huns. 
The  story  goes  that  one  day  a  wounded  heifer  came  limping  along  through  the 
fields,  and  a  herdsman  followed  its  bloody  track  on  the  grass  to  see  where  the 
heifer  was  wounded,  and  went  on  back,  further  and  further,  until  he  came  to  a 
sword  fast  in  the  earth,  the  point  downward  as  though  it  had  dropped  from  the 
heavens,  and  against  the  edges  of  this  sword  the  heifer  had  been  cut.  The  herds- 
man pulled  up  that  sword  and  presented  it  to  Attila.  Attila  said  that  sword  must 
have  dropped  from  the  heavens  from  the  grasp  of  the  god  Mars,  and  its  being  given 
to  him  meant  that  Attila  should  conquer  and  govern  the  whole  earth.  Other 
mighty  men  have  been  delighted  at  being  called  liberators,  or  the  Merciful,  or  the 
Good,  but  Attila  called  himself,  and  demanded  that  others  call  him,  "  The  Scourge 
of  God."  The  Roman  Empire  conquered  the  world,  but  Attila  conquered  the 
Eoman  Empire.  He  was  right  in  calling  himself  a  scourge,  but  instead  of  being 
•*  the  Scourge  of  God,"  he  was  the  scourge  of  hell.  Because  of  his  brilliancy  and 
bitterness,  the  commentators  might  well  have  supposed  him  to  be  the  star  Worm- 
wood Oi  the  text.  Have  you  ever  thought  how  many  embittered  lives  there  are  all 
about  us,  misanthropic,  morbid,  acrid,  saturnine  ?  The  European  plant  from  which 
wormwood  is  extracted,  Artemisia  absinthium,  is  a  perennial  plant,  and  all  the  year 
round  it  is  ready  to  exude  its  oil.  And  in  many  human  lives  there  is  a  perennial 
distillation  of  acrid  experiences.  Yea,  there  are  some  whose  whole  work  is  to  shed 
a  baleful  iufluence  on  others.  There  are  Attilas  of  the  home,  Attilas  of  the  social 
circle,  Attilas  of  the  Church,  Attilas  of  the  State,  and  one-third  of  the  waters  of 
all  the  world,  if  not  two-thirds  of  the  waters,  are  poisoned  by  the  falling  of  the  star 
Wormwood.  It  is  not  complimentary  to  human  nature  that  most  men,  as  soon  as 
they  get  great  power,  become  overbearing.  The  more  power  men  have  the  better,  if 
their  power  be  used  for  good.  The  less  power  men  have  the  better,  if  they  use  it 
evil.  Some  of  you  are  morning  stars,  and  you  are  making  the  dawning  life  of  your 
children  bright  with  gracious  influences,  and  you  are  beaming  upon  all  the  opening 
enterprises  of  philanthropic  and  Christian  endeavour,  and  you  are  heralds  of  day. 
Keep  on  shining  with  encouragement  and  Christian  hope  1  Some  of  you  are 
evening  stars,  and  you  are  cheering  the  last  days  of  old  people.  But  are  any  of 
you  the  star  Wormwood  ?  Do  you  scold  and  growl  from  the  thrones  paternal  or 
maternal  ?  Are  your  children  everlastingly  pecked  at  ?  What  is  your  influence 
upon  the  neighbourhood,  the  town,  or  the  city  of  your  residence?  I  will  suppose  that 


CHAP.  IX.]  REVELATION.  403 

you  are  a  star  of  wit.     What  kind  of  rays  do  you  shoot  forth  ?    Do  you  use  that 

splendid  faculty  to  irradiate  the  world  or  to  rankle  it  ?    Are  your  powers  of 

mimicry  used  to  put  religion  in  contempt  ?    Is  it  a  bunch  of  nettlesome  invective  ? 

Is  it  fun  at  others'  misfortune  ?     Then  you  are  the  star  Wormwood.     Yours  is  the 

fun  of  a  rattlesnake  trying  how  well  it  can  sting.    But  I  will  change  this,  and 

suppose  you  are  a  star  of  worldly  prosperity.     Then  you  have  large  opportunity. 

You  can  encourage  that  artist  by  buying  his  picture.     You  can  improve  the  fields, 

the  stables,  the  highway  by  introducing  higher  style  of  fowl  and  horse  and  cow  and 

sheep.     You  can  endow  a  college.     You  can  build  a  church.     You  can  put  a 

missionary  of  Christ  on  that  foreign  shore.     But  suppose  you  grind  the  face  of  the 

poor.     Suppose  when  a  man's  wages  are  due  you  make  him  wait  for  them  because 

he  cannot  help  himself.     Suppose  by  your  manner  you  act  as  though  he  were 

nothing  and  you  were  everything.      Suppose    you    are    selfish    and  overbearing 

and  arrogant.     You  are  the  star  Wormwood,  and  you  have  embittered  one-third, 

if  not  three-thirds,  of  the  waters  that  roll  past  your  employes  and  operatives  and 

dependents  and  associates.    Are  we  embittering  the  domestic  or  social  or  political 

fountains,  or  are   we  like  Moses,  who,  when  the  Israelites    in  the  wilderness 

complained  that  the  waters  of  Lake  Marah  were  bitter  and  they  could  not  drink 

them,  their  leader  cut  off  the  branch  of  a  certain  tree  and  threw  that  branch  into 

the  water,  and  it  became  sweet  and  slaked  the  thirst  of  the  suffering  host  ?    Are 

we  with  a  branch  of  the  Tree  of  Life  sweetening  all  the  brackish  fountains  that  we 

can  touch  ?    What  is  true  of  individuals  is  true  of  nations.     God  sets  them  up  to 

revolve  as  stars,  but  they  may  fall  wormwood.    Witness  Thebes,  Tyre,  Nineveh, 

Babylon,  and  Imperial  Kome.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)        An  angel  .  .  .  8a3rinff 

Woe  ...   to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth. —  The  body  and  the  bird: — "And 

I  saw,  and  I  heard  an  eagle,  flying  in  mid  heaven,   .  .  .  Woe,  woe,  woe,  for 

them  that  dwell  on  the  earth!"    The  true  reading  of  the  text  is  given  in  the 

Kevised  Version.    It  was  not  "  an  angel  flying,"  but  a  solitary  eagle  or  vulture,  that 

St.  John  saw.     Hovering  high  overhead,  a  mere  speck  in  the  sky,  and  its  harsh  cry 

Bounding  as  if  it  uttered  over  and  over  again  the  ominous  words,  "Woe,  woe,  woe  !  " 

1.  This  eagle  has  often  been  seen.  It  has  long  hovered  over  and  at  last 
descended  upon :  1.  Corrupt  communities.  2.  Corrupt  men.  Many  imagine  that 
the  great  laws  of  God  will  be,  no  doubt,  fulfilled  amid  nations  and  Churches  and 
other  bodies  of  men,  but  they  will  not  take  note  of  individuals.  IE.  It  is  good 
THAT  IT  should  BE  SEEN.  In  the  physical  world,  if  there  were  no  scavengers,  no 
agents  whereby  what  is  corrupt  and  corrupting  could  be  rendered  harmless,  life 
could  not  go  on.  III.  Men  sometimes  think  they  see  it  when  they  do  not. 
Poor  Job — his  friends,  his  comforters,  would  have  it  that  his  dreadful  sufferings 
were  judgments  of  God  upon  him.  IV.  Men  often  fail  to  see  it  when  they 
might  and  should.  1.  The  bird  may  be  invisible.  It  may  be  so  far  up  in  the  sky, 
so  far  away,  that  our  limited  eyesight  cannot  travel  so  far,  it  is  out  of  our  range. 

2.  It  may  be  restrained.  God  is  "  long-suffering,  not  willing  that  any  should 
perish."  3.  It  may  have  already  descended,  and  be  doing  its  work,  and  you  not 
know  it.  4.  If  it  come  not  now,  it  will  fasten  on  him  the  moment  he  reaches 
the  next  world's  shore.  Ah,  yes  I  if  a  man  have  made  his  soul  carrion-like,  the 
eagle  of  judgment  will  find  him  sooner  or  later  in  trouble  ;  from  without  or  within, 
here  or  yonder — there  is  no  escape.  Eemember,  then :  (1)  They  are  fools  who  make 
a  mock  at  sin.  (2)  Turn  from  it,  and  pray  for  the  heart  to  love  and  dread  the  Lord, 
and  to  diligently  live  after  His  commandments.     {S.  Conway,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Yebs.  1-12.  I  sav  a  star  fall  flrom  heaven  unto  the  earth. — Moral  evil  in  the 
universe  : — I.  It  is  exposable  (ver.  1).  Moral  evil,  in  its  incipient  state,  so  stupefies 
the  faculties  and  blinds  the  conscience  that  the  subject  only  becomes  aware  of  it 
by  the  advent  of  a  messenger  from  heaven — an  angel  from  heaven  uncovers  it, 
makes  it  bare  to  the  soul.  II.  It  is  fathomless.  "  Bottomless  pit."  Who  can 
fathom  its — 1.  Origin.  2.  Issues.  IH.  It  is  burning.  "  A  great  furnace."  Like 
aU  fire,  it  exists  in  two  states — latent  or  active.  Where  it  becomes  active  it  is  con- 
Buming  and  transmuting :  it  consumes  the  good,  and  transmutes  its  embers  into 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

evil,  and  in  all  it  inflicts  agony  on  the  soul — the  agony  of  moral  regrets  for  the  past, 
and  terrible  forebodings  for  the  future.  IV.  It  is  obscuring.  1.  How  benighted 
men  are  on  the  eternal  question  of  right !  2.  How  blinded  men  are  to  the  eternal 
conditions  of  well-being!  V.  It  is  alarming  (ver.  3).  What  hellish  squadrons,  to 
terrify  and  destroy  the  soul,  issue  from  the  fathomless  abysses  of  moral  evil! 
Terrible  armies  come  in  the  memories  of  the  past  and  in  the  apprehensions  of  the 
mysterious  future.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  fallen  stars : — A  star  falling  from 
heaven  may  be  interpreted  as  something  bright  that  leaps  from  its  proper  place,  or 
may  be  used  as  the  symbol  of  many  things  that  are  out  of  their  true  position,  and 
as  the  type  of  many  persons  who  are  wandering,  or  who  have  wandered,  or  who  will 
wander  from  their  proper  locality.  It  stands  for  broken  plans,  broken  character, 
for  virtue  turned  upside  down,  and  for  a  world  fiUed  with  riot,  confusion,  and 
shame.  1.  As  we  study  history,  we  find,  in  each  age,  a  large  number  of  prominent 
men  who  for  a  long  season  gave  a  brilliant  light,  and  then  all  at  once  became 
eclipsed  by  their  sins,  being  struck  from  the  celestial  skies.  Is  there  any  sight 
more  sad  than  this?  It  is  opportunity  clipped,  virtue  smothered,  consummate 
grandeur  scorched,  and  a  posterity  robbed  of  examples  that  might  have  been 
splendidly  luminous  beyond  all  human  estimate.  Such  men  have  struck  a  blow  at 
humanity,  and  they  stand  unenvied,  in  the  niche  of  fame,  as  traitors  to  their  race, 
aliens  from  God,  and  bad  specimens  of  a  discrowned  morality ;  and  such  is  the 
penalty  of  a  high  position  misused,  of  a  great  trust  betrayed,  and  of  a  grand 
possibility  disgraced.  2.  Again,  great  cities  and  countries  that  have  become  extinct 
are  fallen  stars — Babylon,  Nineveh,  and  Tyre,  and  others  of  like  nature,  which  once 
led  the  world  in  beauty,  culture,  commerce,  and  force,  but  which  now  are  lost  in  the 
ashes  that  serve  as  their  mausoleum.  No  one  could  have  foreseen  their  fate, 
because  so  stately,  so  magnificent,  and  so  glorious  did  they  appear,  and  right  royal 
in  their  beauty.  3.  In  each  one's  personal  history  we  discover  that  bright  lumin- 
aries have  fallen  from  their  place ;  for  no  one  can  look  back  upon  a  past  life 
without  detecting  various  periods  when  awful  slips  were  made.  How  innocent  we 
once  were !  What  bright  dreams  of  goodness  flitted  athwart  the  brain,  crowned 
the  soul,  and  illuminated  a  possible  future  !  Ah  !  "  the  spirit  was  willing,  but  the 
flesh  was  weak."  We  meant  to  do  that  which  was  right,  but  temptation  came,  then 
we  turned  aside  to  the  evil  way ;  and  probably  there  is  not  a  person  in  the  world  at 
the  age  of  twenty-one  who  has  not  lost  somewhat  of  the  freshness  of  early  life,  and 
we  all  moan  over  some  good  thing  that  we  have  too  easily  let  go.  Are  we  as  truth- 
ful as  we  once  were  ?  as  honest  ?  as  pure  ?  Ah !  the  firmament  of  our  souls  has 
become  strangely  darkened,  and  many  of  the  brilliant  lights  that  once  studded  it 
appear  to  have  died  out.  Only  here  and  there  twinkles  one  little  star,  very  lonely, 
gad,  obscure.  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  us,  while  a  thick  vapour  has 
thrown  its  fearful  shroud  over  our  original  beauty.  Yet,  all  this  we  can  remedy  ; 
and  these  choice  constellations  of  early  days,  now  so  disguised,  can  be  made  to 
shine  with  renewed  glory,  can  once  more  proclaim  their  power,  and  can  yet  again 
blaze  with  gorgeous  splendour.  And  Jesus  came  on  purpose  to  tell  us  how  to  keep 
these  starlike  virtues  in  their  orbit,  how  to  call  them  back  when  they  have  wandered, 
and  how  to  summon  up  their  original  splendour.  He  did  not  wish  us  to  be  freed 
from  all  temptation,  that,  merely  by  the  absence  of  exposure,  our  innocence  might 
be  eternally  fortified,  and  that  our  goodness  might  be  iron-clad — no,  not  that ;  but 
He  endeavoured  to  show  us  how  to  meet  temptation,  how  to  conquer  it,  how  to 
take  our  innocence  and  to  push  it  into  virtue,  and  how  to  change  a  mere  passive 
goodness  into  a  decided,  active,  and  glorious  nobleness  of  character.  {Caleb  D. 
Bradlee.)  Why  should  God  permit  this  star  to  fall  ? — Could  not  He  who  made 
the  heavens  have  kept  the  constellations  in  their  place,  and  have  saved  from 
extinction  those  brilliant  lights  ?  If  He  could  only  make  them,  but  could  never 
control  them  after  they  were  born,  where  was  His  omnipotence  ?  If  He  could  only 
make  them,  and  yet  not  know  that  they  would  rebel,  where  was  His  omniscience  ? 
Or,  in  other  words,  why  did  God  ever  allow  sin  to  attack  the  children  of  men  ? — 
that  old  question  that  is  ever  new,  and  that  will  ever  come  up  to  trouble  ns ;  for  it 
has  puzzled  the  human  heart  ever  since  the  human  heart  was  made,  yet  is  not  the 
answer  really  very  plain  ?  Without  free  will  we  should  be  machines  ;  but  with  it 
there  must  be  the  possibility  of  our  going  astray.  God  can,  and  does,  prevent  sin 
from  injuring  the  world  ultimately ;  but  He  cannot,  consistently  with  the  freedom 
of  the  human  mind,  stop  a  human  being  from  going  astray  if  that  human  being  so 
desires.  And  if  the  star  will  fall  from  heaven,  why  it  must  fall ;  but  God  will  pre- 
vent it  from  scorching  the  world,  while  God,  perhaps,  in  time  will  so  inflame  it 


CHAP.  IX.]  REVELATION.  405 

with  His  blessed  love,  pity,  and  grace  that  it  will  find  again  its  place,  regain  its 
power,    and    shine    once    more    in    splendour.      {Ihid.)  The   evil   effects    of 

degeneracy :    the  fallen   star : — The    evil    effects    are — I.  Widespread.     II.    Db- 

STBUCTIVELY  INJURIOUS.      Ill,    BiTTERLY  AFFLICTIVE.       1.    To    him    who    falls.      2.    To 

them  whom  he  drags  down  with  him.  3.  To  them  whose  sympathies  being  only 
with  goodness  are  afflicted  by  anything  that  tends  to  degeneracy  of  manners,  to 
feebleness  of  faith,  or  to  the  lowering  of  the  tone  and  felicity  of  human  life.  4.  To 
the  widespread,  outlying  multitudes,  amongst  whom  the  spread  of  goodness  is 
retarded  by  any  act  of  unfaithfulness  and  any  instance  of  defection.  {R.  Green.) 
Abuse  of  the  best  things  : — The  best  things,  when  abused,  become  the  worst ;  there 
is  no  devil  like  a  fallen  angel,  no  enemy  to  the  gospel  like  an  apostate  Christian,  no 
hate  like  the  "  theological  hate,"  no  war  like  a  religious  war,  and  no  corruption 
like  religious  corruption.  The  reasons  are  not  far  to  seek.  The  best  things  are 
the  strongest ;  they  can  therefore  do  evil  when  used  in  an  evil  way.  {A.  J, 
Morris.)  Shall  men  seek  death,  and  shall  not  find  it.  —  The  extremity  of 
anguish: — I.  A  state  of  misery  in  which  death  is  sought.  1.  Death  is  universally 
regarded  amongst  men  as  the  greatest  evil.  The  ravenous  beast,  the  furious  storm, 
the  destructive  pestilence,  the  engulfing  earthquake,  are  only  terrible  because 
death  is  terrible.  2.  The  relief  which  men  generally  seek  in  this  world  in  their 
sufferings  is  from  death.  The  mariner  will  forsake  his  ship  with  valuable  cargo, 
the  king  will  resign  his  kingdom,  the  wounded  will  suffer  amputation  of  every  limb, 
if  thought  needful,  to  avoid  death.  11.  A  state  of  misery  in  which  death  is  sought 
AB  A  RELIEF  IN  VAIN.  It  is  miserable  to  seek  relief  in  the  most  deeply  felt  evil,  but 
to  seek  it  in  such  an  evil  in  vain  adds  wondrously  to  the  misery  of  the  case. 
Fatigue,  disappointment,  the  consciousness  of  lost  energy,  add  to  the  anguish. 
Earth  runs  from  death  ;  hell  runs  after  it,  and  runs  in  vain.  III.  Concluding  infeb- 
ENCES  :  1.  The  fact  that  men  are  exposed  to  such  a  state  of  being  implies  that  some 
sad  catastrophe  has  befallen  our  nature.  2.  There  is  something  in  the  universe  to 
be  dreaded  by  man  more  than  death,  and  this  is  sin.  3.  Christianity 
should  be  hailed  as  the  only  means  to  deliver  us  from  this  extremity  of 
anguish.  It  destroys  sin;  it  "condemns  sin  in  the  flesh."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
As  it  were  crowns  like  gold. — The  fictions  of  sin : — These  mystical  locusts 
personify  the  lusts  and  pjissions  which  destroy  the  soul,  and  which,  destroying  the 
soul,  destroy  all  things.  Our  text  suggests  that  sin  affects  great  things,  it  promises 
great  things,  and  it  never  gives  what  it  promises.  "  On  their  heads  were  as  it  were 
crowns  of  gold."  It  is  not  a  real, solid, golden  crown,  but  "as  it  were."  Sin  always 
acts  by  an  infernal  magic ;  it  is  full  of  illusion,  imposition,  and  mockery.  There  is 
indeed  a  Mephistophelean  element  in  all  sin  ;  it  saves  its  word  whilst  it  lies,  it  gives 
a  spurious  gift,  it  is  ironical,  scornful,  and  derisive.  It  is  the  supreme  sophistry ; 
the  supreme  satire.  I.  There  is  no  reality  in  the  greatness  that  sin  promises.  Sin 
promises  distinction,  glory,  fame.  The  devil  is  quite  flush  of  crowns.  But  men 
always  find  at  last  that  selfish  greatness,  soiled  greatness,  unrighteous  greatness  is 
false  greatness,  and  that  it  only  mocks  those  who  have  made  such  immense  sacri- 
fices on  its  behalf.  Take  a  conqueror,  of  whom  Napoleon  is  the  type.  He  was  him- 
self a  locust,  with  a  crown  upon  his  head.  And  just  as  the  locusts  strip  the  trees  and 
leave  rich  and  smiling  landscapes  desolate,  so  did  this  imperial  locust  and  his 
legions  strip  kingdoms  and  leave  a  track  of  blood  and  ruin.  But  how  empty  was  all 
his  glory,  and  how  little  it  came  to !  An  exile  at  St.  Helena,  you  feel  he  got  the 
crown,  "  as  it  were."  And  to-day  how  utterly  discredited  he  is,  and  how  beggared 
all  his  greatness  !  The  world  knows  him  as  a  colossal  brigand.  Take  a  poet,  and 
let  Byron  be  our  typical  instance.  How  much  of  greatness  and  fame  did  he  seem 
to  acquire,  and  yet  his  career  was  based  on  egotism,  sensuality,  godlessness ;  and 
how  poor  he  looks  now !  Take  a  politician.  I  have  been  reading  the  biography  of 
a  notorious  statesman.  He  was  a  brilliant  man  and  he  loved  brilliance.  All  his 
letters  are  about  splendid  events,  gorgeous  pageantries,  eloquent  speeches.  He 
breakfasts  with  wits,- takes  tea  with  duchesses,  dines  with  the  queen.  You  read 
about  literature,  diplomacy,  rank,  but  the  great  words  of  righteousness  and  humani- 
tarianism  are  hardly  breathed.  How  poor  it  all  looks  now !  How  theatrical  it  looks, 
how  theatrical  it  was !  How  differently  we  look  upon  Wilberforce,  who  brought 
men  liberty;  upon  Cobden,  who  gave  us  bread  ;  upon  Shaftesbury,  who  made  mercy 
to  distil  upon  waste  places  as  the  gentle  rains  drop  upon  the  plains  beneath.  Their 
crowns  are  solid,  they  glow  as  they  age ;  but  as  for  my  dramatic  statesman,  his 
diadem  was  dust  before  he  was.  It  is  always  so.  Wherever  glory  is  built  on  egotism, 
violence,  unrighteousness,  it  possesses  only  an  apparitional  crown.    "The  burglar 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

seizes  property,  but  in  his  hands  it  is  no  longer  property,  but  pillage."  The  sensual 
man  seizes  love,  but  beautiful  love  thus  seized  instantly  dies  and  becomes  a  ghastly 
corpse — that  we  call  lust.  The  ambitious  man  seizes  greatness,  but  the  moment 
that  he  touches  it  in  the  spirit  of  egotism  and  pride  the  splendid  crown  becomes 
tinsel.  "  The  coveted  thing,  whatever  it  be,  loses  its  essence  when  the  lawless  lust 
has  got  it."  If  you  want  greatness  and  glory  seek  for  it  in  another  and  truer  path- 
way. You  young  men,  be  sure  that  you  seek  it  in  the  ways  of  truth  and  wisdom 
and  purity.  "  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing."  "  She  shall  bring  thee  to  honour." 
You  professional  men.  You  justly  contemplate  promotion  and  distinction  in  your 
calling,  lawyer,  physician,  artist.  Be  sure  you  make  no  compromise.  Be  ready  to 
go  without  a  crown  that  you  may  get  one.  You  municipal  men.  You  political 
aspirants.  Bring  the  religious  and  moral  into  your  life  or  some  day  you  will  be 
mocked  by  knowing  the  crown  for  which  you  struggled  is  only  a  miserable  counterfeit. 
And  then  we  all  hope  for  a  larger  glory  and  honour  still.  It  is  astonishing  what 
a  faith  we  have  in  the  possibilities  of  our  nature ;  what  an  instinct  for  greatness ; 
what  an  appetite  for  glory.  Years  ago  I  remember  a  poor  woman  dying ;  she  was  a 
very  poor  woman,  and  was  carried  to  the  grave  from  a  lowly  cottage.  But  her 
children  put  this  verse  on  her  funeral  card:  "And  a  great  sign  was  seen  in  heaven; 
a  woman  arrayed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  and  upon  her  head  a 
crown  of  twelve  stars."  They  felt  she  was  great  enough  to  have  the  sun  for  her 
robe,  the  moon  for  a  footstool,  and  Orion,  Venus,  Sirius,  Arcturus,  Aldebaran,  for 
the  stars  of  her  forehead.  And  they  were  right.  The  most  magnificent  things  of 
the  Apocalypse  do  not  startle  us.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  But 
let  us  aim  at  true  greatness — not  mock  greatness.  We  do  not  want  the  crowns  of 
the  locusts — we  want  one  of  those  other  crowns,  such  as  the  elders  wore,  as  the 
angels  wore,  as  the  saints  wore.  The  true  crown  is  a  crown  of  righteousness,  it  f  adeth 
not  away.  II.  There  is  no  reality  in  the  wEAiiTH  that  sin  promises.  Wealth  without 
morality,  without  humanity,  without  spirituality,  is  in  an  extraordinary  degree 
unreal  and  tantalising.  On  the  Stock  Exchange  is  what  is  known  as  "phantom 
gold."  Certain  transactions  in  gold  are  known  by  this  name.  It  is  gold  that  exists 
only  on  paper,  and  it  is  dealt  in  as  a  pure  speculation.  But  how  much  of  the  wealth 
of  society  is  "  phantom  gold  "  !  It  is  on  paper  only ;  it  is  truly  a  visionary,  specu- 
lative thing.  There  is  no  real  solid  joy  in  it.  Look  at  illegitimate  wealth — wealth 
gotten  by  immoral  means.  Men  sometimes  get  it,  and  then  they  are  detected  and 
they  are  deprived  of  it.  There  are  rogues  in  prison  to-day  who  have  been  deprived 
of  their  ill-gotten  wealth.  You  have  seen  a  mouse  in  a  trap — it  gets  the  cheese  "as 
it  were."  And  if  they  do  not  go  to  prison,  wealth  that  comes  badly  has  a  trick  of 
melting  away  swiftly.  They  put  it  into  a  bag  with  holes,  they  get  it  and  are  poor, 
they  never  have  anything.  Fairy  gold  turns  to  withered  leaves  and  dust.  And 
sometimes  conscience  will  not  let  them  enjoy  it.  Look  at  Judas !  He  got  the  thirty 
pieces  of  silver  "  as  it  were."  And  there  is  much  the  same  deception  and  disappoint- 
ment with  all  selfish,  godless,  unspiritual  wealth.  Men  have  it,  and  yet  they  have 
it  not,  they  get  the  golden  prize,  and  then  handling  it  find  it  "  as  it  were."  They 
have  it,  and  it  is  a  phantom.  It  is  like  a  man  promising  you  money,  and  then 
showing  you  a  five-pound  note  in  a  looking-glass.  Balzac,  the  French  writer,  built 
himself  a  splendid  mansion,  but  when  he  had  finished  it  he  had  exhausted  his 
resources,  and  so  he  proceeded  to  furnish  it  in  imagination.  Here  a  ticket 
announced  a  great  picture,  there  a  cabinet,  couch,  table,  &c.  The  realities  were  not 
there,  only  labels.  And  it  is  often  much  the  same  with  the  selfish  unspiritual  rich, 
their  outward  life  overbrims  with  riches,  but  their  soul  is  empty.  They  have 
certificates,  title-deeds,  parchments  declaring  that  they  have  wealth  and  power  and 
happiness,  but  the  realities  are  utterly  wanting  in  their  deepest,  truest  life.  They 
can't  translate  it  into  the  true  riches  of  brain  and  heart,  of  character,  experience,  and 
hope.  A  friend  of  mine  in  London  is  a  jeweller  for  the  theatres,  and  he  was  showing 
me  the  other  day  the  jewels  of  the  stage.  What  a  size  those  jewels  are !  Mammoth 
gems,  mountains  of  light,  stars  of  the  first  magnitude.  What  colours  those  jewels 
have !  Eich,  burning,  gorgeous  hues.  And  what  a  quantity  1  Pearls  by  the  peck. 
Diamonds,  rubies,  emeralds,  abound.  Crowns,  mitres,  diadems,  necklaces  on  every 
side.  The  crown- jewels  in  the  Tower  look  mean  and  shabby  compared  with  this 
treasury  of  gems.  And  yet  one  crown  jewel  would  far  more  than  have  bought  them 
all.  Clever,  ingenious,  plausible — they  were  still  Brummagem.  One  simple,  small, 
modest  gem  of  royalty  outweighs  all  the  gay  and  garish  gems  of  the  mimic  kings 
and  queens  of  the  gaslight.  And  it  is  much  the  same  with  Vanity  Fair,  with  all 
unspiritual  glory,  and  fashion,  and  luxury.     The  rich  and  gay  are  but  actors,  their 


CHAP.  IX.]  REVELATION.  407 

purple  brings  them  no  self-respect,  their  gold  no  gladness,  their  splendour  no  satis- 
faction of  soul.  Have  no  unrighteous  wealth.  It  will  only  deceive  and  curse  you. 
Do  not  hold  your  wealth  in  the  spirit  of  selfishness.  Be  the  steward  of  God,  using 
for  His  glory,  for  high  and  generous  purposes,  whatever  He  gives  you.  And  be  sure 
of  this,  that  no  wealth  is  truly  yours  until  it  is  realised  in  the  spiritual  and  godly. 
*'  The  gold  of  this  land  is  good."  III.  There  is  no  reality  in  the  pleasure  that  sin 
promises.  Pleasure  that  is  not  moral;  pleasure  that  is  selfish;  pleasure  that  has  no 
thought  of  God  in  it  is  always  fictitious.  It  is  imagination,  illusion,  falsehood.  I 
remember  a  picture  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  and  there  was  one  fine  touch  in  it.  The 
poor  fellow  had  come  to  the  feeding  of  the  swine,  and  the  painter  had  put  in  one  of 
those  poetic  touches  which  mean  so  much — a  few  poppies  gave  bits  of  colour  to  the 
dismal  picture.  Yes,  one  deep  lesson  of  the  parable  was  there — the  prodigal  had 
been  under  the  power  of  opium,  he  had  been  the  victim  of  illusion.  And  this 
illusion  had  betrayed  him  to  the  far  country,  the  swine,  the  hunger,  the  brink  of 
despair.  It  is  always  thus — the  poppy  plays  the  grand  part.  The  devil  makes  men 
to  see  wondrous  delights  in  sensual,  selfish,  godless  pleasures.  But  they  prove 
sooner  or  later  as  the  podigal  son  did  that  it  is  illusion,  that  unrighteous  and 
unspiritual  enjoyment  is  a  miserable  cheat.  The  African  saw  blocks  of  silver  on 
the  other  side  of  the  river,  but  when  he  crossed  the  river  they  turned  into  black 
stones.  He  never  gives  you  a  crown  of  roses  but  "  as  it  were."  Brethren,  seek  for 
a  real  crown — greatness,  wealth,  pleasure.  Make  for  this.  Don't  be  deceived. 
And  there  is  One  who  can  give  it.  It  is  in  the  truth  and  grace  and  power  of  Christ 
that  you  shall  realise  all  the  grand  and  beautiful  and  enduring  satisfactions  of  the 
heart.  There  is  no  '•  as  it  were  "  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  reality  ;  it  satisfies,  abides. 
{W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Stings  in  their  tails. — The  tail  of  a  habit : — "  A  beast 
escaped  with  a  halter,"  says  Thomas  Manton,  "  is  easUy  caught  again ;  so  a  lust 
indulged  will  bring  us  into  our  old  bondage."  Nothing  is  harder  to  bury  than  the 
tail  of  a  habit ;  but  unless  we  do  bury  it,  tail  and  all,  the  viper  will  wriggle  out  of 
its  grave.  A  clear,  clean,  and  complete  escape  is  the  only  true  deliverance  from  an 
evil  practice  which  has  long  been  indulged.  A  drunkard  is  not  safe  from  the  drink 
while  he  takes  his  occasional  glass  with  a  friend.  A  man  who  allows  himself  any 
one  sin  will  be  sure  to  allow  another  ;  where  one  dog  comes  into  the  room  another 
may  follow.  A  fish  is  not  free  for  his  life  while  a  hook  is  in  his  mouth,  and  a  line 
holds  him  to  the  rod.  However  thin  the  connecting  medium,  it  will  be  the  death  of 
the  fish,  if  it  holds  ;  and,  however  slight  the  bond  which  links  a  man  to  evil,  it  will 
be  his  sure  ruin.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  There  come  two  woes  more. — Woes  to 
come  : — To  my  own  apprehension,  while  reading  this  in  private,  it  seemed  just  such 
an  utterance  as  the  angel  of  God  might  address  to  the  soul  of  the  ungodly  when  he 
leaves  the  body.  "Death  is  over,"  saith  the  angel.  " One  woe  is  past ;  and,  behold, 
there  come  two  woes  more  hereafter."  Thou  hast  passed  through  the  woes  of  death, 
but  behold  there  comes  a  judgment,  and  then  comes  a  second  death :  "  One  woe  is 
past;  and,  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  hereafter."  1.  The  woe  which  is 
supposed  to  be  passed  is  the  woe  of  death.  Death  to  the  righteous  has  lost  its  sting, 
but  to  the  wicked  death  has  all  its  terrors.  Its  horrors  are  not  diminished  by  any- 
thing that  Christ  hath  done  ;  yea,  rather,  death  gathers  more  cause  of  dismay  ;  for 
the  very  Cross  itself  may  fill  the  obdurate  heart  with  consternation.  When  the 
sinner  dies  impenitent,  having  rejected  the  mercy  of  Christ,  death  is  woe  indeed. 
One  of  my  predecessors,  Mr.  Benjamin  Keach,  has  left  on  record  an  account  of  a 
man  that  had  been  a  trouble  to  his  Church — for  he  had  backslidden — and  his  cries, 
shrieks,  and  tears,  at  the  very  prospect  of  death,  were  enough  to  make  one's  hair 
turn  white  and  stand  upon  end.  The  poor  wretched  man  seems  to  have  had  a  fore- 
taste of  perdition  before  he  entered  into  its  fire ;  and  so  it  is  ofttimes  with  the 
wicked  :  thou  hast  had  thy  harvest ;  thy  summer  is  ended ;  but  thou  art  not  saved ; 
thou  hast  been  warned,  but  thou  shalt  not  be  warned  again,  and  all  the  while  con- 
science says  this  is  just — I  knew  my  duty  and  I  did  it  not ;  I  knew  it  was  my  duty 
to  repent,  but  I  steeled  my  heart  against  God,  and  I  would  not  forsake  my  sins ;  I 
turned  my  back  upon  the  Cross  to  dance  in  a  merry  circle  downwards  to  the  pit. 
This  shall  make  death  woeful  indeed,  when  it  shall  be  hurled  into  the  mind  ;  thou 
knewest  thy  duty,  but  thou  didst  it  not.  2.  Of  the  two  woes  that  loom  in  the  future, 
I  would  now  briefly  but  solemnly  speak.  (1)  The  first  woe  of  the  man  who  dies  in 
his  sins  is  the  woe  of  judgment ;  that  is  terrible  indeed.  Scarce  can  a  prisoner 
stand  in  the  docks  to  be  tried  for  his  life  by  his  fellow-man  without  trembling  ;  at 
least,  it  is  a  wonder  if  it  should  be  so.  But  conceive  the  great  assize — the  graves 
are  opened  1    What  horrors  shall  seize  hold  upon  the  wicked  at  that  moment  1     (2) 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

After  the  woe  of  judgment  there  comes  the  woe  of  hell.  Oh,  what  a  woe  is  that  in 
which  all  the  woes  of  the  lost  are  condensed !  You  cannot  compare  the  pains  of 
this  life  with  the  agonies  to  be  endured  hereafter.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  13-21.  Loose  the  four  angels  which  are  bound. — The  sixth  trumpet: — 
I.  The  state  of  society  at  the  time.  II.  The  nature  of  this  visitation.  1. 
It  is  evoked  by  a  cry  out  of  the  four  horns  of  the  altar.  It  comes  from  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  God,  and  therefore  with  the  sanction  of  God.  The  call  itself  is  the 
common  voice  of  all  four  of  the  horns  of  the  altar,  indicating  the  energy  and  the 
universality  of  the  demand  for  vengeance,  and  of  that  vengeance  itself.  The  impli- 
cation is  that  God's  appointed  way  of  forgiveness  has  been  set  aside ;  that  the  Divine 
system  of  gracious  atonement  and  salvation  has  been  rejected,  and  that  the  wicked- 
ness of  earth  has  risen  so  high,  especially  in  point  of  antagonism  to  the  Cross,  that 
even  the  altar  itself,  which  otherwise  cries  only  for  mercy,  is  forced  into  a  cry  for 
vengeance.  2.  The  command  issues  to  the  angel  who  sounds  this  trumpet.  The 
command  itself  is  the  command  of  the  contemned  Saviour.  But  it  is  addressed  to 
the  angel.  He  obeys  it  as  his  Divine  commission,  and  thus  presides  over  the 
administration  ushered  in  by  his  trumpet.  He  looses  the  imprisoned  forces,  and 
sets  them  free  for  action.  3.  Other  angels  are  the  more  direct  executors  of  the  woe. 
Some  have  taken  these  to  be  good  angels.  I  do  not  so  regard  them.  Good  angels 
are  free,  not  bound.  Good  angels  would  not  destroy  men,  except  by  special  com- 
mand of  God ;  but  these  had  only  to  be  loosed,  and  they  at  once  rushed  forth  for 
slaughter,  impelled  to  the  dreadful  business  by  their  own  malicious  nature.  They 
were  bound  in  mercy  to  our  race,  and  here  they  are  let  loose  in  judgment.  Their 
number  also  indicates  the  universality  of  their  operations.  4.  The  moment  the  four 
bound  angels  are  released  from  their  constraint,  hosts  of  death-dealing  cavalry  over- 
run the  earth.  As  there  are  infernal  locusts,  so  there  are  infernal  horses ;  and  as 
the  former  were  let  forth  to  overrun  the  world  with  their  torments  under  the  fifth 
trumpet,  so  the  latter  are  let  forth  to  overrun  the  world  with  still  more  terrible 
inflictions  under  the  sixth.  5.  Fearful  havoc  of  human  life  is  made  by  these 
infernal  horses.  To  say  nothing  of  the  dread  and  horror  which  their  presence 
inspires,  and  the  confusion  which  their  advent  strikes  into  every  department  of 
society,  it  is  here  written,  that,  by  these  horses,  one  out  of  every  three  of  the  whole 
human  family  is  killed,  destroyed  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  6.  The  continuance 
of  this  plague  is  equally  extraordinary.  7.  The  object  of  this  woe  is  partly  retri- 
butive and  partly  reformatory.  It  belongs  to  the  judicial  administrations  of  the 
great  day.  It  is  God's  terrific  judgment  upon  the  world,  which  has  disowned 
allegiance  to  Him,  and  rejected  the  mediation  of  His  Son.  It  is  the  righteous  indig- 
nation of  outraged  justice  which  can  no  longer  endure  the  superlative  wickednesses 
of  men.  And  yet,  in  wrath  God  remembers  mercy.  He  suffers  only  one-third  of 
the  race  to  fall  a  prey  to  this  tremendous  woe.  He  delighteth  not  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked,  but  would  rather  that  they  should  turn  from  their  evil  ways  and  live. 
{J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  rest  .  .  .  repented  not. — Impenitence : — So  it  was  in  the 
beginning,  so  it  will  be  to  the  end.  All  outward  plagues,  all  outbursts  of  moral  evils, 
all  apostasies  in  Divine  societies,  were  and  are  trumpets  of  God ;  those  who  acknowledge 
His  goodness  and  truth  will  tremble  and  rejoice  that  He  is  speaking  to  them  ;  that  He 
is  calling-  them  to  repent ;  that  He  is  preparing  the  way  for  a  manifestation  of  Him- 
self. But  these  trumpets,  let  them  sound  as  loud  and  long  as  they  may,  seldom  stir 
a  man  who  disbelieves  in  a  living  and  good  God  to  confess  Him.  The  terror  which 
is  in  them  stupefies  rather  than  quickens.  The  slumberer  is  half  roused  out  of  his 
dream ;  is  bewildered ;  takes  a  fresh  opiate ;  flies  to  the  gods  that  neither  see,  nor 
hear,  nor  walk ;  flies  from  Him  whom  he  has  only  recognised  in  thunderings  and 
lightnings.  The  sentence  is  everlastingly  true  that  not  the  fire,  nor  the  earthquake, 
nor  the  blast  rending  the  mountains,  but  only  the  still  small  voice  reaches  the  heart, 
and  compels  it  to  bow.      (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)        Man^s  stubborn  will: — I.  All 

MEN  need  repentance.   II.  GOD  PLEADS  WITH  MEN  TO  BRING  THEM  TO  REPENTANCE. 

These  judgments  of  which  we  read  are  not  God's  primary  dealings  with  men.  "He 
does  not  begin  in  this  manner.  God  has  pleaded  with  men  by  His  Spirit  in  their 
consciences.  By  His  goodness,  giving  them  all  manner  of  providential  mercies. 
Then,  more  especially  by  His  Word.  IH.  But  these  milder  methods  often  fail. 
IV.'  Sterner  methods  are  then  tried.  V.  But  even  these,  at  times,  and  for  long 
time,  fail.  This  is  the  declaration  of  our  text  (also  Jer.  v.  3;  viii.  6;  Kom.  ii.  4,  5). 
So  was  it  with  Pharaoh,  when  the  plagues  one  after  another,  which  in  many 
respects  resembled  these  trumpet-plagues,  came  upon  him.    VI.  What  is  the  reason 


CHAP.  X.]  REVELATION.  409 

OP  THIS?  The  answer  is  manifold,  as,  for  example :  1.  Those  that  are  spared  argue 
from  that  fact  that  they  need  not  repent.  2.  Sin  deadens  belief  in  God.  It  makes 
men  practical  atheists.  3.  God's  judgments  are  put  down  to  secondary  causes. 
4.  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  This  is  true  in  a  sense  the  apostle  never  meant. 
Let  the  heart  love  sin,  as  it  is  so  prone  to  do,  and  that  love  will  utterly  cast  out  the 
fear  of  God.    5.  The  law  of  habit.     You  may  bend  the  sapling,  but  not  the  tree. 

VII.    How  INTENSELY    SERIOUS  ABE    THE    TEACHINGS    OF    THIS    FACT  !      Is    it    trUC   that, 

though  God  sends  judgment  after  judgment  upon  men,  they  will  yet  not  repent? 
Then :  1.  More  judgments  and  worse  will  come.  2.  How  we  need  to  watch  and 
pray  lest  we  be  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  I  3.  What  imperative 
need  there  is  of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  1    {S,  Conway,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER    X. 

Vers.  1-7.  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  .  .  .  clothed  with  a  cloud. — The  tDord 

of  assurance  and  consolation  : — The  Book  of  Kevelation  is  written  for  the  comfort  of 
the  Church  in  presence  of  her  oppressing  foes.  This  word  of  consolation  is  of  great 
preciousness  and  help  to  the  suffering  Church ;  for — I.  It  is  given  by  the  Lobd 
Himself.  The  strong  angel  "  coming  down  out  of  heaven,  arrayed  with  a  cloud," 
can  be  none  other  than  the  Lord  Himself.  The  surrounding  symbols  are  His,  and 
His  alone.  "  The  rainbow  was  upon  His  head  "  ;  "  His  face  was  as  the  sun,  and 
His  feet  as  pillars  of  fire."  It  is  the  reflection  of  the  Divine  glory  in  Christ.  When 
He  cries  the  seven  thunders  utter  their  voices,  and  His  great  voice  was  "  as  a  lion 
roareth."  From  the  word  of  such  a  one  the  Church  may  always  gather  the  utmost 
comfort  n.  It  gives  the  pbospect  and  pledge  of  belease.  The  suffering 
Church  writhes  in  its  anguish ;  but  a  definite  limit  is  put  to  the  days  of  sorrow.  "  In 
the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  is  about  to  sound."  This  is  not 
indefinite  and  uncertain  :  "  There  shall  be  time  no  longer  " — there  shall  be  no  more 
delay.  Eelief  is  certain  and  speedy.  This  is  assured  by  oath,  even  by  the  voice  of 
the  Angel  who  "  sware  by  Him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  who  created  the  heaven, 
and  the  things  that  are  therein,  and  the  earth,  and  the  things  that  are  therein,  and 
the  sea,  and  the  things  that  are  therein."  This  oath  is  for  truest  confirmation.  IH.  The 
word  of  consolation  and  promise  is  given  in  the  most  solemn  and  assuring  manner. 
This  is  seen  in  the  whole  vision — the  person,  attitude,  message,  oath,  and  surrounding 
testimonies.  IV.  It  is  the  tbuest,  the  utmost  encouragement  to  hope.  Upon 
this  vision  the  Church  should  ever  reflect  in  the  time  of  suffering  and  fear.  It  is 
possible  patiently  to  endure  and  hold  out  when  a  definite  and  assured  prospect  and 
pledge  of  relief  is  given.  The  words,  "  declared  to  His  servants  the  prophets,"  shall 
have  their  fulfilment ;  "  the  mystery  "  shall  be  "  finished."  {R.  Green.)  Aspects 
of  Christ : — 1.  The  gospel  and  Church  of  Christ  has  mighty  enemies,  such  as 
princes  and  the  great  men  of  the  earth.  Yet  here  is  her  comfort,  that  she  has  a 
mighty  Angel,  even  that  great  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  Christ  Jesus,  the  Almighty  God, 
for  her,  to  deliver  her  and  confound  her  enemies,  in  the  height  of  their  pride.  2.  By 
this  mighty  Angel's  coming  down  from  heaven  we  see  whence  and  whereby  shall  be 
the  1  nin  of  antichrist,  to  wit,  not  from  the  earth  or  the  arm  of  flesh,  but  from  heaven 
and  the  heavenly  power  of  the  Word  of  God.  3.  He  comes  clothed  with  a  cloud,  to 
show  the  manner  of  His  manifestation  to  His  Church  in  His  Word  and  sacraments, 
and  that  her  knowledge  of  Him  on  earth  is  but  obscure  and  only  in  part.  4.  By  the 
rainbow  on  His  head  we  see  that  He  comes  to  His  Church  with  peace,  and  the 
assurance  of  the  covenant  thereof ;  and  so  shall  He  come  in  like  manner  to  every 
humbled  soul.  5.  His  face  is  said  to  be  as  the  sun,  whereby  we  see  that  as  anti- 
christ comes  with  darkness  and  the  smoke  of  error,  so  on  the  contrary  Christ  comes 
ever  with  the  light  and  brightness  of  truth.  6.  His  feet  as  pillars  of  fire,  to  tread 
down  and  consume  His  enemies,  serve  as  a  just  and  dreadfiii  terror  to  His  foes,  but 
as  a  sweet  and  singular  comfort  to  His  elect  ones,  who  are  here  trod  upon  and  cruelly 
nsed.  {William  Guild,  D.D.)  And  he  had  in  his  hands  a  little  book  open. — The  little 
hook  ;  or,  characteristics  of  revelation.  "  He  had  in  his  hand  a  little  book  open." 
I.  The  ambassadob  who  brings  it.  Much  may  be  learnt  concerning  any  message 
that  is  sent  by  an  earthly  monarch  from  the  character  and  rank  and  insignia  whidi 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

belong  to  the  messenger.    He  who  brings  God's  message  to  mankind  is  one  of  no 
mean  order,  and  the  tokens  of  his  authority  are  of  the  most  impressive  kind.     1. 
He  comes  from  heaven.     The  Bible  is  not  a  merely  human  production.     2.  It  is 
mighty  in  its  power.   It  was  "  a  strong  angel "  that  St,  John  saw,  suggesting  to  him 
and  to  us  the  strength  of  that  message  which  he  was  commissioned  to  bring.    What 
trophies  of  its  power  has  not  the  Bible  won  ?    3.  Its  truths  fill  the  soul  with  awe. 
The  angel  was  "clothed  with  a  cloud" — symbol  this  of  the  majesty  and  mystery 
that    surround    and    invest    the   foundation-teachings  of   the  Word  of  God.    4. 
But  they  are  crowned  with  blessed  promise  and  grace.     "  The  rainbow  was  upon 
his  head."      Though  there  be  so  much  that  we  cannot  penetrate  or  comprehend, 
nevertheless  the  predominant  characteristic  is  that  of  "  grace."     6.  They  irradiate 
and  illumine  all  our  earthly  life.     *'  His  face  was  it  were  the  sun."     "  Truly  the 
light  is  sweet,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  behold  the  sun"  {Eccles.  xi.  7).     6.  And 
they  shall  never  be  driven  forth  or  removed.     "  His  feet  as  pillars  of  fire,"  and  ver. 
2.  '*  He  planted  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  his  left  foot  upon  the  earth."     His 
invincible  power  is  signified  by  "the  pillars  of  fire  "  ;  and  his  having  set  his  feet 
upon  the  earth  and  sea  teUs  of   "  the  immovable  steadfastness  of  the  heavenly 
Conqueror  against  all  the  resistance  of  His  enemies."    AU  Church  history  proves 
this.     In  many  ages  and  places  it  has  been  death  to  keep  a  copy  of  the  sacred 
writings.     Wherever  they  were  found,  they  were  ruthlessly  destroyed,  and  often 
they  also  with  whom  they  were  found.     But  every  copy  of  the  Bible  that  we  possess 
to-day  proves  how  partial  and  ineffective  all  such  endeavours  were.  Glory  be  to  God 
that  they  were  so  !    II.  The  desckiption  given  op  it.     "A  little  book  open."     1. 
A  book.     The  Bible  is  not  the  revelation  itself,  but  the  record  of  it.     But  without 
the  record  the  revelation  would  not  have  availed  us.     Great  scorn  has  been  poured 
on  the  idea  of  "  a  book  revelation,"  and  an  immense  deal  of  poor  wit  has  been 
expended  upon  the  idea  that  God  should  have  used  sucli  mean  materials  as  books 
are  made  of  as  the  vehicle  of  His  revelation  of  Himself.    But  the  Bible  is  not  the 
revelation,  only  its  record ;  and  it  is  reason  for  eternal  gratitude  that  His  revelation 
has  been  so  given  that  it  can  be  thus  recorded.    In  what  other  way  could  the  know- 
ledge of  God  have  been  so  well  preserved  or  spread  abroad?     2.  Its  seeming 
insignificance.    It  is  "  a  little  book."    In  these  days  of  gold  and  guns,  when  wealth 
and  armies  are  thought  to  be  the  great  means  of  accomplishing  everything,  the 
spiritual  force  'hat  lies  hidden  in  "  a  little  book  "  counts  but  for  little.     But  what 
hath  not  God  wrought  by  it  ?    And  we  may  be  grateful  that  it  is  little,  and  not  a 
ponderous  library  which  it  would  need  a  lifetime  even  to  know  part  of,  but  one  small 
volume  which  can  be  read  and  re-read  and  carried  everywhere  as  we  will.    No  doubt 
the  littleness  of  the  book  here  spoken  of  is  intended  to  be  in  contrast  with  that  vast 
volume  told  of  in  chap,  v.,  which  was  written  within  and  without,  so  complete,  so  fuU, 
was  it.    3.  It  is  to  be  an  open  book.     St.  John  saw  it  "  open"  in  the  hand  of  the 
angel.     There  have  been  and  there  are  those  who  would  have  the  Word  of  God 
closed,  if  not  entirely,  yet  to  large  extent.     God  hath  caused  the  vision  to  be  written 
and  made  "plain,"  so  that  the  unlearned  may  learn,  and  the  most  simple  compre- 
hend,   in.  The  voices  for  and  against  it.     We  read  that  the  angel  cried  with  a 
loud    voice,   and  that  the  seven  thunders   uttered  their   voices.      Now — 1.  The 
angelic  voice  suggests — (1)  The  startling  effect  of  the  Word  of  God  upon  mankind. 
The  angel's  voice  was  "  as  when  a  lion  roareth."     So  did  the  Word  of  God  affect 
men.     See  when  at  the  Eeformation  it  was  first  freely  given  to  Europe.     How  it 
roused  men's  minds,  awoke  them  from  their  lethargy,  nation  after  nation  heard  the 
sound  and  broke  away  from  the  superstition  and  sins  in  which  they  had  so  long 
lived  1    And  it  is  so  still.     (2)  The  assured  persuasion  it  gives  concerning  the 
mystery  of  this  present  life.     The  solemn  oath  of  the  angel  (vers.  6-7)  did  but  re- 
present what  the  Word  of  God  accomplishes.    As  He  gave,  so  it  gives,  solemn 
assurance  that  what  now  is — so  much  of  it  so  mournful,  so  full  of  mystery — is  not 
ever  to  be,  but  shall  have  an  end.      Life  is  a  mystery  now,  even  in  these  compara- 
tively calm  days  of  ours;   but  what  must  it  have  appeared  to  the  persecuted, 
outraged  Church  of  St.  John's  day?    2.  The  thunder  voice  (ver.  4).     The  question 
comes — Whence  this  voice  of  the  seven  thunders?     It  has,  we  think,  been  too 
hastily  assumed  that  St.  John  is  referring  to  the  sevenfold  voice  of  the  thunder 
mentioned  in  Psa.  xxix.    And,  doubtless,  in  this  book  thunders  are  referred  to  aa 
coming  forth  from  the  throne  of  God  (cf.  chap.  iv.  5).  But  the  true  interpretation  is 
given,  we  think,  in  the  strikingly  parallel  passages  in  Dan.  viii.  26  and  xii.  4-9, 
where  that  which  the  prophet  is  commanded  to  "  seal  up  "  is  not  what  God  shall  do, 
but  what  His  people's  enemies  shall  do  against  Him  and  them.    And  so  here,  we 


CHAP.  X.]  REVELATION.  411 

believe,  the  thunders  tell  of  the  wrathful  response,  the  angry  mutterings  of  God's 
enemies  against  His  truth.  And,  thus  regarded,  they  tell  of  the  opposition  the  Word 
arouses  in  the  world  of  the  wicked.  It  has  ever  been  so.  Hence  the  Divine  forces 
on  the  side  of  the  Church  and  against  her  foes  are  what  this  book  mainly  reveals. 
It  tells  us,  "  The  Lord  is  on  our  side  ;  we  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  us." 
IV.  The  directions  concernino  it.  As  it  was  with  the  "  little  book  "  so  it  must  be 
with  the  Word  of  God.  1.  It  must  be  received  as  from  God  (ver.  8),  2.  It  must  be 
taken  into  the  soul.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  strange  command,  "  Take  it,  and 
eat  it  up."  3.  When  so  taken,  it  will  produce  both  sorrow  and  joy.  The  first  taste 
will  be  pleasant.  "  In  thy  mouth  sweet  as  honey."  And  it  is  so.  Is  it  not  a  joy 
that  we  have  a  revelation  from  God  at  all;  that  we  are  assured  God  is  "our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven"  ;  that  our  salvation  is  "  without  money  and  without 
price,"  for  that  Christ  died  for  us  ?  Yes  ;  "  sweeter  also  than  honey  and  the  honey- 
comb "  are  these  precious  truths.  But  the  after-taste  will  cause  distress  and  pain. 
Witness  the  Saviour's  tears  over  lost  souls,  and  the  like  tears  shed  still  by  those  who 
know  "  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings."  That  men  should  resist  and  reject  such 
a  Saviour  ;  that  we  should  so  long  have  done  so,  and  do  not  yet  wholly  receive  Him 
— yes,  this  after-taste  hath  pain.  4.  When  eaten,  it  qualifies  for  witness-bearing 
for  God  (ver.  11).  This  is  the  real  qualification,  this  deep  experimental  knowledge 
of  the  power  of  God's  Word.  All  else  is  a  naught  compared  with  this.  Only  such 
God  ordains  to  be  His  prophets.  Thus  doth  this"Uttle  book,"  though  it  meant 
not  the  Bible,  tell  of  the  Bible.     {S.  Conway,  B.A.) 

Vers.  5-7. — That  there  should  be  time  no  longer. — The  end  of  time  .-—"That 
there  should  be  time  no  longer."  A  tremendous  asseveration,  whether  we  regard 
the  thing  afiirmed  or  the  person  who  affirms  it.  Of  the  person  making  this  asse- 
veration we  may  say  that  there  are  traces  about  him,  which,  although  he  is  called 
an  angel,  seem  to  identify  him  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  first  verse  he 
is  represented  as  clothed  with  a  cloud ;  and  the  cloud  vesture  is  stated  in  the  Psalms 
to  be  the  vesture  of  God  Himself — "  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him."  A 
rainbow  encircles  his  head ;  and  a  rainbow  is  the  well-known  token  of  the  covenant 
of  grace  made  with  us  in  and  through  Christ.  "  His  face,"  we  are  told,  "  was  as  the 
sun."  In  the  first  chapter  of  this  Book,  John  describes  the  countenance  of  the  Son 
of  Man  to  be  "  as  the  sun  shining  in  its  strength  "  ;  not  to  mention  that  one  of  the 
features  of  the  glorified  Christ,  as  He  appeared  at  the  Transfiguration,  was  this, 
"  His  face  did  shine  as  the  sun."  I.  What  may  be  meant  by  this  cessation  of 
TIME?  Time,  considered  in  itself,  can  never  cease  to  exist.  It  must  flow  on  and  on 
to  endless  ages.  Everything  which  happens  must,  of  course,  have  a  certain  period 
of  time,  longer  or  shorter,  in  which  to  happen.  The  redeemed  in  glory  will  sing  the 
praises  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  Time  must  elapse  while  they  are  singing  those 
praises.  If  in  the  glorified  body  there  should  be  a  heart,  it  must  go  on,  pulsation 
after  pulsation,  in  never-ending  succession.  If  in  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth 
there  should  be  anything  analogous  to  that  movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies  which 
gives  us  day  and  night  and  the  vicissitudes  of  the  seasons,  such  a  movement  must 
necessarily  ask  time  to  proceed  in — nay,  as  it  proceeds,  it  must  measure  time.  What, 
then,  is  meant  by  the  announcement  of  a  period  when  there  shall  be  time  no  longer? 
Time,  as  I  have  said,  must  always  flow  on  ;  but  it  may  be  annihilated  to  us,  or  in 
great  measure  annihilated.  How  this  may  be  is  not  really  an  intricate  or  a  subtle 
question,  although  it  may  at  first  sight  appear  so.  It  is  generally  and  truly  said  that 
to  Almighty  God  there  is  no  such  thing  as  time.  If  you  understand  this  as- 
sertion, you  will  then  find  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  how  time  to  us  may  be  no 
longer.  To  say  that  to  Almighty  God  there  is  no  such  thing  as  time,  is  only  another 
method  of  expressing  the  truth  (and  be  it  said  with  the  utmost  reverence),  that  God 
has  a  perfect  memory  and  a  perfect  foresight.  There  are  many  points  of  analogy 
between  the  mind  and  the  eye.  Imagine,  then,  an  eye  as  free  from  the  laws  of  the 
eye  as  you  have  been  imagining  a  mind  free  from  the  laws  of  the  mind.  Imagine 
an  eye  not  subjected  to  the  laws  of  perspective,  an  eye  to  which  things  do  not,  as 
they  recede  from  it,  either  diminish  in  size  or  fade  in  colour.  It  must  be  clear  that 
to  such  an  eye  distance  does  not  exist,  ^ust  as  to  a  mind  endowed  with  perfect 
memory  and  perfect  foresight  time  does  not  exist.  One  object  may  be  placed  a  yard 
distant  from  the  eye  ;  another  object  may  be  placed  a  thousand  miles  distant ;  but 
if  the  latter  of  these  objects  appear  of  the  same  size,  shape,  and  colour,  and  with  all 
the  same  circumstantials,  as  it  would  if  brought  within  the  range  of  thirty-six 
inches  to  that  eye  distance  is  annihilated,  and  has  no  existence.    And  if  God  were 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

to  announce  to  any  one  that  distance  would  be  no  more  to  him,  this  would  be  only 
another  form  of  saying  that  his  eyesight  should  be  free  from  those  limitations  which 
are  at  present  the  conditions  under  which  eyesight  exists.  Thus  we  have  arrived  at 
the  last  stage  of  our  explanation.  You  have  only  to  remember  that  the  human  mind, 
in  another  stage  of  existence,  will  be  made  competent  for  a  far  higher  state  of  things 
than  it  can  ever  now  attain,  that  its  reach  will  be  increased  both  as  regards  the  past 
and  the  future,  in  order  to  comprehend  the  announcement  that  "  time  shall  be  no 
longer."  Our  memory  of  all  that  has  befallen  us  will  then  be  perfect.  Many  events 
and  sensations  of  our  past  career  are  buried  away  in  the  sod  of  the  mind,  trodden 
down  into  the  soil,  and  overlaid  by  our  more  recent  experiences.  Of  many  vei'y 
critical  events,  on  our  minds  there  is  just  a  headstone,  as  it  were,  with  a  monu- 
mental inscription,  giving  in  the  coldest  manner  their  name  and  date ;  but  fresh- 
ness, reality,  and  vitality  they  have  none.  Yet,  even  now,  passages  of  our  past 
history  are,  ever  and  anon,  recalled  to  us  with  a  wonderful  vividness,  by  music,  by 
odours,  by  long  forgotten  scenes,  or  by  some  other  association  of  the  senses.  Sudden 
and  transient  flashings  these,  of  a  light  which  is  destined  one  day  to  flush  the  whole 
mind,  and  to  penetrate  into  its  darkest  recesses.  The  memory  has  really  no  more 
lost  its  deposits  than  the  graveyard  has  lost  the  corpses  entrusted  to  its  keeping. 
Those  deposits  will  one  day  start  from  the  sod  in  all  the  freshness  of  new  life,  and 
Btand  up  upon  their  feet  "  an  exceeding  great  army."  Nor  need  we  shrink  from 
supposing  that  in  that  higher  condition  of  existence  the  powers  of  memory  and 
foresight  possessed  by  the  mind  will  be  greatly  enlarged,  whether  or  not  they  be 
made,  as  regards  our  future  experience,  perfect.  11.  Why  the  asseveration  of  the 
TEXT  IS  MADE  UPON  OATH.  The  reasoHs  are  obvious.  First,  its  being  made  on  oath 
argues  its  importance.  We  take  an  oath  in  matters  of  moment,  not  in  trifles.  Petty 
interests  are  felt  to  be  beneath  the  solemnity  and  dignity  of  an  appeal  to  Heaven. 
Secondly,  an  oath  is  an  indication  that  the  thing  assevered  appears  till  then  in  more 
or  less  uncertainty.  It  is  the  province  of  an  oath  to  give  assurance  of  something 
which  was  previously  open  to  question.  III.  To  each  one  among  us  the  abolition 
OF  time  wiLii  BE  THE  HOUR  OF  OUR  OWN  DEATH.  "  This  I  say,  brethren,  the  time  is 
short."  Yes,  that  is  the  main  point  which  the  oath  may  be  taken  to  imply — the 
infinite  importance  in  God's  estimation  of  the  time  that  remains  to  you  upon  earth. 
{Dean  Goulburn.)  The  end  of  time  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  end  of  time  ? 
Time,  as  far  as  man  has  any  concern  with  it,  is  that  portion  of  duration  which  is 
commensurate  with  the  existence  of  our  wwld,  and  which  is  measured  by  its  diurnal 
and  annual  revolutions.  It  began  when  this  world  began  to  exist.  The  end  of 
time,  and  the  end  of  the  world,  are,  then,  expressions  of  the  same  import.  IE.  When 
will  the  event  denoted  by  these  expressions  arrive  ?  We  learn  from  our  text 
that  it  will  arrive  when  the  mystery  of  God  shall  be  finished.  God's  great  object  in 
creating  this  world  and  its  inhabitants  was  to  gratify  and  glorify  Himsell  Now, 
God  at  once  glorifies  and  gratifies  Himself  when  He  displays  His  perfections  in  His 
works.  Some  of  His  perfections,  as,  for  instance,  His  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness, 
He  displayed  in  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  and  they,  as  well  as  some  other  perfec- 
tions of  His  nature,  are  still  displayed  in  its  providential  government.  But  the 
principal  display  of  His  perfections  is  made  in  the  work  of  redemption  by  Jesus 
Christ,  the  great  object  to  which  all  His  works  of  creation  and  providence  ultimately 
refer.  Agreeably,  inspiration  informs  us,  that  for  Jesus  Christ  all  things  were 
created ;  and  that  to  Him  there  is  given  dominion  and  glory  and  a  kingdom  that  aU 
people,  nations,  and  languages,  should  serve  Him.  When  the  purposes  for  which 
this  kingdom  was  given  to  Christ,  and  set  up  in  the  world,  are  accomplished,  the 
mystery  of  God,  mentioned  in  our  text,  will  be  finished.  Now  the  purposes  for 
which  this  kingdom  was  given  to  Christ  include  two  things.  The  first  is,  the  com- 
plete salvation  of  aU  who  are  given  to  Him  by  the  Father.  The  second  is,  the 
complete  and  final  subjugation  of  His  enemies.     III.  What  will  be  the  attending 

CIRCUMSTANCES    AND   CONSEQUENCES   OP   THIS  EVENT  ?       1.    With   respect   tO    OUrSclvCS, 

considered  as  individuals,  the  end  of  time,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing  to  us,  the  end 
of  our  lives  will  be  attended  by  circumstances,  and  followed  by  consequences,  most 
important  and  interesting.  (1)  We  shall  then  be  separated  at  once  from  all  tem- 
poral and  earthly  objects.  (2)  With  the%nd  of  time  our  state  of  probation  and  our 
day  of  grace  will  end.  We  shall  be  removed  from  our  present  religious  privileges 
and  means  of  spiritual  improvement.  (3)  When  time  ends,  eternity  will  begin.  The 
moment  in  which  we  leave  this  temporary  and  mutable  state,  we  shall  enter  a  state 
which  is  eternal,  and,  of  course,  unchangeable.  2.  The  circumstances  and  con- 
sequences which  will  attend  and  follow  the  end  of  time  with  respect  to  the  human 


CHAP.  X.]  REVELATION,  413 

race.  (1)  "When  the  end  of  time  shall  arrive,  the  general  resurrection  will  take 
place.  (2)  At  the  end  of  time,  the  day  of  judgment,  the  great  day  for  which  all 
other  days  were  made,  will  arrive.  3.  It  remains  only  to  consider  what  will  then  be 
the  fate  of  the  globe  which  we  inhabit.  Then  the  gold,  the  silver,  the  jewels,  and 
all  the  glittering  but  delusive  objects,  for  which  so  many  thousands  have  bartered 
their  souls,  shall  be  destroyed.  Lessons :  1.  In  view  of  this  subject,  however  insig- 
nificant, how  unworthy  of  an  immortal  being,  do  all  merely  temporal  and  earthly 
pursuits  appear !  2.  In  full  view  of  the  end  of  time  let  me  ask,  are  you  all,  my 
hearers,  prepared  for  it?  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  The  end  of  time: — I.  There  is  a. 
PERIOD  SET  AT  WHICH  TIME  SHALL  BE  NO  MORE.  1.  Time  had  a  beginning.  There 
was  a  day,  a  year,  that  was  the  first,  before  which  there  was  not  another.  But 
eternity  was  before,  and  will  be  after  time ;  which  therefore  appears  at  present  like 
a  small  island  lifting  up  its  head  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean.  2.  Time  has  run  from 
the  beginning,  and  is  running  on  in  an  uninterrupted  course  of  addition  of  moments, 
hours,  days,  months,  and  years.  3.  Time  will  come  to  an  end.  It  has  run  long, 
but  it  will  run  out  at  length.  The  last  sand  in  the  glass  of  this  world  will  pass. 
The  period  is  set  in  the  Divine  decree,  the  last  day  and  hour,  though  no  man  knows 
them.  (1)  This  present  world  shall  be  no  more  ;  these  heavens  and  earth  shall  pass 
away  by  the  general  conflagration  (2  Pet.  iii.  10).  (2)  New  years  shall  be  no  more. 
The  year  will  come,  the  month,  the  day,  hour  and  minute,  after  which  there  shall 
never  be  another.  Let  us  improve  our  years  then  for  eternity,  and  count  our  days 
so  as  to  apply  our  hearts  to  wisdom.  (3)  The  different  seasons  will  be  no  more. 
There  will  be  no  more  summer  and  winter,  seed-time  and  harvest.  There  will  be  an 
eternal  spring  in  heaven  ;  but  an  eternal  winter,  as  it  were,  in  hell,  where  is  gnash- 
ing of  teeth.  (4)  The  business  of  this  life  shall  be  no  more.  There  shall  be  no 
more  tilling  of  the  ground,  tending  of  flocks,  merchandising,  nor  trades.  How 
unhappy  must  they  be  who  have  no  pleasure  nor  satisfaction  in  anything  else,  since 
these  are  not  to  last  1  (6)  The  means  of  sustaining  this  life  shall  be  no  more. 
There  shall  be  no  more  eating,  drinking,  nor  sleeping.  (6)  Relations  shall  be  no 
more.  Time  going  dissolves  them  all,  as  fellow-travellers  part  when  come  to  their 
journey's  end.  There  shall  be  no  more  magistrates  and  subjects,  ministers  and 
people,  husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  children,  masters  and  servants  (Job  iii. 
19).  Only  the  relation  betwixt  Christ  and  His  people  as  head  and  members,  which 
is  not  of  this  world,  shall  remain ;  and  so  the  relation  to  God  as  His  children  (Luke 
XX.  35,  36) ;  who  are  the  children  of  God,  being  the  children  of  the  resurrection. 
(7)  Space  for  repentance  shall  be  no  more.  (8)  Tribulation  and  adversity  of  the 
godly  shaU  be  no  more.  (9)  The  prosperity  and  comfort  of  the  wicked  (Luke  xvi. 
25)  shall  be  no  more.  11.  The  weight  of  this  truth,  and  its  concern  to  man- 
kind. 1.  That  it  is  of  weight  and  concern  to  them  appears  in  its  being  sworn  to 
them ;  which  implies — (1)  That  men  are  very  heedless  about  it,  and  slow  to  be- 
lieve it,  and  be  impressed  with  it.  (2)  A  legal  intimation  made  to  them  of  its 
ending.  (3)  That  the  period  of  time  is  unalterably  fixed,  the  bounds  of  it  set, 
beyond  which  it  cannot  go  ;  for  ii>»is  set  by  an  oath.  2.  The  weight  of  the  thing  lies 
in  these  three.  (1)  That  then  that  which  concerns  mankind's  happiness  or  misery 
is  completed ;  the  state  of  probation  is  over,  and  the  state  of  recompense  takes  place 
in  perfection,  both  as  to  their  bodies  and  souls.  (2)  That  then  eternity  succeeds 
the  state  of  all  for  ever  unalterable,  no  end  to  be  expected  more.  (3)  That  now  or 
never  must  be  done  what  is  done  for  eternity.  Use.  Then  be  exhorted  suitably  to 
improve  this  intimation  of  time's  ending.  1.  Look  beyond  time,  this  world,  and 
the  state  of  things  in  it ;  carry  your  views  into  the  other  world,  to  eternity  (2  Cor. 
iv.  18).  2.  Lift  your  hearts  from  off  the  things  of  time,  and  set  them  on  those  that 
are  eternal  (Col.  iii.  2).  3.  Use  this  world  passingly,  as  pilgrims  and  strangers  in 
it  (1  Cor.  vii.  29-31).  4.  Let  not  the  frowns  of  this  world,  the  troubles  and  trials  of 
the  present  life,  make  deep  impression  on  us  :  they  wiU  not  last.  5.  Be  not  lifted  up 
with  the  world's  smiles,  nor  value  yourselves  on  worldly  prosperity ;  for  time  will 
put  an  end  to  this  also.  6.  Improve  time  while  it  lasts,  for  the  ends  it  is  given 
you  for.  (1)  Laying  a  good  foundation  for  eternity,  getting  out  of  your 
natural  state  into  the  state  of  grace,  believing  on  Christ,  and  repenting  of 
sin.  (2)  Living  to  the  honour  of  God,  endeavouring  to  act  in  your  sphere 
for  propagating  the  name  and  kingdom  of  Christ.  (3)  Serving  your  genera- 
tion in  usefulness  to  mankind,  seeking  to  forward  the  spiritual  and 
temporal  good  of  others  ;  as  David  did  (Acts  xiii.  36).  {T.  Boston.) 
The  mystery  of  God  finished  with  time  : — I.  We  shall  consider  the  mystery  of 
God  in  His   kinqdom  among  men.    1.  We  shall  consider  what  that  mystery  of 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

God  is.  A  mystery  is  a  secret  or  hidden  thing.  2.  I  will  show  in  what  respects 
it  is  a  mystery,  the  mystery  of  God  ;  or  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  His 
management,  is  a  mystery,  the  mystery  of  God.  II.  We  shall  consider  the 
MYSTERY  OF  GoD  AS  BEGUN  AND  CARRIED  ON  IN  TIME.  1.  We  shall  Consider  the 
first  opening  of  the  mystery.  (1)  In  the  promulgation  of  the  promise  of  the  gospel 
(Gen.  iii.  15).  (2)  In  the  offering  of  the  first  sacrifices,  with  the  skins  whereof  our 
naked  first  parents  were  clothed  (Gen.  iii.  21).  2.  We  shall  consider  the  gradual 
opening  of  the  mystery.  Of  this  we  have  an  account  in  Heb.  i.  1.  3.  We  shall 
consider  the  progress  of  the  mystery.  (1)  It  has  never  been  interrupted  since  it 
began  in  paradise  ;  the  salvation  of  the  Church  has  all  along  been  carried  on,  and 
matters  managed  for  that  end.  (2)  It  has  made  such  progress,  that  by  this  time 
it  is  drawing  towards  the  period  of  finishing  it.  (3)  It  is  going  on  in  our  day,  in 
the  same  powerful  hand  that  has  managed  it  all  along.  But  for  a  more  full  view  of 
the  mystery,  as  executed  in  time,  we  shall  consider  the  eight  following  particulars  of 
this  mysterious  kingdom,  in  every  part  of  which  there  is  a  mystery.  1.  The  head 
of  it,  Jesus  Christ,  is  a  mystery.  And  He  is  a  mystery,  a  mysterious  Head :  (1) 
In  the  constitution  of  His  person,  being  God  and  man  in  one  person.  (2)  In  His 
offices.  (3)  In  all  circumstances  about  Him.  2.  The  subjects  of  it,  believers,  are 
a  mystery  too.  They  are  in  the  world  indeed,  but  unknown  to  the  world  (1  John  iii.  1). 
3.  The  erection  and  conservation  of  it  is  a  mystery  (Luke  xvii.  20).  (1)  The  begin- 
nings of  it  were  very  small ;  how  vastly  soever  it  has  spread.  (2)  The  means  of 
erecting  and  setting  it  up  were  very  unlikely  and  unusual,  viz.,  the  despised  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  (Psa.  ex.  2).  (3)  The  opposition  to  it  from  the  beginning  has 
been  very  great ;  yet  it  has  made  its  way  in  face  of  all  opposition.  (4)  The  means 
of  keeping  it  up,  even  such  as  it  was  set  up  by.  Not  the  power  of  the  sword,  but 
the  preaching  and  teaching  of  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  setting  that  home  on 
men's  consciences ;  prayers,  and  tears,  patient  suffering  even  unto  death  (Rev.  xii.  11). 
,4.  The  seat  of  it  is  a  mystery  too.  5.  The  extent  of  it  is  a  mystery,  whether  it  is 
considered — (1)  In  respect  of  the  kind  of  jurisdiction  He  has  in  it.  (a)  The 
kingdom  of  grace  is  in  His  hand.  (6)  The  kingdom  of  glory  is  in  His  hand  too 
(Luke  xxii.  29,  30).  (c)  The  kingdom  of  providence  is  in  His  hand  likewise.  (2) 
In  respect  of  the  bounds  of  it.  It  extends  itself  over  both  worlds  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 ; 
Rev.  i.  18).  6.  The  privileges  of  it  are  a  mystery.  (1)  Their  union  with  Christ  is 
a  mystery  (Eph.  v.  32).  (2)  Their  justification  is  a  mystery.  (3)  Their  sanctifica- 
tion  is  a  mystery.  (4)  Their  perseverance  in  grace  is  a  mystery.  7.  The  life  and 
practice  of  it  is  a  mystery.  8.  The  manner  of  the  conduct  and  management 
of  it  is  a  mystery.  It  is  the  manner  of  this  kingdom — (1)  To  prefer  the 
most  unlikely,  bauDcing  them  that  stand  fairest  for  the  preference  in  aU  human 
appearance  (Matt.  xx.  16).  (2)  To  let  things  go  to  an  extremity,  to  the 
utmost  point  of  hopelessness,  before  a  hand  be  put  to  help  them,  and  set 
them  right  again  (Deut.  xxxii.  36).  (3)  To  give  the  sharpest  treatment  to  the 
greatest  favourites.  This  is  not  the  manner  of  men,  but  it  is  the  manner  of 
God  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  5,  14).  (4)  To  meet  men  with,  astonishing  strokes  going  in  the 
way  that  God  bade  them,  while  they  have  a  fair  sunshine  that  are  going  in  the  way 
of  their  own  hearts  (Eccles.  viii.  14).  (5)  To  lay  by  accepted  petitions,  and  let  them 
long  lie  by,  time  after  time,  while  yet  unacceptable  requests  are  quickly  granted. 
(6)  To  answer  accepted  prayers  quickly  with  some  one  terrible  thing  or  other,  which 
yet  are  to  be  graciously  and  bountifully  answered  in  due  time  (Psa.  Ixv.  5).  III. 
We  are  to  consider  the  mystery  of  God  as  finished  with  time.  1.  Let  us  con- 
sider when  this  mystery  of  God  shall  be  finished.  2.  Wherein  does  the  finishing  of 
this  mystery  lie?  It  lies  in  these  three  things  following.  (1)  The  accomplishment 
of  the  remaining  prophecies.  (2)  The  gathering  in  of  all  the  elect.  (3)  The  com- 
pleting of  the  salvation  of  the  Church  of  the  elect.  This  is  the  delivering  up  of 
the  kingdom  to  the  Father  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  xv.  24.  3.  It  remains  to  show  the 
import  and  consequence  of  this  finishing  the  mystery  of  God.  It  is  of  greatest 
importance  to  the  honour  of  God,  and  to  the  children  of  men.  For  then — (1)  The 
eternal  purpose  of  God  concerning  mankind  is  fulfilled ;  the  contrivance  laid  from 
eternity  in  the  depth  of  wisdom  about  them,  is  executed.  (2)  The  covenant  between 
the  Father  and  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  is  then  fulfilled  on  both  hands.  (3)  Then 
the  whole  frame  of  the  ordinances,  now  or  since  Adam's  fall,  in  use  in  the  world 
for  bringing  in  of  sinners,  and  edifying  of  saints,  is  laid  by.  (4)  Then  the  matter 
of  the  Divine  conduct  towards  mankind  is  altered  so  that  it  is  quite  new  (Rev. 
xxi.  5).  (5)  Then  Christ's  conquest  is  complete,  His  enemies  made  His  footstool, 
which  He  is  this  day  in  expectation  of  (Heb.  x.  12,  13).     4.  Then  the  mystery  is 


CHAP.  X.]  REVELATION.  415 

opened,  and  appears  in  a  full  light ;  though  before  veiled,  the  veil  is  then  taken 
off.  5.  There  will  be  no  more  mystery  of  God  ;  then  it  is  finished.  IV.  We  shall 
consider  the  relation  betwixt  the  mystery  of  God  and  time.  1.  Time  is  the 
space  appointed  for  the  mystery  of  God  its  being  executed.  2.  The  subsistence  or 
continuation  of  time  depends  on  the  mystery.  Had  there  been  no  mystery  of  God 
to  have  been  carried  on,  time  once  polluted  with  sin,  had  ended  soon  after  it  began. 
Hence  we  may  learn :  1.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  there  is  so  much  stumbling 
of  wicked  men  at  the  Divine  conduct  by  Christ  in  the  world.  The  matter  is  :  it  is 
a  mystery,  and  their  natural  blindness  hinders  them  to  see  it,  so  that  they  know  it 
not  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  How  the  godly  come  to  have  other  thoughts'  of  it ;  and  true 
Christians  admire  the  beauty  and  glory  of  it,  which  carnal  men  despise.  It  is  the 
mystery  of  God,  which  He  reveals  to  His  friends  and  fearers  of  His  name 
(Psa.  XXV.  14).  3.  No  reason  to  despise  religion  because  the  world  generally  do 
so.  4.  Time  is  not  continued  as  a  sleep  without  a  design.  Oh,  that  men  would 
consider  that  it  is  lengthened  out  on  a  particular  design ;  which,  being  compassed, 
it  shall  end  for  good  and  all  1  5.  It  is  not  this  world's  business,  but  Heaven's  busi- 
ness, that  is  the  great  design  of  the  continuing  of  time.  6.  The  mystery  of  God 
must  be  a  matter  of  singular  excellency,  and  of  the  last  importance,  that  for  it  time 
is  continued.  7.  The  mystery  of  God  has,  in  the  execution  of  it,  been  of  long 
continuance ;  but  it  is  drawing  to  a  close.  8.  When  there  is  no  more  time  requisite 
for  the  mystery  of  God,  there  will  be  no  more  time  for  other  things  neither ;  time 
will  end  with  it ;  for  it  is  for  the  sake  of  it  that  it  is  continued.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  &-11.  Go  and  take  the  little  ^oo'k.—The  making  of  a  minister  (with 
Ezek.  ii.  8-10,  iii.  1-3) : — The  symbolical  scene  in  the  case  of  Ezekiel  was  enacted 
over  again  in  the  case  of  John;  only  with  such  surroundings  of  majesty  and 
magnificence  as  were  but  befitting  after  John's  humiliated  but  glorified  Master 
had  sat  down  on  His  throne  in*  heaven.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  we  see  in 
that  fine  symbolical  scene  God's  own  immediate  way  of  making  a  minister — a  book. 
A  book  plays  a  great  part  in  the  salvation  of  men.  A  book  is  brought  down  from 
heaven  to  earth — a  book  written  in  heaven  lies  open  in  the  hand  of  the  heavenly 
messenger,  and  the  salvation  "  of  many  peoples,  and  nations,  and  tongues,  and 
kings  "  lies  wrapped  up  in  that  little  book.  "  Go  thou,"  said  the  voice  from  heaven 
to  John,  *'  Go  thou  and  take  the  book."  Now  that  is  being  both  said  and  done 
every  day  among  ourselves.  There  is  the  Book,  and  there  are  the  people,  and  there 
somewhere  among  the  people  is  the  man  chosen  of  God  to  take  the  Book,  and  to 
make  the  Book  his  own,  and  then  to  carry  it  to  the  people ;  "  Go,"  the  Spirit  of 
God  says  to  that  man,  "  Go,  leave  all  other  occupations  and  all  other  pursuits  ;  give 
thyself,  body  and  soul,  day  and  night,  and  all  the  days  of  thy  life,  to  that  Book." 
"Take  the  book  and  eat  it,"  said  the  angel  to  the  seer.  You  will  observe  that  the 
angel  did  not  say,  '*  Take  the  book  and  read  it."  Had  it  been  any  other  book  but 
the  Book  it  was,  to  read  it  himself  and  to  have  it  written  out  and  sent  to  all  the 
Churches  would  have  been  enough.  But  that  was  not  enough  for  this  Book. 
Interpret  the  Bible  like  any  other  book,  it  is  the  fashion  of  our  day  to  say,  and  in 
some  senses  that  is  an  excellent  enough  rule  ;  but  that  was  not  the  angel's  rule  that 
day  to  John.  All  other  books  in  John's  day  were  to  be  read,  but  this  Book  was  to 
be  eaten.  Yes,  eaten.  Clearly,  then,  this  is  not  an  ordinary  Book.  Clearly  this 
is  like  no  other  book.  Job  said :  *'  Neither  have  I  gone  back  from  the  command- 
ment of  His  lips.  I  have  esteemed  the  words  of  His  mouth  more  than  my  necessary 
food."  Eat,  then,  this  same  meal ;  eat  it  both  minister  and  people  ;  and  eat  it  for 
your  first  food  every  morning.  It  will  do  for  you  what  no  earthly  food,  the  best 
and  the  most  necessary,  can  do  ;  see  that  all  its  strength  and  all  its  sweetness  fills 
your  heart  before  you  eat  any  other  meat ;  read  God's  Book,  and  have  it  next  your 
heart  to  defend  yourself  against  the  influences  of  men  that  attempt  to  overthrow 
you.  "Enough  of  that;  bring  me  my  Bible,"  his  widow  told  me  one  of  my  old 
elders  used  to  say,  as  they  read  to  him  the  morning  newspaper  ;  "  enough  of  that; 
bring  me  my  Bible."  The  Word  of  God  was  more  to  that  saint  than  all  else,  and 
his  widow  and  I  rejoice  to  tell  the  story  after  he  has  gone  home  to  his  rest.  The 
Word  of  God  was  more  to  him  than  that  which  is  to  some  of  you  your  necessary 
food.  But  what  does  this  mean — this  extraordinary  thing,  "  It  was  in  my  mouth 
sweet  as  honey,  but  as  soon  as  I  had  eaten  it  my  belly  was  bitter  "  ?  The  best  way, 
the  only  way  indeed  to  find  out  all  that  means  is  to  eat  the  same  roll  ourselves,  and 
then  to  observe  what  passes  within  ourselves.  Keligion  is  an  experimental  science. 
Just  you  eat  the  Book  now  before  you  as  Ezekiel  and  John  ate  it,  and  then  tell  us 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

what  takes  place  with  you.  I  will  tell  you  what  will  take  place.  The  Word  of  God 
will  be  bitter  in  your  mouth  every  morning,  bitter  with  memories  of  yesterday  and 
yester-night.  Yes,  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  abiding  and  abounding  mercy  of  God, 
they  are  in  His  blessed  Word  always  passing  sweet  to  a  penitent  sinner.  Ah,  the 
truth  is  that  the  power,  and  the  holiness,  and  the  heavenly  beauty  of  God's  Word  is 
the  daily  and  the  sweet  experience  of  all  those  who  make  the  Word  of  God  their 
earliest  and  their  most  necessary  food.  But  after  this,  when  this  sweet  Book 
descends  into  what  David  calls  our  "  inward  parts  "  ;  when  the  holy,  and  the  just, 
and  the  good  Word  of  God  enters  our  guilty  conscience  and  our  corrupt  heart,  then 
there  is  bitterness  indeed ;  for  a  sense  of  sin,  as  we  so  lightly  speak,  is  then 
awakened  in  the  soul,  and  with  that  new  sense  comes  a  new  bitterness,  compared 
with  which  the  waters  of  Marah  are  milk  and  honey.  "  Son  of  man,  eat  that  thou 
findest,"  says  Jehovah  to  Ezekiel  in  the  vision.  "  Take  it,  and  eat  it  up,"  said  the 
angel  in  like  manner  to  John.  Neither  the  prophet  nor  the  apostle  was  asked  or 
allowed  to  pick  and  choose,  as  we  say.  They  were  not  to  eat  the  sweet,  and  spit  out 
the  bitter.  They  were  not  to  keep  rolling  the  sweet  morsels  under  their  tongue,  and 
to  keep  their  inward  parts  strangers  to  their  inward  share  of  the  Divine  Book.  I 
know  this  Scripture  will  not  be  sweet  to  aU  who  hear  it ;  but  if  it  is  at  first  bitter  it 
must  not  be  cast  out.  We  must  allow  ourselves  to  read  and  preach  and  hear  the 
whole  Word  of  God.  "  Son  of  man,  eat  that  thou  findest  "  ;  and  again,  "  Take  the 
roll  and  eat  it  up."  It  is  a  fine  study  to  take  up  the  Old  Testament,  and  to  trace  all 
through  it  how  prophet  follows  prophet,  and  psalmist  follows  psalmist,  each  several 
prophet  and  psalmist  taking  home  to  himself  all  that  the  prophets  and  the  psalmist 
had  said  and  sung  before  him ;  and  then,  having  made  the  Book  their  own  by 
reading  it,  by  praying  over  it,  by  singing  it,  by  eating  it,  as  the  figure  is,  then  when 
their  own  call  came  they  prophesied  prophecies,  and  sang  psalms,  new  psalms,  new 
prophecies  as  the  people's  need  was — never  contenting  themselves  with  just  counter- 
signing and  repeating  what  any  former  prophet  had  said,  what  any  former  psalmist 
had  sung,  however  great  and  however  good  in  his  time  that  prophet  and  psalmist 
had  been.  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  God's  Word  ;— The  "  little  book  "  may  be  taken 
to  illustrate  God's  redemptive  truth,  or  the  gospel.  I.  The  gospel  is  brought  to 
MAN  TROM  HEAVEN.  The  was  in  which  alienated  humanity  can  be  brought  into  a 
loving  sympathy  with  God  transcends  human  discovery.  Divine  messengers 
brought  this  "  little  book  "  to  man,  and  Christ  embodied  it.  II.  This  gospel  is 
TO  BE  APPROPRIATED  BY  MAN.  "  Eat  it  up."  The  Spirit  of  this  "little  book"  must 
become  the  inspiring  and  the  regnant  spirit  of  our  being.  III.  This  gospel  has 
A  TWOFOLD  EFFECT  ON  MAN.  "  Swcet "  in  its  disclosurcs  of  infinite  love  and 
promises  of  future  blessedness;  "bitter"  in  its  convictions  of  sin,  reproofs,  and 
denunciations.  It  produces  in  the  soul  sorrow  and  joy,  sighs  and  songs  ;  and  its 
bitterness  will  remain  as  long  as  one  particle  of  depravity  continues  in  the  heart. 
IV.  This  gospel,  APPROPRIATED,  QUALIFIES  MAN  FOR  HIS  MISSION  (ver.  11).  {D.  Thomos, 
D.D.)  Take  it,  and  eat  it  up. — On  eating  books  : — There  are  many  different 
kinds  of  books  in  the  worid.  I.  There  are  some  which  have  nothing  in  them. 
They  are  not  directly  harmful,  but  neither  are  they  of  much  good.  When  you 
have  read  them  you  can  scarcely  remember  anything  that  they  contained.  They 
are  \ery  much  like  a  kind  of  pastry  wiiicii  we  call  "  tride."  The  moment  you  put 
it  into  your  mouth  it  vanishes  into  thin  air.  Beware  of  books  which  only  please 
you  for  the  moment,  and  do  nothing  that  would  make  you  better  or  wiser.  II. 
There  are  other  books  which  are  stupefying.  They  dull  the  senses.  They  are 
like  what  we  call  "opiates,"  which  make  men  feel  heavy  and  stupid.  Be  careful 
never  to  read  books  which  merely  please  by  soothing  and  dulling  the  senses.  III. 
There  are  other  books  which  are  unduly  exciting.  I  do  not  object  to  a 
reasonable  amount  of  interest.  Every  book  worth  the  reading  must  in  one  sense 
excite  us ;  but  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  books  which  excite  you  by  the  amount 
of  true  knowledge  which  they  give,  or  noble  enthusiasm  which  they  impart,  but 
those  which  excite  you  by  the  feverish  curiosity  with  which  they  fire  you.  I 
earnestly  warn  you  against  every  book  which  makes  it  more  difficult  for  you  to  do 
your  every-day  duty.  IV.  There  are  other  books  which  are  very  hard  to  digest. 
I  have  no  doubt  some  of  you  think,  for  instance,  that  books  on  arithmetic  or  English 
grammar  are  very  indigestible  ;  but  if  you  take  a  little  at  a  time,  and  masticate  that 
well  before  you  take  more,  you  will  find  that  even  hard  books  will  agree  with  you 
wonderfully,  and  that  you  will  be  stronger  and  better  fpr  having  taken  them. 
Children  suffer  from  indigestion,  in  learning  difficult  tasks,  by  taking  too  much  at 
a  time.    The  great  secret  of  success  is  to  take  a  little  often,  and  to  see  that  you 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  417 

learn  well  every  little  lesson,  and  thus  make  it  your  own,  before  you  take  more.  V. 
There  are  other  books  which  are  decidedly  poisonous.  Take  care  that  you 
do  not  eat  them.  These  books  speak  well  of  sin,  and  kindly  of  evil.  Beware  of 
any  book  that  does  not  agree  with  the  Bible  in  its  estimate  of  good  and  of  evil.  VI. 
And  now  I  want  to  tell  you  of  this  one  Book — the  Bible — of  which  you  need  never 
grow  weary.  (2).  Davies.)  The  proper  use  of  Divine  truth  : — Divine  truth  is 
not  something  for  intellectual  speculation,  it  is  not  something  for  memory,  but 
diet  for  the  life.  It  must  be  transmuted  into  the  moral  blood,  and  sent  through  the 
heart  into  every  fibre  of  our  being.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Word  of  God  to  be 
pondered  : — "  Read  the  Word  of  God  much,"  said  General  Gordon,  "  but  chew  it 
more."  That  is  pondering.  Make  a  practice  of  it ;  make  a  rule  of  it.  {Bp.  Talbot.) 
Thou  must  prophesy  again. — Rules  for  Christian  effort : — I.  Chbi8tla.n  effort 
MUST  BE  personal.  "  Thou."  The  faculties  of  the  individual  man  must  be  excited 
to  activity  in  the  cause  of  God.  The  most  magnificent  achievements  of  the  human 
mind  have  been  wrought  out  in  lonely  musings  and  lonely  labours.  If  we  would 
hew  the  rugged  forms  of  our  fellow-men  into  the  symmetry  and  grace  of  Christian 
discipleship  we  must  not  be  content  to  give  subscriptions  for  evangelistic  purposes ; 
but  we  must  feel  a  responsibility  that  is  all  our  own,  and  while  acting  in  brotherly 
union  we  must  also  act  as  if  we  had  been  specially  called  to  a  task  in  which  no  one 
has  so  much  to  do  as  ourselves.  II.  Christian  effort  must  be  proportioned  to 
PERSONAL  ability.  "  Thou  must  prophesy."  John  had  the  prophetic  gift,  and  he 
was  to  use  it.  God  has  called  thousands  to  His  work,  and  though  all  cannot  do  the 
same  thing,  aU  are  to  do  their, best  in  that  which  they  can  do.  A  man  with  a 
divided  mind,  with  his  mind  in  part  intent  on  his  own  ease,  and  in  part  only  on  the 
work  of  the  Lord,  will  accomplish  nothing  worth  naming.  But  let  him  unite  his 
faculties,  let  him  bring  all  the  strength  and  all  the  determination  of  his  soul  to  bear 
on  the  task  to  which  he  is  called,  let  him  throw  the  glow  and  enthusiasm  of  his 
nature  into  his  duty  with  the  bold  avowal,  "  This  one  thing  I  do,"  and  though  a 
thousand  difficulties  withstand  him,  he  will  sweep  on  to  the  consummation  of  his 
plans,  m.  Christian  effort  must  be  repeated.  "  Thou  must  prophesy  again." 
Nothing  great  can  be  done  all  at  once.  It  was  only  after  many  struggles  that 
Wilberforce  succeeded  in  the  abolition  of  the  slave  trade.  Nor  are  we  to  think  that 
any  strange  thing  has  befallen  us,  or  to  deem  it  a  reason  for  suspending  our  labours, 
if  months  or  even  years  elapse  before  we  see  the  moral  and  religious  reformation  at 
which  we  are  aiming.  We  cannot  reasonably  expect  that  rude,  ignorant,  vicious 
men  will  all  at  once  be  transformed  into  melodious  Davids,  magnificent  Isaiahs,  or 
saintly  Johns.  We  cannot  reasonably  expect  that  Babylon  wiU  come  crashing  to 
the  ground  at  our  first  shout,  and  its  ruins  start  at  a  touch  into  the  majesty  of  a 
holy  city.  We  shall  have  to  '•  prophesy  again";  we  shall  have  to  repeat  our 
efforts  before  we  see  "  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  prosper  in  our  hand."  IV. 
Christian  effort  must  enlarge  the  scope  of  its  movements.  •*  Thou  must 
prophesy  again  before  many  peoples,"  &c.  The  more  we  do,  the  more  we  see  there 
is  to  do.  Patriotism  owns  that  this  is  a  land  which,  from  white  cliff  in  the  south 
to  sternest  precipice  in  the  north,  is  worthy  of  any  labour  and  any  self-sacrifice. 
If  the  statesman  will  contend  from  early  evening  until  the  morning  crimsons  the 
windows  of  the  Senate  House  for  measures  by  which  he  intends  to  enlarge  the 
liberties  and  increase  the  happiness  of  the  people — if  the  soldier  will  stride  over  the 
field  of  deadly  fight  and  rush  through  the  fiery  breach  that  the  foeman's  drum  may 
not  be  beaten  in  our  street,  nor  the  foeman's  flag  be  lifted  among  our  old  ancestral 
oaks,  it  surely  becomes  us  to  raise  ourselves  to  the  level  of  Christian  patriotism, 
and  to  stretch  out  our  prayers  and  our  labours  so  that  they  shall  include  the  whole 
nation.    (G.  Manat.) 


CHAPTER    XI. 

Vers.  1-19.  Rise,  and  measure  the  temple  of  God.— r^«  living  temple  of  ChrUVa 
Church  and  the  two  witnesses  of  the  Word  written  and  the  sacraments  : — The  temple 
and  altar,  and  them  that  worshipped  therein,  were  capable  of  measurement.  They 
were  not  like  the  unorganised  multitude,  formless,  creedless,  undisciplined,  without 
the  court.  The  temple,  the  altar,  and  its  priesthood  and  the  worshippers,  have  strength 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

of  form  and  organisation,  and  the  beauty  of  order.     So  the  apostles  organise  the 
Church,  set  in   order  its  worship,   estabUsh  its  discipHne.      Standing  before  the 
Incarnate  Son  of  God,  who  in  the  spiritual  organisna  of  His  temple,  the  Church, 
reveals  Himself,  and  bearing  their  corroborating  testimony  to  the  faith  are  the  two 
witnesses  of  the  sacraments  and  the  written  Word.     1.  Consider  first  the  witness 
of  the   sacraments.      (1)  They  are  the  instrumental  life-givers.     For  Christ,  the 
Incarnate  Son  of  God,  is  to  the  new  creation  what  God,  "  Creation's  secret  force," 
is  to  the  old.     (2)  So  likewise  the  sacraments  enlighten.    Baptism  with  water  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  declares  the  doctrine  of  the  Blessed 
Trinity  as  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  Christian  faith.     It  manifests  our  sinful 
condition  and  the   need   of   a   washing   away   of   sin.      (3)  The   sacraments   are 
witnesses.     The  Church,  filled  with  sacramental  life,  bears  witness  to  the  world. 
2.  Turn  we  next  to  the  other  great  witness,   the  written  Word.      The  written 
Word  self -evidences  its    own    inspiration.      {Bp.    Grafton.)         The  extent  and 
limit   of  the   true    Church   of    God : — ^At  the  time  of   this  prophecy  the  literal 
temple  was  no  more.     The  once-holy  city  was  defiled   by  the  "  abomination  of 
desolation."     Then  the  true  temple,  the  true  holy  city,  existed  ii^  "  the  Church  of 
the  living  God."     The  outer  enclosure  is  not  to  be  reckoned  as  a  part  of  the  temple 
in  this  Divinely  appointed  remeasurement.   All  this  most  impressively  sets  forth  the 
fact  that  Zion's  external  buildings  cover  a  much  wider  space  than  the  real  heart- 
worshippers  whom  God  will  own.     There  may  be,  and  there  are,  large  masses  of 
people  at  the  outer  fringe  of  our  Christian  services.    But  if  now  a  heavenly 
messenger  were  to  come  among  us  who  was  appointed  to  measure  the  real  living 
temple  of  God,  would  it  not  turn  out  that,  of  a  very  large  part  of  our  surroundings, 
the  order  would  be,  "  Measure  it  not "  ?    This  measurement  from  on  high  is  ever 
going  on.    And  if  the  great  Lord  of  the  Church  saw  fit  to  show  us  in  a  vision 
who   are   in  His   Church   and  who   are  not,  many  would  be  without  whom  we 
thought  were  in,  and  many  within  whom  we  thought  were  out.    But  not  by 
any    human    hands    can   the    true    temple    of    God  be    built ;    nor  yet  by  any 
human  eye  can  its  limits  be  discerned.     {C.  Clemance,  D.D.)        The  measuring 
of  the  temple  : — I.  The  measuring.    But  as  in  those  other  representations  we  cannot 
think  that  material  earthly  buildings  are  meant,  or  any  literal  measurements 
whether  of  city  or  temple,  so  here  we  regard  the  temple  as  telling  of  that  glorious 
spiritual  fabric  of  which  we  so  often  read  under  like  imagery  in  the  Epistles  of  St. 
Paul,  and  the  measuring  is  a  metaphor  to  signify  that  careful  investigation  and 
scrutiny  whereby  true  knowledge  is  gained.      1.  God  has  an  ideal  for  every- 
thing, a  standard  to  which  He  would  have  it  conform.     He  had  in  the  creation 
of  the  world.      And  He  looks  down  from  heaven — so  we  are  told — to  see  what 
is  done  upon  the  earth;  He  taketh  account  of  aU  that  men   do.     2.  Christ  is 
the  ideal  Man,  and  therefore  called  "the  Son  of  Man."    He  did  in  all  things  so 
answer  to  His  Father's  intent  that  He  was  the  "  beloved  Son  in  whom  "  God  was 
♦'  well  pleased."    3.  And  this  "  measuring  "  is  continually  going  on.     There  is  an 
inward  monitor  as  well  as  an  outward  one.    4.  How  grateful  we  should  be  for  this  1 
"  Lord,  with  what  care  Thou  hast  begirt  us  round  I  "  so  sings  holy  George  Herbert; 
and  one  evidence  of  this  care  is  in  the  constant  bringing  before  our  consciences  the 
rigid  rule  of  right.     H.  The  measured  that  are  spoken  of  here.     The  temple, 
the  altar,  and  the  people.     1.  The  temple  of  God.    It  was  a  symbol  and  type  of  all 
Israel,  if  not  of  the  whole  Church  of   God    (St.   Paul,    "In  whom  the  whole 
building  fitly  framed  together  groweth  into  a  holy  temple  unto  the  Lord  ").     There- 
fore we  may  take  "  the  temple  of  God"  as  representing  the  Church  in  its  outward 
form.    Now,  God  has  His  ideal  for  this.    What  is  it  ?    By  this  supreme  test  will  all 
our  Church  organisations  be  tried.    What  fruit  have  they  borne  in  that  which  is  the 
end  of  all  religion  ?    No  antiquity,  orthodoxy,  catholicity,  popularity,  beauty,  wealth, 
or  any  other  such  plea  will  stand  if  God's  standard  be  not  answered  to,  and  His 
demand  for  "  good  fruit "  be  not  met.     The  axe  will  fall,  and  the  tree  will  go  down. 
2.  The  altar.     This  also  was  to  be  measured.     We  may  take  "  the  altar  "  as  the 
symbol  of  the  worship  of  the  Church.    Is  our  worship  fervent  ?     On  that  altar  was 
an  ever-burning  fire.    Is  it  spiritual  ?    Does  it  ascend  up  to  God  as  the  smoke  of 
the  sacrifice  mounted  up  into  the  heavens — symbol,  beautiful,  striking,  appro- 
priate, of  that  uplifting  of  the  heart,  that  real  outgoing  of  the  soul  after  God, 
which  belongs  to  all  true  worship  ?    And,  above  all,  is  it  sacrificial?    The  altar  was 
for  sacrifice.    Worship  that  has  not  this  element  in  it  will  be  rejected  when  that 
measurement  of  the  altar  told  of   here  takes  place.     Sacrifice  means  giving  up 
something  which  we  should  like  to  keep.     Was  not  Christ's  sacrifice  such  ?    Is  not 


.<3HAP.  n.-]  REVELATION.  419 

all  sacrifice  such  ?  3.  The  people.  "  Them  that  worship  therein  " — so  we  read. 
Now,  the  Divine  ideal  for  these  may  be  learnt  by  noting  what  was  not  to  be 
measured.  And  we  are  told  in  ver.  2  that  "  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple 
.  .  .  measure  it  not."  It  was  to  be  cast  out,  left  out  of  the  reckoning  altogether. 
Now,  the  outer  court  of  the  temple  was  the  addition  of  Herod ;  he  was  given  to 
erecting  magnificent  buildings,  and  the  addition  of  this  outer  court  did  undoubtedly 
add  much  to  the  splendour  of  the  whole  fabric.  But  such  court  had  no  place  in  the 
tabernacle  nor  in  the  temple  of  Solomon  or  that  of  Zerubbabel.  But  Herod  had 
made  this  outer  court  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  It  was  thronged  by  all  manner 
of  people.  There  it  was  the  money-changers  had  their  tables,  and  they  who  bought 
and  sold  doves.  The  Gentiles  might  come  there,  though  they  might  not  pass  into 
what  was  especially  the  temple,  and  which  was  sacred  to  Israelites  only.  And 
so  it  represented  all  those  outer-court  worshippers,  those  mixed  multitudes  which 
are  found  associated  with  God's  true  people  everywhere — of  them,  but  not  truly 
belonging  to  them.  HI.  The  meaning  op  all  this.  It  was  because  a  time  of  sore 
trial  was  imminent,  close  at  hand.  God  ever  has,  even  in  the  worst  of  times,  a 
remnant.  And  He  takes  notice  of  them,  and  will  keep  them  securely,  whilst  those 
who  are  not  as  they  are  subjected  to  His  sore  judgments.  The  measuring  means 
preservation  for  the  faithful,  judgment  for  all  else.  (S.  Conway,  B.A.)  The 
cause  of  right  on  earth  : — I.  The  cause  of  right  on  this  earth  has  its  meastjrino 
RULE  (vers.  1,  2).  1.  In  the  human  world  there  is  right  and  wrong.  There  is 
the  temple  of  God,  &c.  At  the  same  time  there  is  the  court  that  is  outside — a 
sphere  discarded  by  the  right  and  trampling  on  the  holy.  This,  however,  is  only 
for  a  time.  2.  Right  here  has  its  measuring  line.  Take  the  "  temple  "  here  as  the 
emblem  of  right  on  the  earth,  and  the  "  reed  "  as  that  of  the  moral  law  of  God — 
the  law  that  measures  moral  character.  It  is  a  plummet  that  sounds  the  deepest 
depths  of  being  :  it  is  a  moral  analyst  to  test  the  quality  of  every  thought,  affection, 
and  deed.  U.  Tne  cause  op  right  on  this  earth  has  its  mighty  defenders 
(vers.  3-6).  1.  They  do  their  work  in  sadness.  *'  Clothed  in  sackcloth."  It  is 
not  a  light  work  to  stand  up  against  a  corrupt  world  and  struggle  against  an  age 
grinning  with  selfishness,  sensuality,  and  cupidity.  2.  They  contribute  Divine 
light.  The  "olive  trees"  fed  the  lamps  and  the  "candlesticks"  reflected  the 
light.  Were  it  not  for  the  Divine  defenders  of  the  right,  grand  heroes  in  moral 
history,  all  the  lamps  of  truth  would  go  out,  and  the  whole  race  would  be  mantled 
in  midnight.  3.  They  exert  tremendous  power  (ver.  5).  Their  words  flash 
devouring  flames,  so  shake  the  corrupt  moral  firmament  under  which  their 
contemporaries  are  living,  that  the  very  heavens  seem  shut  up  and  the  rolling 
streams  of  life  seem  turned  into  blood.  III.  The  cause  of  right  on  the  earth 
HAS  its  terrible  ANTAGONISTS  (vcrs.  7-13).  1.  The  antagonists  of  the  right  are 
malignant ;  they  not  only  murder,  but  they  exult  in  their  cruelty.  The  spirit  of 
persecution  is  an  infernal  virus  that  gallops  through  the  veins  of  the  intolerant 
persecutor,  and  physical  violence  is  the  weapon.  2.  The  antagonists  of  the  right  are  ever 
frustrated.  (1)  Their  victims  were  Divinely  reanimated.  (2)  Their  victims  ascended 
to  heaven.  (3)  With  their  ascension  terrible  calamities  befall  the  earth.  IV.  The 
CAUSE  OP  right  on  THE  EARTH  IS  DESTINED  TO  TRIUMPH  (vcrs.  14-19).  1.  The  rapture 
and  adoration  of  the  good.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world."  What  have  they  been  ? 
What  are  they  now  ?  Hellish  mimicries  of  eternal  right  and  power.  Like  muddy 
bubbles  on  the  great  stream  of  life,  they  have  broken  into  the  clear  and  fathomless 
river  of  rectitude  and  will  appear  no  more,  and  this  will  continue  for  ever  and 
ever.  Well,  then,  might  the  righteous  worship  and  thank  God.  2.  The  increased 
accessibility  of  heaven.  "  The  temple  of  God  was  opened."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  temple  of  God : — I.  Its  peculiarity.  By  "the  temple  of  God,"  which  John  is 
commanded  to  measure,  understand  the  true  Church  of  Christ.  The  altar  of 
incense  is  named,  to  denote  the  militant  state  of  the  Church,  whose  employment  is 
prayer ;  in  distinction  from  that  of  the  Church  triumphant,  which  is  praise.  The 
censer  is  in  the  hand  of  the  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God  "  below,  the  harp  is  in  the 
hands  of  those  above.  That  the  measurement  is  to  be  confined  to  the  altar  and 
worshippers  within  the  temple  is  obvious  also  from  the  refusal  of  its  extension  to 
the  court ;  "  But  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  leave  out,  and  measure  it 
not."  If  whatever  is  without  the  temple  be  precluded  from  the  measurement,  aU 
that  to  which  it  applies  must  of  course  be  considered  within.  11.  Its  meashre- 
MENT.  Rise  and  see  how  far  we  have  proceeded  with  the  prophecies.  Observe  in 
what  state  we  left  the  Church !  Let  a  correct  measurement  be  taken  before  we 
proceed  further.    Measure  how  far  the  building  is  advanced,  and  see  what  remains 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

to  bring  it  to  perfection.  See  what  injuries  the  temple  of  God  has  sustained  from 
fierce  and  sanguinary  attacks.  It  has  suffered  much,  but  behold  it  still  abides. 
See  now  what  the  work  is,  after  weathering  its  storms.  "Rise  and  measure  the 
temple  of  God."  Measure  too  the  altar.  Take  the  dimensions  of  the  altar  of 
incense  which  has  been  reared  for  prayer  and  praise.  Take  the  degree  of  faith  in 
the  everliving  Intercessor.  Measure  the  devotions  of  the  sanctuary.  Mark  the 
plenitude  and  purity  of  the  incense  rising  before  the  throne.  Measure  too  the 
worshippers.  Observe  the  number  of  professing  Christians.  Measure  the  spiritual 
stature,  and  gauge  the  heart  of  each  one.  Measure  them  that  worship  therein. 
There  must  be  a  certain  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height  of  character. 
There  must  be  a  certain  depth  of  humility  and  self-renunciation,  a  certain  height 
of  faith  and  devotion,  a  certain  length  of  integrity  and  zeal.  View  them  as 
worshippers,  and  there  is  a  certain  height  to  which  they  must  attain,  in  feeble 
imitation  of  the  dignity  of  Him  that  sits  upon  the  throne.  The  breadth  of  the 
believer's  principles,  the  depth  of  his  emotions,  a  certain  breadth  of  sincerity  and 
charity,  the  length  of  his  hopes,  the  height  of  his  joys,  are  far  beyond  the  narrow 
bounds  within  which  his  whole  being  was  formerly  confined.  His  soul  is  enlarged. 
He  is  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  has  risen  above  this  earth,  and  has 
attained  a  spiritual  stature  that  brings  him  into  fellowship  with  the  Father,  and 
with  His  son  Jesus  Christ.  His  conversation  is  in  heaven.  HI.  The  desecration 
OP  THE  COURT  BY  THE  Gentiles  is  the  remaining  particular  in  relation  to  this 
temple.  This  court  is  nominal  Christianity,  which  now,  for  the  first  time,  began 
to  assume  a  distinct  character.  It  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  an  alliance 
between  the  Church  and  the  world,  it  has  been  far  more  prejudicial  to  the  real 
interests  of  the  Church  than  the  most  virulent  persecution.  This  court  is  further 
said  to  be  "  given  unto  the  Gentiles."  It  remains  only  to  speak  of  the  court  being 
given  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  the  holy  city  to  be  trodden  under  foot.  *'  I  will  give 
power,"  it  is  afterwards  said,  "  unto  My  two  witnesses  and  they  shall  prophesy 
clothed  in  sackcloth."  It  brings  before  us  the  permission  of  the  awful  reign  of  anti- 
christian  darkness,  for  the  development  of  the  whole  principles  of  evil  in  contrast 
with  good.  It  coincides  with  the  surrender  of  the  Church  by  God,  to  that  ardent 
desire  for  worldly  conformity  which  the  severest  chastisements  had  failed  to  repress. 
They  would  not  retain  the  gospel  in  its  simplicity,  but  would  rely  upon  an  arm  of 
flesh;  therefore  God  suffered  them  to  be  spoiled  by  thieves  and  robbers,  who 
entered  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheepfold,  but  climbed  up  some  other  way.  (<?. 
Rogers.)  The  right  temple  : — Jesus  Christ  in  what  He  has  done  as  the  way  in  which 
God  dwells  with  us,  and  we  with  God,  is  the  temple  that  we  are  thus  to  measure. 
I.  First,  this  is  a  temple  that  endureth  fob  ever  ;  a  temple  of  eternity,  a  house, 
as  the  apostle  calls  it,  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  Blessed  are 
they  that  dwell  in  this  temple.  And  who  are  they  that  take  such  account  of  it  as 
to  understand  the  eternity  of  it,  the  certainty  of  it,  that  Christ  is  indeed  a  house 
not  made  with  hands,  that  He  is  indeed  eternal  in  the  heavens.  II.  A  temple  of 
Plenty.  "  We  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  Thy  house,  even  of  Thy  holy 
temple."  Ah,  God  the  Father  is  well  pleased,  Christ  is  satisfied  with  the  travail  of 
His  soul ;  and  "  we,"  poor  sinners  saved  by  mercy,  brought  out  of  eternal  privation 
into  this  eternal  plenty,  "  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  Thy  house,  even 
of  Thy  holy  temple  "  ;  a  temple  from  which  sin  and  death  are  for  ever  excluded ;  a 
temple  into  whijch  sin  and  death  cannot  enter.  III.  A  temple  of  government,  as 
you  may  see  in  the  last  verse  of  this  chapter :  "  The  temple  of  God  was  opened  in 
heaven,  and  there  was  seen  in  His  temple  the  ark  of  His  testament."  Now  heaven 
here  means  the  New  Testament  dispensation,  and  there  will  never  be  another 
dispensation  after  the  one  we  have  now.  But  will  there  not  be  glorification? 
That  will  not  be  another  dispensation ;  that  will  only  be  a  continuation  of  the 
present.  It  is  true  preaching  will  end,  the  ordinances  of  the  present  dispensation 
wiU  end  ;  but  we  shall  always  have  the  same  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  same  God,  and 
the  same  covenant,  and  the  same  life,  and  the  same  sanctification.  Christ's 
kingdom  shall  reign  through  all  ages,  and  never  be  moved ;  and  everything  must 
be  subservient  to  the  government  of  Christ's  kingdom.  And  hence  it  is  said  that 
when  this  temple  was  opened  •'  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  thunderings, 
and  an  earthquake,  and  a  great  hail."  What  are  the  lightnings?  Why,  God's 
Word.  His  arrows  shall  go  forth  as  lightning,  whether  it  be  to  strike  an  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  dead,  or  to  pierce  the  hearts  of  three  thousand  sinners,  and  make 
them  cry,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  whether  it  be  for  judgment  or 
for  mercy.    These  lightnings  are  God's  Word ;  and  when  the  temple  is  opened,  that 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  421 

is  when  Christ  is  revealed,  then  these  lightnings  come.  And  there  were  "voices." 
There  is  the  voice  of  salvation :  there  is  the  voice  of  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor 
forsake  thee."  There  is  the  voice  of  the  deep  soul  trouble ;  there  are  the  various 
voices  of  all  the  experiences  of  the  people  of  God :  glorious  voices  of  exaltation, 
triumph,  victory,  and  satisfaction.  And  then  there  are  thunderings  :  and  what  are 
they  ?  Why,  God's  Word.  The  child  of  God  sometimes  gets  rather  sleepy,  some 
thundering  Scripture  will  come  into  his  mind,  create  fears,  and  doubts,  and 
tremblings.  This  is  what  one  calls  being  called  into  the  secret  place  of  thunder — 
but  it  does  the  soul  good.  And  an  earthquake.  Why,  regeneration  is  an  earth- 
quake. It  swallows  up  what  you  were  before  ;  swallows  up  your  former  hope,  and 
makes  you  feel  that  you  yourself  will  be  swallowed  up  in  hell.  Many  a  sinner, 
when  God  begins  His  work  in  this  earthquake-like  way,  has  exclaimed  with  the 
Psalmist,  "  Let  not  the  pit  shut  her  mouth  upon  me."  '*  And  a  great  hail."  What 
is  that  ?  Storms  of  persecution  and  tribulation.  If  the  lightning  seem  to  be 
against  you,  yet  your  God  holds  the  lightnings  in  His  hand,  and  though  the 
thunderings  may  seem  to  be  against  you,  yet  the  Lord  governs  those  thunderings, 
and  though  revolutions  alarm  you,  yet  the  Lord  governs  these  changes,  and  though 
you  may  be  persecuted,  and  storms  and  persecutions  may  fall  upon  you,  yet  the 
Lord  hath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of 
His  feet.  {Jus.  Wells.)  The  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot. — The  true 
Church  reduced : — The  Church  of  God  will  be  greatly  reduced  in  its  apparent 
numbers  by  the  open  desertion  of  the  powers  of  the  world.  This  desertion  will 
begin  in  a  professed  indifference  to  any  particular  form  of  Christianity,  under  the 
pretence  of  universal  toleration  ;  which  toleration  will  proceed  from  no  true  spirit  of 
charity.  .  .  .  The  pretended  toleration  will  go  far  beyond  a  just  toleration,  even 
as  it  regards  the  different  sects  of  Christians.  For  governments  will  pretend  an 
indifference  to  all,  and  will  give  a  protection  in  preference  to  none.  All  establish- 
ments will  be  set  aside.  From  the  toleration  of  the  most  pestilent  heresies,  they 
will  proceed  to  the  toleration  of  Mahometanism,  atheism,  and  at  last  proceed 
to  the  positive  persecution  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  In  these  times  the 
temple  of  God  will  be  reduced  almost  to  the  holy  place,  i.e.,  to  the  small 
number  of  real  Christians  who  worship  the  Father  in  spirit,  and  regulate  their 
doctrine,  and  their  worship,  and  their  whole  conduct  strictly  by  the  Word  of  God. 
The  merely  nominal  Christians  will  all  desert  the  profession  of  the  truth  when 
the  powers  of  the  world  desert  it.  And  this  tragic  event  I  take  to  be  typified  by 
the  order  to  St.  John  to  measure  the  temple  and  the  altar,  &c.    {Bp.  Horsley.) 

Vers.  3-13.  I  will  give  power  unto  My  two  witnesses. — The  preacher  a  witness 
and  a  prophet: — 1.  The  prophecy  under  consideration  gives  us  an  undeniable 
evidence  of  the  Divinity  and  truth  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  prophecy  under  con- 
sideration assures  us  of  the  continuance  of  the  gospel  ministry.  3.  We  are  here 
taught  what  is  the  character  of  Christ's  approved  ministers,  and  what  are  the 
duties  which  he  requires  of  them.  (1)  They,  as  witnesses,  are  to  bear  testimony 
to  the  gospel  by  professing  their  own  faith  in  it,  by  exhibiting  the  evidences  of  its 
Divinity,  by  defending  it  against  the  cavils  of  unbelievers,  by  exemplifying  the 
virtues  of  it  in  their  conversation,  and  by  sacrificing  in  its  cause  their  worldly 
interest,  and  even  their  lives,  if  occasion  should  require.  (2)  They,  as  prophets, 
must  preach  the  Word  with  plaiimess  of  speech,  adapting  themselves  to  common 
capacities :  they  must  speak  with  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  with  power, 
commending  themselves  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God  :  they  must 
declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  however  disgustful  any  part  of  it  may  be  to 
vicious  and  corrupt  minds :  they  must  reprove  prevailing  iniquities,  and  confute 
licentious  errors,  whoever  may  practise  the  former  or  patronise  the  latter.  4.  This 
prophecy  teaches  us  that  in  times  of  prevailing  infidelity  and  corruption  there  is 
always  a  pointed  opposition  to  the  ministers  of  the  gospel.  If  men  wish  to 
exterminate  the  religion  of  Christ,  they  will  first  oppose  the  means  of  its  support ; 
and  of  these  one  of  the  chief  is  a  learned  and  godly  ministry.  5.  We  are  taught 
in  this  prophecy  from  whence  arises  the  enmity  of  wicked  men  against  the  stated 
teachers  of  religion.  St.  John  says  that  when  the  witnesses  shall  be  slain,  they 
who  dwell  on  earth  "  shall  rejoice  over  them,  because  these  two  prophets  tormented 
them."  How  did  these  prophets  torment  them  ?  Not  by  persecution ;  for  they 
possessed  neither  the  power  nor  the  authority  to  persecute ;  but  merely  by  pro- 
claiming those  solemn  truths  which  condemn  the  practice,  expose  the  guilt,  and 
announce  the  punishment  of  irreclaimable  sinners.    6.  Another  observation  which 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

here  presents  itself  to  us  is  that  the  Christian  Church  is  meek,  humble,  and  peace- 
able. So  she  is  represented  in  this  prophecy.  She  suffers  persecution  from  her 
enemies,  but  does  not  persecute  them  in  return.  Her  deliverances  are  effected  by 
the  hand  of  God,  not  by  her  own  hand.  The  main  instruments  of  her  defence  are 
the  excellency  of  her  religion,  the  purity  of  her  works,  and  the  fervour  of  her 
prayers.  These  weapons  of  her  warfare  have  proved  mighty  through  God  to 
confound  the  devices  and  defeat  the  power  of  those  who  sought  her  overthrow. 
7.  We  are  taught  the  great  efficacy  of  the  prayers  of  good  men.  {J.  Lathrop,  D.D.) 
The  two  witnesses  : — I.  The  chabacter  of  the  two  witnesses.  "The  two  witnesses" 
are  the  Son  and  Spirit  of  God ;  the  doctrines  of  their  Divinity,  or,  more  particularly, 
the  justifying  righteousness  of  the  one,  and  the  regenerating  influence  of  the  other. 
1.  These  are  the  two  principal  witnesses  of  God  in  the  Church.  They  are  witnesses 
of  the  highest  credibility,  and  to  whom  alone  God  would  commit  His  cause.  They 
are  best  qualified  to  give  evidence  upon  a  subject  in  all  the  particulars  of  which 
they  have  been  personally  concerned.  They  are  the  parties  to  whose  care  the 
whole  affairs  of  the  Church  have  been  officially  consigned.  They  alone  are 
acquainted  with  the  whole  mind  and  wiU  of  God.  2.  They  are  frequently  spoken 
of  as  witnesses  for  God  in  other  parts  of  the  Scripture  (Isa.  vii.  14,  Iv.  4 ; 
John  V.  31,  32,  xv.  26 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22 ;  Heb.  x.  14,  15 ;  1  John  v.  6-10,  20,  &c.). 
3.  This  view  of  the  two  witnesses  is  sustained  by  the  preceding  allusion.  Their 
emblems  are  "  water  and  blood."  In  the  court  of  the  temple  are  the  water  and  the 
blood.  Here  are  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  and  the  brazen  sea;  or,  in  other 
words,  the  "  water  and  the  blood."  These  are  the  only  furniture  of  the  court. 
The  altar  is  between  the  entrance  to  the  court  and  the  brazen  sea ;  and  the  brazen 
sea  is  between  the  altar  and  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  None  without  passing  by 
these  could  enter  the  holy  place.  4.  The  two  witnesses  we  have  named  agree  with 
their  denomination  as  prophets.  The  claim  of  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  to  the  title 
of  the  two  prophets  of  God  in  the  Church,  above  all  others,  is  substantiated  by 
these  two  Scripture  declarations  :  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only 
begotten  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him,"  and, 
•♦When  He  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come,  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth."  5.  Our 
selection  of  these  witnesses  accords  with  the  metaphorical  illustration  of  them  in 
the  fourth  verse.  They  are  the  oHve  trees  from  which,  and  the  golden  pipes 
through  which,  the  oil  of  grace  is  suppUed  to  the  Church  of  God.  These  olive 
trees  are  represented  to  John  as  still  standing  before  the  God  of  the  earth.  Are 
they  not  then  "  He  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  and  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  which  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory 
that  should  follow  ?  U.  The  rejection  of  these  witnesses.  "  And  I  will  give 
unto  My  two  witnesses,  and  they  shaU  prophesy,  clothed  in  sackcloth."  ((?.  Rogers.) 
The  continuous  witness : — The  Lord  calls  forth  His  faithful  witnesses,  and  makes 
promise  that  their  voice  and  testimony  shall  not  be  silenced,  even  though  the  holy 
city  be  trodden  underfoot.  Mark — I.  The  unfailing  testimony.  Throughout  the 
entire  period  during  which  the  usurping  worldly  power  shall  oppress  and  tread  down 
the  adherents  to  the  truth,  the  voice  of  testimony  is  heard.  It  cannot  be  silenced. 
Forty  and  two  months  is  the  holy  city  trodden  underfoot ;  a  thousand  two  hundred 
and  three  score  days  do  the  witnesses  prophesy.  Not  any  particular  two ;  but  the 
confirmatory  two.  The  number  may  be  minished;  but  the  voice  is  clear.  One 
herald  is  sufficient  to  make  a  proclamation.  II.  The  painfulness  of  witnessing 
against  evil  and  threatening  judgment  is  but  too  obvious.  The  witnesses 
prophesy,  "  clothed  in  sackcloth."  So  must  all  who  stand  in  opposition  to  evil 
find  the  painful  bitterness  of  their  sad  duty.  HI.  The  Divine  defence  of  the 
witnesses.  "If  any  man  desireth  to  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their 
mouth."  The  Lord  defends  His  witnesses;  His  anointed  must  not  be  touched. 
The  word  of  their  mouth  is  itself  a  penetrating  sword  of  flame;  nor  can  the 
adversaries  of  truth  escape  those  external  judgments  which  fire  always  represents, 
and  which  the  God  of  truth  uses  for  the  punishment  of  evildoers.  This  is  further 
seen  in — IV.  Their  punitive  power.  But  it  is  of  a  nature  correspondent  to  the 
entire  character  of  the  gospel.  "They  shut  up  heaven."  Sad  indeed  is  it  for 
them  who  stay  the  holy  work  of  the  heavenly  witnesses.  For  if  their  work  be 
hindered  it  is  as  the  shutting  up  of  the  heavens — no  spiritual  rain,  no  teaching. 
The  world  is  the  sufferer.  The  loss  is  unspeakable.  By  the  removal  of  the  earth- 
preserving  salt — the  Word — a  plague  is  brought  upon  the  earth.  Alas  !  though  the 
testimony  is  continuous  through  all  the  time  of  the  worldly  oppression,  yet  the 
witnesses  are  finally  slain  1      Here  the  vision  may  be  for  the  comfort  of  the 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  423 

witnesses  to  the  truth  themselves.  And  we  reflect — V.  Upon  their  temporaby 
DESTRUCTION  AND  FINAL  TRIUMPH,  They  are  slain,  and  so  far  the  world  triumphs. 
So  it  did  with  the  one  faithful  and  true  Witness.  Or  we  may  see  here  a  temporary 
triumph  of  the  evil  worldly  spirit,  and  the  final  supremacy  of  the  truth.  Probably 
the  former.  But  in  either  case  the  faithful  witnesses  to  the  truth  are  assured  in 
this,  as  in  many  other  ways,  of  the  final  reward  to  their  fidelity  and  the  final 
triumph  over  them  who  make  them  their  foes.  {R.  Green.)  The  two  witnesses, 
their  testimony  : — I.  Why  the  saints  and  people  of  God  are  called  witnesses. 
Because  it  is  their  work  and  business  to  bear  witness  to  the  truths  and  ways  of 
Christ,  in  opposition  to  the  ways  of  antichrist.  This  is  the  work  that  we  are  bom 
for :  For  this  cause,  saith  Christ,  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the 
world,  that  I  might  bear  witness  unto  the  truth.  This  is  the  work  of  our  generation, 
witness-bearing  to  the  truths  of  Christ  in  opposition  to  the  ways  of  antichrist,  in 
anti-christian  times.  You  will  say,  What  shall  I  do  that  I  may  be  found  faithful 
in  this  witness-bearing  ;  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  witness  a  good  confession  in 
these  days  of  ours  ?  Something  by  way  of  rule.  Be  sure  that  your  testimonies  do 
agree.  Though  there  be  a  hundred  witnesses  about  a  business,  if  their  witness  does 
not  agree  it  will  be  of  little  worth.  And  now  so  it  is,  Christ's  witnesses  this  day 
are  divided  into  many  opinions  and  persuasions,  but  they  may  agree  in  the  main 
for  Christ,  they  may  all  agree  in  opposition  unto  antichrist.  If  then  you  would 
have  your  witness  vaUd  and  good,  labour,  you  that  are  the  witnesses,  for  unity  in 
your  testimony.  Again,  if  you  would  witness  a  good  confession  in  these  days 
of  ours,  then  you  must  be  willing  to  own  the  truth  of  Christ,  to  own  it  whensoever 
you  are  called  thereunto.  It  is  said,  our  Saviour  Christ  He  witnessed  a  good 
confession  before  Pontius  Pilate.  Pray  what  kind  of  witness  was  it  ?  Was  it  any 
long  confession,  or  large  ?  No  ;  but  the  manner  of  it  was  this  :  when  they  called 
Him  before  them  to  give  an  account  of  any  fact,  He  left  them  to  prove  it.  When 
they  called  Him  to  give  an  account  of  the  doctrine  that  He  held,  "Art  thou  the 
King  of  the  Jews  "  ?  then  He  owned  it.  He  left  them  to  prove  the  fact,  and  He 
owned  the  truth ;  so  should  we  do.  If  you  would  witness  a  good  confession  in 
these  days  of  ours,  then  you  must  be  willing  also  for  to  suffer  for  the  truth  of 
Christ.  Those  that  cannot  suffer  for  the  truth  of  Christ  and  run  the  hazard  of 
a  suffering,  they  cannot  bear  their  witness  fully.  See  how  they  go  together  in 
chap.  xiii.  10.  If  you  would  witness  a  good  confession,  then  take  heed  that  when 
you  have  borne  your  testimony  you  do  nothing  that  may  revoke  the  same, 
either  directly  or  by  consequence.  Thus  by  way  of  rule.  And  now  by  way  of 
means.  If  you  would  be  faithful  in  bearing  your  testimony,  in  bearing  witness  to 
the  truths  of  Christ  in  opposition  to  the  ways  of  antichrist,  observe  what  the  root 
is  that  a  good  confession  grows  upon,  and  labour  for  to  strengthen  that.  Now  what 
is  the  root  that  a  good  confession  grows  upon,  but  faith  working  by  love  ?  Labour 
in  the  work  of  self-denial,  and  use  yourself  now  to  deny  yourself.  In  the  next 
place,  take  heed  that  you  be  not  scared  too  much  with  the  scarecrows  of  the  times, 
but  go  to  God  for  boldness,  that  you  may  be  emboldened  with  the  boldness  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  II.  But  then  what  are  these  witnesses  more  expressly  in  regard 
OF  THEiB  number,  AND  IN  REGARD  OF  THEIR  QUALITY  ?  In  regard  of  their  number 
they  are  two :  "  And  I  will  give  power  unto  My  '  two '  witnesses."  Two  is  but 
a  few,  and  yet  it  is  enough  to  bear  witness,  for  "  out  of  the  mouths  of  two  or  three 
witnesses  shall  every  word  be  established."  Two,  a  few,  and  yet  enough.  The 
note  is  this :  Christ  will  always  have  enough  to  bear  witness  to  His  truth  in  the 
darkest  times.  But  then  as  for  their  qualification.  For  their  quality  :  "  These  are 
the  two  olive  trees,"  at  ver.  4.  If  you  look  into  Zechariah,  from  whence  this 
is  taken,  you  will  find  the  two  olive  trees  are  the  godly  magistrates  and  ministers, 
by  whose  assistance  the  golden  oil  is  emptied  into  the  candlesticks  and  lamps.  But 
what  are  the  two  candlesticks?  Our  Saviour  tells  you  that  "the  seven  golden 
candlesticks  are  the  seven  Churches."  They  were  seven ;  now  in  anti-christian 
times  reduced  to  a  lesser  company,  two  candlesticks.  Though,  as  I  said  before. 
Christ  will  lose  none  in  the  latter  times,  yet  in  anti-christian  times  reduced  unto 
two.  These  are  the  two  candlesticks.  Christ  tells  you  the  candlesticks  are  the 
Churches ;  so  then  put  this  together.  Would  you  know  what  these  two  olive  trees 
are,  and  the  two  candlesticks  ?  They  are  the  godly  magistrate  and  godly  minister 
in  conjunction  with  the  saints  of  God  and  Churches  of  Christ.  Here  we  may  see 
who  those  are  that  are  fit  to  bear  witness  of  Christ  in  anti-christian  times,  to  bear 
their  testimony.  They  are  to  be  a  fruitful,  profitable  people,  and  a  lightsome 
people,  that  can  hold  forth  light  unto  others  in  some  measure.     HI.  In  sackcloth; 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

WHAT  IS  THAT  ?  If  you  ask  what  this  sackcloth  means,  it  represents  the  sad  and 
afflicted  condition  that  the  saints  and  people  of  God  shall  be  in  in  anti- 
christian  times.  Is  it  not  a  sad  thing  for  the  saints  to  be  persecuted  to  the 
very  gates  of  Zion  ?  And  if  Christ's  witnesses .  shall  be  in  sackcloth  1,260 
years,    will    not    you    be    contented    to  be  in  sackcloth    three    or  four  years? 

IV.  Prophesy — what  is  that,  and  how  did  it  come  to  pass  that  they 
SHALL  PROPHESY  IN  THE  TIME  OF  THEIR  SACKCLOTH  ?  Prophesy — what  Is  that  ?  Why 
prophesying  is  sometimes  taken  in  Scripture  for  the  revelation  of  the  mind  of 
God,  whereby  a  man  doth  foretell  things  to  come.  Prophesy  is  taken  for  a 
declaring  and  making  known  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  For,  I  pray,  do  but 
mark,  this  their  prophesying  and  witness-bearing  seems  to  be  all  one.  *'  I  will 
give  power  unto  My  two  witnesses,  and  they  shall  prophesy  in  sackcloth."  I  will 
give  power  to  them  ;  they  shall  have  their  orders  to  preach  from  Myself ;  they  shall 
have  power  from  Me  to  preach,  and  to  prophesy,  and  to  bear  their  testimony. 

V.  But  then  what  is  the  defence  and  guard  that  these  witnesses  have,  whereby 

THEY  ARE  GUARDED  AND  DEFENDED  IN  THEIR  PROPHESYING  ?   The  tCXt  Saith,  "  If  any  man 

will  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth  and  devoureth  their  enemies." 
What  then  is  this  fire  that  proceeds  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  witnesses  but  the 
devouring  judgments  of  God,  whereby  the  enemies  of  God's  people  are  destroyed  by 
the  prayers  and  threatenings  of  the  people  of  God  that  come  out  of  their  mouth. 

VI.  What  are  the  great  things  that  these  witnesses  will  do  in  the  end  of 

THE  days  of   their  PROPHESYING  AND   OF   THEIR   SACKCLOTH  ?      "  ThcSe  haVB  pOWCr  tO 

smite  the  earth    with  all  plagues,  as  often  as  they  will."    {W,  Bridge,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  The  beast  .  .  .  shall  make  war. — Against  the  beast : — I.  Among  the  foes 
which  attack  the  Church  of  the  Lord,  either  alternately  or  in  solid  phalanx,  the 
present  age  is  exposed  particularly  to  one — the  Beast,  which  sometimes  arms  him- 
self with  demoniac  force,  and  again  adorns  himself  with  demoniac  wisdom,  but  who 
nevertheless  is,  and  always  remains,  a  beast,  combining  in  himself  antagonism  to 
God  and  humanity.  Keeping  these  things  in  view,  let  us  consider  the  signs  of  the 
times.  Behold  in  modern  heathenism  man  making  himself  an  ape,  and,  even 
through  the  midst  of  baptized  Christianity,  the  doctrine  noised  abroad  that  human 
history  does  not  emanate  from  God,  in  no  sense  has  its  source  in  God  ;  that,  in  fact, 
in  the  sense  of  a  conflict  for  moral  freedom,  there  can  be  no  history  of  any  kind, 
not  to  mention  the  possibility  of  a  sacred  history.  Nothing  is  left  but  natural 
history,  and  that  includes  only  three  pages  :  following  the  title,  under  which  the 
name  of  the  author  is  wanting,  there  stands  on  the  first  legible  page  an  animal ;  on 
the  second,  a  man  ;  on  the  third,  death.  Ancient  heathenism  was  only  a  departure 
from  universal  revelation  by  means  of  nature  and  conscience ;  but  modern  paganism 
is  apostasy  from  the  perfect  revelation  of  God  in  His  Son.  This  is  heathenism 
more  mischievous,  more  difficult  of  cure  1  Hold  fast,  0  man,  to  what  thou  hast, 
and  what  thou  art  in  moral  conviction,  in  order  that  no  animalised  wisdom,  and  no 
false  prophet,  rob  you  of  the  crown  of  your  personality,  which  descended  to  you 
from  God,  and  flashes  back  to  God.  Ye  human  souls,  a  brute  has  no  power  to 
elevate  nor  to  degrade  itself ;  that  is  why  it  is  a  brute  and  no  more  than  nature  ; 
man,  however,  designed  for  God's  child  and  Christ's  co-labourer,  must,  if  he  is 
determined  not  to  follow  his  calling,  fall  deep  and  ever  deeper,  until  he  sinks 
beneath  the  brute.  There  certainly  never  has  been  a  period  when  the  word 
"  humanity  "  has  been  so  much  preached  and  praised  as  in  ours ;  but  a  figure  of  speech 
is  not  yet  a  fact.  Christianity,  in  truth,  has  so  little  conflict  with  the  rights  and 
duties  indicated  by  that  word  "  humanity,"  that  it,  the  rather,  was  first  to  make  the 
word  a  truth.  "  Behold  the  Man !  "  through  Him  by  whom  a  new  order  of  things 
arose,  so  that  there  is  no  longer  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female,  Greek  nor  Scythian, 
but  all  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus,  one  redeemed,  regenerated,  baptized  humanity.  In 
order  to  be  humane,  humanity  has  need  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who  is  the  Son  of  God. 
When,  in  the  preceding  century,  France  was  inscribing  the  word  "humanity"  on  all 
her  banners,  and  always  with  new  embellishment,  she  began  with  dethroning  God, 
and  ended  by  murdering  her  king.  The  guillotine — that  was  her  fraternity  !  II. 
It  is  time  that  we  leave  off  boasting,  and  awake  and  lay  hand  on  our  weapons,  and 
startle  the  beast  back  to  his  dismal  hole.  The  Scripture  indicates  three  weapons  to 
be  used  in  the  conflict  against  the  beast,  when  it  exclaims  :  "  Here  is  the  patience 
and  the  faith  of  the  saints."  From  these  words  we  derive  strictness  of  discipline, 
the  simplicity  of  the  cross,  the  power  of  prayer.     {R.  Kdgel,  D.D,) 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  425 

Ver.  8.  Where  also  our  Lord  was  crucified. — The  Cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  : — This 
passage  strikingly  identifies  the  Master  and  the  servants — our  Lord  and  His 
witnesses.  They  were  to  suffer  as  He  suffered  and  where  He  suffered  :  one  with 
Him  in  life  and  death,  in  shame  and  glory ;  one  with  Him  on  the  Cross,  in  the  grave, 
in  resurrection,  in  ascension,  and  on  the  throne.  "Where  also  our  Lord  was 
crucified."  It  is  the  last  reference  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  in  the  Bible,  and  corre- 
sponds well  with  that  frequent  expression  in  the  Eevelation,  "  the  Lamb  slain" ; 
carrying  us  back  to  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  "  and  "  the  bruised  heel."  1.  It  was 
the  place  of  guilt  and  condemnation  (Matt,  xxvii.  22,  26,  28).  2.  It  was  the  place 
of  shame  (Heb.  xii.  2).  3.  It  was  the  place  of  weakness  (2  Cor.  xiii.  4).  4.  It  was 
the  place  of  pain  (Heb.  xiii.  12).  5.  The  place  of  the  curse  (Gal.  iii.  13).  6.  The 
place  of  rejection  (John  xix.  6).  7.  The  place  of  hatred  (Matt,  xxvii.  25).  8. 
The  place  of  death  (Matt.  xx.  18,  19).  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Good  things  found 
in  the  Cross  : — This  Cross,  where  so  many  evil  things  meet,  is  the  place 
where  all  good  things  are  to  be  found.  God  gathered  all  the  evil  to  that 
spot,  that  He  might  utterly  make  away  with  it,  through  Him  who  took  all 
the  evil  on  Himself,  that  He  might  bring  out  of  it  only  good.  1.  It  is  the 
place  of  propitiation  (Lev.  xvi.  15;  Bom.  iii.  25).  The  altar  was  there  for  the 
burnt-offering.  The  place  without  the  gate  for  the  sin-offering  was  there.  2.  It  is 
the  meeting-place  (Exod.  xxix.  42).  It  is  the  place  where  we  meet  with  God,  and  God 
meets  with  us  in  friendship,  and  love,  and  joy.  It  is  the  place  where  the  Father 
meets  the  prodigal  and  embraces  him.  3.  It  is  the  place  of  love.  God's  love  is 
there,  shining  in  its  full  brightness,  unhindered  and  undimmed.  4.  It  is  the  place 
of  acceptance.  Here  we  become  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  Here  the  exchange  takes 
place  between  the  perfect  and  the  imperfect.  Believing  in  the  perfect  One,  we 
become  "  complete  in  Him."  (Ibid.)  What  the  Cross  accomplished  .-—The  Cross 
accomplished  such  things  as  the  following : — 1.  It  removed  the  wall  of  partition 
(Col.  ii.  14).  2.  It  made  peace  (Col.  i.  20).  3.  It  has  secured  oneness  (Eph.  ii.  15, 
16).  4.  It  has  brought  life  (2  Cor.  xiii.  4).  5.  It  contains  power  (1  Cor.  i.  18,  23). 
6.  It  is  the  focus  or  centre  of  all  wisdom  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  7.  It  crucifies  the  world 
(Gal.  vi.  14).  8,  It  furnishes  a  theme  for  glorying  (Gal.  vi.  14).  9.  It  is  the  model 
and  test  of  service  (Mark  viii.  34  ;  Luke  ix.  23).  10.  It  is  the  badge  of  discipleship 
(Luke  xiv.  27).  11.  It  is  God's  way  of  salvation  (Acts  x.  39-43).  12.  It  is  the 
measure  of  Christ's  endurance  and  obedience  (Phil.  ii.  8).  13.  It  is  the  pledge  and 
standard  of  Divine  love  (Kom.  v.  8).  14.  It  is  the  revelation  of  God's  character  (1 
Johniv.  10).  15.  It  is  God's  lamp  of  light.  16.  It  is  the  universal  magnet  (John 
xii.  32).  17.  It  is  the  universal  balm  and  medicine.  18.  It  is  man's  estimate  of 
sin.  19.  It  is  God's  verdict  against  sin,  and  His  estimate  of  it  (Kom.  viii.  3).  20. 
It  is  man's  estimate  of  the  Son  of  God.  21.  It  is  God's  interpretation  of  law  and 
its  penalties.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  12.  A  great  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  them,  Come  up  hither.— T^ 

voice  from  heaven  : — I.  We  shall  regard  it,  first,  as  a  summons  sent  at  the  appointed 
HOUR  TO  every  SAINT.  When  the  time  shall  come,  fixed  by  irreversible  decree,  there 
shall  be  heard  "a  great  voice  from  heaven"  to  every  believer  in  Christ,  saying, 

"  Come  up  hither."     1.  This  should  be  to  us— each  one  of  us,  if  we  be  in  Christ 

the  subject  of  very  joyful  anticipation.  To  some  Christians  it  will  be  not  only  joy- 
ful in  anticipation,  but  it  will  be  intensely  delightful  when  it  arrives.  2.  To  change 
the  note  a  moment ;  while  this  should  be  the  subject  of  joyous  anticipation,  it 
should  also  be  the  object  of  patient  waiting.  God  knows  best  when  it  is  time  for 
us  to  be  bidden  to  "  Come  up  hither."  We  must  not  wish  to  antedate  the  period  of 
our  departure.  I  would  not  wish  to  die  while  there  is  more  work  to  do  or  more 
souls  to  win.  3.  As  this  "Come  up  hither"  should  excite  joyous  anticipation, 
tempered  by  patient  waiting,  so  it  should  always  be  to  us  a  matter  of  absolute  cer- 
tainty as  to  its  ultimate  reception.  I  can  understand  a  man  being  in  doubt  about 
his  interest  in  Christ,  but  I  cannot  understand  a  man's  resting  content  to  be  in  these 
doubts.  4.  I  think  very  often,  besides  joyfully  anticipating,  patiently  waiting,  and 
being  confidently  assured  of  it,  the  Christian  should  delightfully  contemplate  it. 
II.  We  wiU  take  the  text  this  time,  not  as  a  summons  to  depart,  but  as  a 
whispeb  from  the  skies  to  the  believer's  heart.  The  Father  seems  to  say  this  to 
every  adopted  child.  Nor  will  your  Father  and  my  Father  ever  be  content  till  every 
one  of  His  children  shall  be  in  the  many  mansions  above.  And  Jesus  whispers  this 
in  your  ear.  "  I  will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  be  with  Me  where  I 
am,  that  they  may  behold  My  glory."  Jesus  beckons  thee  to  the  skies,  believer.  Lay 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

not  fast  hold  upon  the  things  of  earth.  HI.  These  words  may  be  used  as  a  lovino 
INVITATION  TO  UNCONVERTED  PERSONS.  There  are  many  spirit  voices  which  cry  to 
them,  "  Come  up  hither;  come  up  to  heaven."  1.  God  our  Father  calls  thee.  Sinner, 
thou  hast  many  troubles  of  late  ;  business  goes  amiss.  Dost  thou  not  know, 
Binner,  this  is  thy  Father  saying,  "Come  up  hither"  ?  Thy  portion  is  not  here; 
seek  thou  another  and  a  better  land.  2.  But  more,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  also 
beckoned  to  you  to  come.  Thou  hast  heard  that  He  made  a  way  to  heaven.  Is  not 
a  road  an  invitation  to  a  traveller  to  walk  therein  ?  3.  The  Spirit  of  God  strives 
with  thee  and  cries,  "  Come  up  hither."  The  Spirit  of  God  wrote  this  book ;  and 
wherefore  was  this  book  written  ?  Hear  the  words  of  Scripture,  "  These  are  written 
that  ye  might  believe,"  &c.  4.  Moreover,  does  not  thy  conscience  say  the  same?  5. 
And,  last  of  all,  the  spirit  of  your  friends  departed  cry  from  heaven  to  you  to-night 
— that  voice  which  I  would  you  could  hear,  "Come  up  hither."  I  adjure  you,  ye 
sons  of  saints  in  glory;  I  adjure  you,  daughter  of  immortal  mothers;  despise  not 
now  the  voice  of  those  who  speak  from  heaven  to  you.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Voices 
from  heaven  : — And  we,  too,  hear  voices  from  heaven,  saying  unto  us,  "  Come  up 
hither."  Did  we  not,  how  grovelling  our  desires,  our  pursuits,  our  very  natures 
would  be  I  1.  There  is,  first,  a  voice  even  from  the  lower  and  material  heaven, 
calling  on  our  souls,  and  urging  them  to  ascend.  The  stars  of  the  firmament,  and 
the  sun,  and  the  moon,  speak  as  well  as  shine.  They  "  utter  forth  a  glorious 
voice  " ;  a  voice  which  not  only  declares  the  glory  of  God,  but  exhorts  the  spirit  of 
man.  Come  up  hither  !  Come  up  into  the  vast  domains  of  space,  and  count  our 
numbers,  and  compute  our  size,  and  bathe  in  our  brightness,  and  learn  what  we  can 
tell  you  of  height  and  of  depth,  of  splendour  and  of  power.  Stay  not  always  below. 
Breathe  not  always  in  mist  and  vapours.  Eegard  not  earth  so  exclusively  and  so 
long,  as  to  rest  in  the  conclusion  that  earth  is  all.  2.  We  do  not  stop,  however, 
.  but  only  begin  with  these  works,  all  bright  and  eloquent  as  they  are.  They  intro- 
duce us  to  Him  who  made  them  ;  to  Him  from  whose  fountain  they  draw  their  light, 
and  of  whose  voice  their  own  is  but  an  echo,  God  delegates  not  to  His  creatures, 
but  reserves  as  His  own  right,  the  highest  converse  with  His  likeness,  the  human 
soul.  He  is  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  He  will  speak  Himself  to  His  children.  And 
from  the  heaven  where  He  dwelleth  He  says  to  them,  Come  up  hither.  Come  up 
into  the  spiritual  dwelling-place  of  your  Creator,  and  birthplace  of  your  own  souls. 
Bemain  not  so  constantly  in  your  temporal  residence,  as  to  forget  the  way  to  that 
abode  where  My  children  are  to  live  for  ever.  Come  up  hither  by  faith  now,  that 
hereafter  you  may  come  in  by  sight.  Come  up  by  hope,  that  when  hope  shall 
disappear,  it  may  be  swallowed  up  in  fruition.  Come  up  by  charity  and  good 
works  done  in  the  body,  that  when  your  bodies  are  resolved  into  dust,  your  souls 
may  be  prepared  for  that  happy  and  holy  kingdom  into  which  sin  and  impurity 
cannot  enter.  Come  up  hither  by  the  exercises  of  piety  and  the  strength  of  Divine 
love.  Come,  and  see  My  face,  and  be  to  Me  as  sons.  3.  But  there  is  another  to 
whom  we  are  dear,  even  His  own  Son,  who  dwells  with  His  Father  ;  and  He  also 
calls  us  from  the  same  heaven,  saying  unto  us.  Come  up  hither  1  Here  are  the 
mansions  which  I  have  been  preparing  for  My  disciples.  Cause  not  My  labour  for 
you  to  be  vain,  I  earned  My  reward,  that  ye  might  share  it  with  Me,  I  would  not 
lose  one  soul  that  I  once  bled  to  redeem.  Come  up  hither.  There  is  room  for 
you,  and  for  all.  4.  And  now  we  hear  other  great  voices  from  heaven,  saying  unto 
us,  Come  up  hither !  They  are  the  voices  of  "  the  glorious  company  of  the  apostles," 
«•  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets,"  "  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,"  the  in- 
numerable multitude  of  saints  and  sealed  servants  of  God,  which  no  man  can 
number,  of  all  nations  and  kindreds  and  people  and  tongues.  Come  up  hither  ! 
they  cry,  and  witness  our  joyg,  and  be  encouraged  by  our  success.  5.  There  are 
few  to  whom  I  am  speaking  who  do  not  hear  other  voices  yet,  which,  though  not 
more  animating  than  the  last,  are,  by  the  provision  of  God,  nearer  to  the  listening 
ear,  and  dearer  to  the  soul.  There  are  few  who  do  not  number  in  their  families 
those  whose  places  are  vacant  at  the  table  and  the  hearth,  but  who  are  not  reckoned 
as  lost  but  only  gone  before.  And  when  the  business  of  daily  life  is  for  a  while 
suspended,  and  its  cares  are  put  to  rest — nay,  often  in  the  midst  of  the  world's 
unheeded  tumult — their  voices  float  down  clearly  and  distinctly  from  heaven,  and 
say  to  their  own.  Come  up  hither  !  Our  infirmities  are  relieved  ;  our  strength  is 
renewed  ;  our  fears  and  doubts  are  flown  away ;  our  sins  are  forgiven.  Hearken  to 
us,  and  be  comforted  1  Come  to  us,  when  your  journey  is  done  I  {F.  W.  P, 
Greenwood,  D.D.)  The  great  voice  from  heaven  : — No  argument  is  needed  to  show 
that  the  word  "  up  "  is  used  in  a  figurative  and  not  in  a  literal  sense.    What 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  427 

heaven  is  we  do  not  know.  The  truth  is  that  between  physical  and  moral  relations 
there  is  often  a  close  analogy.  The  physical  world  in  which  we  live  is  the  type  of 
the  world  to  which  we  are  going  ;  the  conditions  of  being,  the  relations  of  matter 
in  which  we  are  practised  here — motion,  rest,  distance,  nearness,  weight,  buoyancy, 
power,  resistance,  birth,  life,  growth,  death — aU  these  are  physical  ideas  ;  yet  we 
cannot  talk  about  spiritual  or  heavenly  things  without  employing  these  terms  ;  and 
they  were  meant  to  be  used  by  us  in  this  way.  Of  course  the  essential  excellence 
of  heaven  consists  in  the  moral  purity  and  perfection  of  which  it  is  the  home. 
And  between  moral  purity  and  perfection  and  physical  elevation  there  seems  to  be 
a  constant  and,  perhaps,  a  necessary  relation.  Perhaps  the  human  mind  is  so 
constituted  that  it  wiU  associate  these  ideas.  The  fact  is  worth  noting,  because  we 
are  not  always  aware  that  when  we  seem  to  be  speaking  in  the  soberest  prose  we 
are  often  using  words  poetically.  We  talk  of  the  higher  life,  meaning,  of  course, 
the  purer  and  better  Hfe ;  we  describe  one  whom  we  know  as  possessing  a  lofty 
spirit,  as  governed  by  an  elevated  purpose,  as  having  a  high  standard  of  conduct. 
The  analogy  between  physical  height  and  moral  excellence  is  most  clear  and  vivid. 
We  go  down  into  cellars  and  dungeons,  into  caverns  and  morasses,  into  sloughs  and 
pitfalls,  into  floods  and  depths  of  ocean.  A  great  part  of  our  physical  discomforts 
and  dangers  are  encountered  in  going  down.  We  go  up  to  solid  footing,  to  pure 
air,  to  wide  prospects  ;  many  of  our  more  pleasurable  sensations  are  the  result  of 
ascending.  The  voice  from  heaven  which  says,  "  Come  up  hither,"  means  to  us 
a  great  deal.  It  means,  Come  up  out  of  the  fens  and  quagmires,  out  of  the  cellars 
and  the  dungeons,  out  of  the  miasma  and  the  darkness — up  to  the  heights  where 
the  sun  always  shines,  where  the  air  is  always  pure  and  sweet,  where  the  eye  sweeps 
a  wide  horizon  that  girdles  fertile  plains  and  shining  lakes  and  winding  rivers  and 
glorious  summits.  "  It  is  only  a  figure,  then,"  somebody  may  say.  That  is  as  if 
one  should  stoop  to  pick  up  a  pebble  and  should  exclaim,  as  he  held  it  in  his  hand, 
*♦  Only  a  diamond !  "  How  much  more  rich  and  precious  is  the  figure  than  any 
mere  literaUsm  could  be !  We  conceive  of  heaven  rightly  both  as  a  state  of  being 
and  as  a  place  of  residence.  Holding,  then,  both  these  conceptions  of  heaven  in 
our  thought,  let  us  listen  to  the  great  voice  out  of  heaven  saying  unto  us,  "  Come 
up  hither!  "  Heaven  as  a  state  is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  those  who  dwell  upon 
the  earth.  Heaven  came  down  to  earth  when  Christ  came.  It  had  always  been 
coming,  indeed  ;  but  there  was  more  of  it  here  when  He  came  than  ever  before.  The 
announcement  of  the  Saviour's  coming  by  the  Forerunner — what  was  it  ?  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  There  is  a  life  that  springs  from  the  earth  and 
that  clings  to  the  earth  ;  a  life  whose  central  motive  is  appetite  or  passion,  or  some 
form  of  selfishness  a  little  more  refined  ;  a  life  that  is  ruled  by  material  ideas  and 
forces  ;  a  life  whose  maxims  and  methods  are  all  earthly  and  sordid.  There  is 
another  life  that  has  its  inspiration  in  heaven,  and  that  lifts  us  up  toward  heaven  ; 
a  life  whose  central  motive  is  love ;  whose  source  is  the  indwelling  of  God's  spirit 
in  the  soul ;  a  life  that  enthrones  the  nobler  faculties  and  makes  the  grosser  nature 
serve  the  higher;  that  holds  the  appetites  in  check,  and  subordinates  material 
things  to  spiritual ;  a  life  whose  joy  is  found  in  giving  rather  than  in  getting. 
These  two  realms  of  experience — the  upper  and  the  lower — lie  close  together,  and 
both  of  them  invite  us  by  motives  of  their  own.  There  is  that  in  us  which  responds 
to  the  solicitations  of  the  realm  of  sense,  and  there  is  that  in  us  which  answers  to 
the  call  from  the  spiritual  realm.  Unhappily  many  of  us,  I  fear,  spend  most  of  our 
days  down  below.  Our  affections  are  set  on  things  on  the  earth,  rather  than  on  the 
things  above.  Now  and  then  we  make  an  excursion  into  the  heavenly  reahn,  but 
we  do  not  stay  there  long.     {W.  Gladden,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  And  the  remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven. 

— The  judgments  of  God: — 1.  The  judgments  of  God's  mouth,  and  the  judgments 
of  God's  hand — the  word  and  the  work  of  God — the  manifestation  of  His  truth  by 
verbal  announcement,  and  the  manifestation  of  His  truth  by  providential  dispensa- 
tion, are  alike  efficacious,  through  the  Divine  blessing,  to  the  conversion  of  the  souls 
of  men.  "  The  remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven."  2. 
The  terrible  judgments  of  the  Almighty,  overwhelming  the  wicked  with  alarm  and 
awe,  are  the  last  means — where  the  other  have  been  despised  and  unavailing — by 
which  infinite  mercy  operates  for  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  men  (Pro v.  xxix.  1). 
3.  These  means  are  also,  historically  or  prophetically,  the  last  means  by  which 
shall  be  accomplished  that  national  regeneration  which  shall  precede  and  usher  in 
the  glory  of  the  millennial  era,  which  is  thus  described  by  revelation  (chap.  xi.  15). 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

4.  "  Wars  and  rumours  of  wars,"  "  and  great  earthquakes  in  divers  places,  and 
famines,  and  pestilence,  and  fearful  sights  and  great  signs  from  heaven,"  shall  be 
the  principal  instrumentalities  of  judgment  by  which  the  enemies  of  God  and  His 
Church  shall  be  dealt  with  in  these  predicted  "  days  of  vengeance."  5.  The  present 
condition  of  Christendom — its  Churches  and  its  nations — viewed  in  the  light  of 
prophetic  intimation,  reveals  that  "  monitory  pulse-like  beating  "  which  is  sympto.- 
matic  of  the  approaching  end.  6.  In  the  meantime,  let  the  Church  of  Christ,  by 
the  enterprise  of  faith  and  the  devotion  of  worship  anticipate  the  anthem  of  her 
triumph  when,  commingling  her  own  gladness  with  the  hymnal  joys  of  the  world's 
jubilee,  she  shall  sing  (chap.  xi.  17).     (Thos.  Easton.) 

Ver.  15.  The  Mngdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 

and  ol  Zis  Christ. — Ave,  Imperator  : — This  text  is  generally  quoted  in  a  missionary 
connection,  and  associated  with  the  conversion  of  the  heathen.  But  it  is  of  much 
wider  scope  than  that.  There  are  plenty  of  Christians  that  want  converting,  plenty 
of  Churches  that  want  Christianising.  The  progress  of  all  life  in  our  planet  has 
been  a  progress  from  the  animal  upward  to  the  intellectual,  the  moral,  the  spiritual ; 
from  mere  brute  force  to  the  dominion  of  thought  and  reason.  Ages  back  mere 
bigness  of  mass  seemed  to  count  for  everything.  The  so-called  "antediluvian" 
monsters  were  rampant.  As  life  developed  mere  bigness  became  of  less  and  less 
account,  and  brain  became  of  more  account.  Those  who  can  influence  mind  are 
the  true  monarchs  of  creation.  This  is  the  realm  in  which  Christ's  supreme 
triumphs  are  to  take  place.  Christ  will  fascinate  and  possess  the  mind  of  the 
world,  and  the  mind  will  rule  all  the  rest.  "  Strong  beliefs  win  strong  men,  and 
then  make  them  stronger."  The  masculine  but  humane  morality  of  Jesus  Christ 
must  more  and  more  commend  itself  to  the  thinking  and  influential  portion  of 
society.  Ideas  and  institutions  which  have  been  long  prevalent  go  down  before 
a  superior  idea.  So  shall  it  be  with  many  world-ideas  in  presence  of  the  truth  of 
Christ.  Many  institutions  have  lived  and  done  their  work.  They  have  served  their 
day  and  generation,  but  now  they  have  waxed  old,  and  are  ready  to  decay  and 
vanish  away  in  the  presence  of  a  nobler  ideal.  Still,  we  are  not  to  disparage  the 
old  because  the  new  has  come.  The  present  forms  of  animal  life  are  far  superior 
in  development  and  attainment  to  those  whose  remains  are  found  in  the  tertiary 
rocks.  But  the  forms  of  to-day  could  not  have  existed  without  the  forms  that  went 
before.  Those  very  things  which  Christ's  law  and  spirit  will  supplant  have  been 
important  factors  in  human  progress.  When  the  Apocalyptic  dream  of  the  New 
Jerusalem,  the  Christian  state,  the  city  of  God,  finally  and  triumphantly  established 
upon  earth,  shall  find  complete  fulfilment,  it  will  be  characterised  by  a  fuller 
embodiment  of  the  law  of  Christ  in  every  sphere  of  human  relationship  and  conduct. 
For  instance,  the  kingdom  of  Art  shall  become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  His 
Christ.  It  has  become  so  to  a  great  extent.  All  the  noblest  paintings,  all  the 
grandest  buildings  in  the  world  during  the  Christian  era,  have  been  the  product  of 
the  Christian  imagination.  Certainly  the  sublimest  music  owns  this  inspiration. 
We  need  not  fear  the  complete  annexation  of  this  kingdom,  because  the  genius  of 
the  true  Christianity  is  hopeful  and  happy.  The  kingdom  of  Literature  would,  in 
like  manner,  come  under  the  dominance  of  Christian  ideas.  It  is  hard  to  say  at 
present  whether  this  tremendous  engine  for  good  or  evil  works  most  good  or  evil. 
What  a  blessed  thing  it  will  be  when  the  domain  of  literature  becomes  the  domain 
of  Christ ;  when  nothing  wiU  be  written  or  read  the  tendency  of  which  is  not  to  the 
true  elevation  and  edification  of  the  human  mind ;  when  editors  shall  all  be  men  of 
conscience,  and  the  venal  pen  shall  be  as  much  an  archaeological  curiosity  as  the 
stone  hatchet ;  when  we  shall  be  able  to  take  up  any  book  and  feel  that  it  will  be 
safe  for  our  children  to  read ;  when  we  can  open  even  the  latest  novel  from  Paris 
with  the  confidence  that  none  of  our  finer  sensibilities  will  be  shocked,  and  that  an 
atmosphere  will  not  be  introduced  into  the  home  whose  poisonous  vapours  we  should 
shudder  to  think  that  our  young  people  will  breathe.  The  kingdom  of  Commerce, 
too,  shall  one  day  fall  under  the  rule  of  Christ.  That  will  be  indeed  a  blessed  day 
when  men  can  trust  one  another,  and  when  aU  shall  be  worthy  of  that  trust ;  when 
another  man's  property  shall  be  as  sacred  in  our  eyes  as  our  own ;  when  publio 
funds  shall  be  administered  with  the  same  scrupulous  integrity  with  which  our  own 
are  dispensed.  The  realm  of  Amusements,  too,  shall  come  under  the  same  rule. 
The  prophecy  will  find  its  fulfilment  not  in  the  expression  of  any  particular  forms 
of  recreation,  but  in  the  Christianising  of  them  all.  And  will  it  not  be  a  grand  day 
when  the  kingdom  of  Politics  shall  be  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  ?    When 


CHIP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  429 

debates  shall  be  purged  from  the  pettiness  of  personality  and  the  rancour  of 
recrimination ;  when  offices  shall  be  filled  with  the  sole  aim  that  the  common- 
wealth shall  receive  the  services  of  its  most  capable  citizens  ;  and  when  the  states- 
man's ruling  principle  shall  be  not  to  catch  votes,  but  to  redress  wrongs  and 
establish  righteousness.  And  then  may  we  not  hope  that  even  the  Church  itself  in 
that  happy  day  shall  come  under  the  dominion  of  the  law  of  Christ  ?  No  longer  to 
be  the  collection  of  ecclesiastical  antiquities,  the  museum  of  theological  curiosities, 
the  arena  of  strife  and  debate  that  it  is  to-day,  but  the  abode  of  ideal  men  and 
women,  the  home  of  all  the  sweet  and  pure  Christian  virtues.  Then  Christians 
shall  no  longer  *'  bite  and  devour  one  another  "  ;  "  giving  the  enemy  occasion  to 
blaspheme."  Their  energies  shall  be  converted  into  light,  and  not  into  heat,  and 
men  will  be  willing  to  rejoice  in  that  light.  But  how  shall  those  great  results,  of 
which  we  have  spoken  in  other  spheres,  be  achieved  unless  the  Church  be  first  true 
to  herself  ?  It  is  through  her  that  these  beneficent  impulses  upon  society  must 
come.  We  must  begin  by  being  ideal  Christians  if  the  world  is  to  become  an  ideal 
world.      {J.    Halsey.)        The    glory   atoaiting    the   Church    on    earth  : — I.   The 

PROBABLE    CONDITION    OF    THE    WORLD   IN   THE    ACCOMPLISHMENT   OF   THIS    PREDICTION. 

It  will  be  characterised  by — 1.  The  universal  dissemination  of  Christian  knowledge. 
2.  The  general  prevalence  of  religious  life.  3.  The  increase  and  glory  of  the 
Christian  Church.  4.  The  diffusion  of  happiness  throughout  the  world. 
Christianity  is  the  parent  of  morality,  industry,   patriotism,   public  spirit.     II. 

The  PROBABLE  MEANS  BY  WHICH  THIS  GREAT  EVENT  WILL  BE  PRODUCED.   1.  The 

preaching  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  active  zeal  of  Christians.  3.  The  operations  of 
Divine  providence.    4.  The  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    III.  The  duties  which 

ARISE    IN    ANTICIPATING    THIS    GREAT   CONSUMMATION.      1.    To    Seek    the   pOSSeSSion    of 

personal  religion.  2.  To  render  all  assistance  to  accelerate  the  advent  of  this 
glorious  period.  3.  To  unite  in  prayer  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  prediction. 
{Homilist.)  The  kingdom  of  God  : — We  can  imagine,  I  suppose,  that  when  the 
Kevelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine  was  taken  to  the  different  Christian  Churches,  in 
the  upper  chambers  where  they  were  accustomed  to  meet  together,  or  in  the  secret 
places  where  they  gathered  for  fear  of  persecution,  after  they  had  rea<?  these  glow- 
ing pages,  they  must  have  parted  with  new  feelings  of  hope  in  their  hearts.  They 
would  expect  that  a  time  would  come  speedily  when  the  persecutions  would  be 
memories  of  the  past,  and  the  kingdom  would  be  set  up,  of  which  they  had  been 
reading  in  such  vivid  colours.  Yet  the  day  passed  by,  and  the  Boman  power 
remained,  and  the  Temple,  sacred  to  Diana  at  Ephesus,  was  as  stable  as  ever.  It 
happened  then  as  it  has  happened  to  many  a  one  since.  So  it  must  have  been  with 
many  of  those  of  the  ancient  Church,  when,  all  eager  and  expectant,  they  found  the 
vision  was  sealed  for  the  time ;  they  must  go  their  way  and  tarry  until  the  time 
should  come  when  the  promise  would  be  fulfilled.  We  can  scarcely  be  surprised  at 
finding  that  they  looked  for  a  very  literal  fulfilment  in  the  shape  of  a  kingdom 
which  should,  by  the  exercise  of  power,  bear  down  all  opposition.  They  were  told 
of  a  great  king  who  went  forth  "  conquering  and  to  conquer."  The  tradition  of 
the  old  Jewish  Church  was  of  a  people  going  forth  as  the  Lord's  messengers  to  crush 
down  all  the  Lord's  enemies.  Again,  the  majority  of  Christian  people,  when  they 
found  that  the  promise  could  not  be  realised  in  that  way,  looked  for  something 
totally  different.  The  promise  seemed  impossible  of  literal  fulfilment.  The  kingdom 
of  God  became  totally  distinct  from  the  kingdom  of  the  world.  It  was  something 
which  could  only  be  reached  when  this  world  was  over.  When  persecution  broke 
out,  when  the  people  were  dragged  to  prison,  men  felt  that  the  kingdom  of  God  was 
not  of  this  world,  but  of  that  which  is  to  come.  And  so,  little  by  little,  people  had 
that  expectation  for  the  realisation  of  this  promise.  Does  the  Christian  Church  of 
to-day  have  the  same  expectation  ?  Is  there  any  possibility  of  the  realisation  of 
this  promise  ?  I  would  suggest  that  the  realisation  is  to  come  through  our  changed 
ideas  about  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  that  the  kingdom  of  God  does  not  mean  power 
victorious,  but  that  it  means  love  victorious  ;  that  the  kingdom  of  God  means  what 
St.  Paul  does  when  he  writes,  *'  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with 
good."  What  I  want  to  leave  in  your  minds  is  the  conviction  that  the  crown  of 
thorns  is  the  crown  of  glory  ;  that  the  Cross  is  the  throne  on  which  Christ  is  exalted. 
What  do  these  two  things  mean — the  crown  of  thorns  and  the  cross  of  shame  ? 
They  mean  the  extremest  manifestation  of  infinite  love.  Christ  has  said  that  love 
is  greater  than  hate ;  love  is  greater  than  infamy.  And  that  is  the  only  principle 
on  which  "  the  kingdom  of  this  world  will  become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of 
His  Christ;  and  He  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."    The  Christian  Church  is 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

slowly  abandoning  the  idea  of  conquering  by  mere  power.  The  Christian  Church 
is  slowly  losing  the  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  this  world  becoming  the  kingdom  of  our 
Lord  and  of  His  Christ  in  the  persons  of  those  who  pass  away  beyond  this  world, 
and  become  the  subjects  of  a  kingdom  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  this  world. 
His  kingdom  shall  come  on  this  earth  by  the  individual  members  copying  the 
example  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  believing  in  the  revelation  of  that  love  which  overcame 
sin  ;  so  that  the  people  who  live  upon  this  earth  shall  be  willing  subjects  of  Divine 
love,  and  living  in  perfect  love  to  their  fellow-men.  (Bp.  Courtney.)  Missionary 
prospects  : — It  is  related  of  Hannibal  that,  when  he  nad  led  his  men  to  one  of  the 
higher  ridges  of  the  Alps,  they  began  to  murmur,  and  requested  that  they  should  be 
reconducted  to  their  native  country.  Standing  on  an  eminence  and  waving  his 
hand,  the  intrepid  Carthaginian  General  directed  their  attention  to  the  plains  of 
Piedmont  below.  "Behold,"  said  he,  "these  fruitful  vineyards  and  luxuriant 
fields.  A  few  more  struggles,  and  they  are  all  your  own."  These  were  inspiring 
words,  and  they  had  the  desired  effect.  May  we  not  apply  them  to  the  subject  of 
missions,  and  say,  Behold,  from  the  mount  of  promise,  the  nations  of  the  earth  at 
the  feet  of  the  Church's  exalted  Head  !  A  few  more  struggles  on  the  part  of  Hia 
followers,  and  voices  shall  be  heard,  not  in  heaven  only,  but  from  the  innumerable 
and  widely  scattered  tongues  of  earth,  giving  utterance  to  the  joyous  announcement, 
"  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become,"  &c.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  and  its 
progress : — You  might  as  well  stand  on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  and  be  afraid 
it  was  going  to  run  up  stream  as  to  suppose  that  the  current  of  Christendom  can 
run  more  than  one  way.  What  would  you  think  of  a  man  who  should  stand 
moonstruck  over  an  eddy,  and  because  that  didn't  go  right  forward,  declare  that 
the  whole  flood  had  got  out  of  its  course  ?  So  in  the  stream  of  time.  The  things 
that  appear  in  our  day  all  have  bearing  on  the  coming  triumph  of  the  gospel  and 
the  reign  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  on  earth.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Jesus  will  con- 
quer the  world : — Yonder  in  the  cathedral  at  Vienna  the  Emperor  Frederick  is  repre- 
sented, standing  with  arm  uplifted,  and  at  the  tip  of  his  extended  fingers  are  the  five 
vowels.  A,  E,  I,  o,  u,  which,  being  interpreted,  means,  "  Austria  est  imperare  obi 
universo" — "Austria  will  conquer  the  world."  Another  and  a  grander  figure 
meets  the  gaze  of  every  Christian  of  to-day,  no  matter  where  his  standpoint,  and 
the  inscription  thereon  is  in  letters  of  fire :  "  Jesus  est  imperare  obi  universo  " — 
"Jesus  will  conquer  the  world."     (C.  W.  Boot.) 

Vers.  16-19. — The  four-and-twenty  elders  .  .  .  fell  upon  their  faces  and 
worshipped  God. — The  heavenly  life: — I.  It  is  a  life  op  worship.  1.  The 
persons  who  are  worshipping  are  described  as  twenty-four  elders.  They  are  the 
Universal  Church,  the  blessed  of  the  old  covenant  and  of  the  new;  and  yet,  as 
persons  and  representatives,  are  portrayed  as  leaders  of  the  heavenly  worship. 
2.  Their  dignity.  They  are  "  before  God,"  i.e.,  in  His  immediate  presence,  and  sit 
upon  thrones.  They  are  said  also  to  have  crowns  (chap.  iv.  10).  This  is  a  picture 
in  which  vision,  repose,  kingly  power,  and  victory  each  has  a  place.  3.  Their 
worship.  Observe,  it  is  an  act — they  "  fell  upon  their  faces  and  worshipped  God." 
Sitting  upon  thrones,  contemplating  God,  was  their  habitual  condition ;  but  worship 
was  the  active  expression  of  their  sense  of  the  Divine  majesty.  They  offer  Him 
inward  and  outward  adoration.  II.  It  is  a  life  of  thanksgiving.  1.  This  arises 
from  the  clear  realisation  of  their  indebtedness  to  God  for  all.  Gratitude  is  apt  to 
be  chilled  by  the  sorrows,  the  sufferings,  and  the  uncertainties  of  this  present  life. 
When  it  exists  in  the  soul  it  has  to  struggle  with  life's  burden,  and  its  expression 
is  like  the  transient  rays  of  light  which  pierce  the  cloud  that  darkens  the  landscape. 
But  the  song  of  the  redeemed  is  called  forth  by  the  sight  of  the  Giver,  and  the  dark 
problems  of  earth  are  solved  in  the  light  of  heaven  (John  xiii.  7).  2.  It  arises 
from  the  possession  of  "  the  gift  of  glory."  Grace  is  more  precious  than  all  the 
gifts  of  nature ;  but  glory  is  greater  than  grace,  as  the  flower  is  more  than  the  bud. 
The  consciousness  of  having  "  attained  to  the  true  end  of  their  being  elicits  from 
the  worshippers  the  anthem  of  thanksgiving  with  a  fulness  and  a  sweetness  in  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  with  which  the  songs  by  the  waters  of  Babylon  could  never 
compare.  3.  It  arises  from  a  deeper  sense  of  unworthiness  than  can  ever  be  felt 
on  earth.  What  was  the  casting  of  their  crowns  before  the  feet  of  the  Most  High 
but  a  protestation  that  their  excellence  and  their  victories  were  due  to  the  grace 
which  He  had  vouchsafed  to  them?  4.  It  was  a  corporate  oblation  of  thanks- 
giving— "  We  give,"  &c.  Each  has  his  own  joy,  and  each  can  enter  into  the  joy  of 
all.    III.  What   Divine   perfection   did   they  hymn?    The  eternity  of  God. 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  431 

1.  This  perfection  belongs  to  God  alone.     He  alone  is  without  beginning.     This  is 
the  root-distinction  between  Creator  and  creature.     He  is,  in  the  language  of 
Daniel,  "the  Ancient  of  days  "  (Dan.  vii.  '22).    He  is  from  Himself;  with  Him  is 
•*  the  well  of   life."     None  other  is   self-derived.    He  alone  possesses  His  life 
without  succession,  imchangeably  {tola  simul).     2.  Every  creature  has  a  beginning. 
"  The  creature  is  from  that,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  which  is  as  yet  not."    As  being 
is  a  base  of  all  gifts,  so  creation  is  at  the  root  of  all  worship.      The  realisation  of 
God  as  the  Beginning  and  End  of  our  being  is  essential  for  worship.     The  elders 
grasped  the  difference  between  Creator  and  created.     They  offered  Him,  their  God, 
•'  glory,  and  honour,  and  praise."     Why  ?     "  Thou  hast  created  all  things,  and  for 
Thy   pleasure  they   are,   and   were  created."     Here  every  one  and  everything 
we  see  is  created  and  transient ;  the  line  between  eternal  and  temporal  is  clearly 
marked    where  the  Eternal    makes    Himself    known  and  seen.     IV.    Lessons. 
1.  The  importance  of  worship  as  a  preparation  for  the  heavenly  life.     2.  The 
spirit  of  thanksgiving  should  enter  more  fully  into  our  religion,  which  is  some- 
times lacking  in  brightness,  trust,  and  unselfishness.    3.  The  contemplation  of  the 
eternity  of  God,  "  Thou  art  from  everlasting,"  produces  many  fruits.      There  is  a 
certain  delight  in  the  contemplation,  as  in  regarding  some  vast  and  magnificent 
object,  as  the  heavens  or  the  sea.    Then  the  thought  of  an  eternity  in  the  future, 
of  the  endlessness  of  human  life,  must  stir  within  us  hopes  and  fears — "  hope  of 
glory,"  and  fear  of  missing  it.     Such  a  conception  will  always  create  in  us  a  sense 
of  the  littleness  of  things  present,  in  comparison  with  things  eternal.      {Canon 
Hutchings,  M.A.)        We  give  Thee  thanks,  0  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  art,  and 
wast,  and  art  to  come. — The  omnipotence  of  God : — In  the  original  production  or 
ALL  CREATURES.    It  is  God  aloue  who  can  create.     Man,  in  the  exercise  of  his 
wisdom  and  ingenuity,  may  indeed  form  and  invent  many  things,  but  he  must 
have  the  materials  to  work  with :  when  God  formed  the  world  He  found  no 
materials  to  work  with — He  created  the  materials  Himself.    He  called  them  into 
being  with  His  irresistible  voice :  and  when  He  surveyed  the  various  works  of  His 
hands,  we  are  told,  they  all  met  with  His  full  approval :  "  And  God  saw  everything 
that  He  had  made,  and  behold  it  was  very  good."    AU  the  works  of  God  are 
finished  works ;  they  will  bear,  as  they  invite,  the  closest  and  most  minute  inspec- 
tion ;  and  unlike  the  works  of  man,  when  most  examined  they  will  be  the  most 
admired.    We  may  notice  also  the  power  of  God  in  the  greatness  of  some  of  Hia 
works,  and  in  the  smallness  of  others.     The  earth  which  we  inhabit  is  said  to  be 
eight  thousand  miles  in  diameter,  but  what  is  this  when  compared  with  the  body  of 
the  sun,  which  gives  us  light  day  after  day,  and  which  is  said  to  be  a  million  of 
times  larger  than  the  earth  we  inhabit,  and  ninety  millions  of  miles  distant  from 
it.    The  smallness  again  of  many  creatures  is  equally  surprising,  as  is  the  greatness 
of  others.     II.  In  the  preservation  and  government  of  His  creatures.     "  He 
opholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power."    The  planets  revolve  in  their 
appointed  circuits  with  the  most  unerring  and  minute  exactness.     The  various 
seasons  succeed  each  other  in  their  regular  and  appointed  order.    The  great  and 
wide  sea  also,  whose  billows  roar  and  threaten  to  overwhelm  the  earth,  is  kept  by 
the  power  of  its  Maker  within  its  proper  and  prescribed  limits.    We  may  again 
observe  the  same  Almighty  power  in  making  such  constant  and  abundant  provision 
for  the  vast  family  of  the  universe.    All  the  innumerable  tribes  of  beings  which 
inhabit  the  earth,  the  air,  and  the  water,  "these  all  wait  upon  God."    The  moral 
government  of  God  is  still  more  wonderful  to  contemplate.    IH.  In  the  work  ob" 
OUR  redemption  by  Christ  Jesus.     How  manifest  was  this  in  the  person  of  our 
Divine  Kedeemer  Himself  1     And  when  we  come  to  consider  the  first  planting  of 
our  holy  religion  in  the  world,  by  means  so  feeble  and  so  unlikely  to  all  human 
appearance,  and  notwithstanding  obstacles  so  great,  we  shall  see  with  what  pro- 
priety the  gospel  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."    The  gospel 
also  is  intended  to  produce  a  great  inward  change.     The  corruption  of  our  nature 
is  such  as  to  render  this  change  absolutely  needful ;  and  it  is  a  change  so  consider- 
able and  complete,  that  it  is  called  in  Scripture  a  "  new  creation  " ;  this,  of  course, 
can  only  be  effected  by  the  power  of  God.    And  the  apostle,  as  if  wanting  language 
to  express  the  greatness  of  this  power,  says,  "  and  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness 
of  His  power  to  us-ward,  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of  His  mighty 
power,  which  He    wrought  in   Christ   when  He   raised    Him    from    the  dead, 
and  set  Him  at  His  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places."     One  exertion  more 
of  the  Divine  power  let  us  dwell  on.     When  Moses  beheld  a  bush  on  fire,  and  yet 
not  consumed,  he  turned  aside  to  behold  it  with  admiration.    In  that  burning  bush 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

he  beheld  the  emblem  of  Israel  afflicted  in  Egypt,  yet  not  destroyed  ;  and  may  we 
not  also  perceive  in  it  an  emblem  of  the  true  Christian,  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation  "  ?  And  what  but  the  power  of  God  is  sufficient  for  this 
purpose  ?  Lessons  :  1.  That  God  should  be  held  in  reverence  and  adored.  2.  Let 
this  Almighty  God  be  also  feared.  3.  Blessed  are  they  who  put  their  trust  in  Him. 
{J.  L.  F.  Russell,  M.A.)  The  omnipotence  of  God  .-—Every  attribute  of  God  is  a 
proper  and  useful  object  of  our  consideration,  as  being  apt  to  remind  us  of  our  duty, 
and  excite  us  to  the  practice  of  it,  for  which  purposes  this  of  omnipotence,  mentioned 
in  the  text,  is  of  much  avail,  and  deserves  serious  consideration.  1.  God  is 
TravTOKpdriop,  as  having  a  just  right  and  authority  over  all  thing,  being  naturally  the 
sovereign  Lord  and  Emperor  of  the  world.  1.  He  is  also  such  inregard  to  His  infinite 
power,  as  that  word  may  signify  omnipotent.  3.  He  is  also  so,  because  He  doth 
actually  exercise  all  dominion,  and  continually  exert  His  power,  according  to  His  good 
pleasure;  "for  the  Lord  hath  prepared  His  throne  in  heaven,  and  His  kingdom 
ruleth  over  all,"  &c.  4.  God  is  Travro/cparwp,  as  the  true  proprietary  and  just 
possessor  of  all  things ;  "  the  heavens,"  saith  the  Psalmist,  "  are  Thine ;  the  earth  also 
is  Thine,"  &c.  5.  Also  as  containing  and  comprehending  all  things  by  His  immense 
presence  and  infinite  capacity.  "  I  fill  heaven  and  earth,"  said  God  in  Jeremiah ;  and 
King  Solomon  in  his  prayer  observes,  "  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Thee," 
&c.  6.  God  is  TravTOKpaTojp,  in  regard  that  He  sustains  and  preserves  all  things 
(Nehem.  ix.  6;  Col.  1.  17).    I.  If  God  be  the  just   Sovereign  op  all  things, 

HAVING    A     BIGHT    TO    GOVERN    THE     WORLD,     AND     ACTUALLY    EXERCISING     IT,    then 

1.  We  see  our  condition  here ;  that  we  live  not  in  an  anarch,  or  in  perfect  liberty 
to  follow  our  own  will,  &c.  2.  We  understand  our  duty  as  subjects  and  vassals, 
&c.  3.  We  may  hence  discern  the  heinousness  of  every  sin  as  committed  against 
the  crown  and  dignity  of  God.  4.  We  may  learn  what  reason  we  have  to  be 
content  in  every  condition,  since  our  station  is  allotted  to  us  by  unquestionable 
right.  5.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  consolation  to  reflect  that  we  and  all  the  world 
are  under  such  a  governor,  who  is  no  usurper  and  tyrant,  but  a  most  just,  wise, 
and  gracious  sovereign.    II.  The  belief  of  God's  immense  and  uncontrollable 

POWER   is   also   of   GREAT   IMPORTANCE   AND   INFLUENCE   ON   PRACTICE.       1.   It  SCrVCS  tO 

beget  in  us  a  due  awe  and  dread  of  Him.  2.  It  consequently  dissuades  and  deters 
us  in  a  high  manner  from  sin,  nothing  being  more  reasonable  than  that  advice 
of  the  preacher,  "  contend  not  with  him  that  is  mightier  than  thou."  3.  Whence  the 
consideration  of  this  point  may  dispose  us  to  weigh  well  our  counsels.  4.  It  may 
also  serve  to  depress  confidence  in  ourselves,  and  in  all  other  things,  as  to  any 
security  they  can  afford.  5.  It  may  be  of  special  efficacy  to  quell  and  mortify  in 
us  the  vices  of  pride,  arrogance,  self-will.  6.  Also  to  breed  and  nourish  faith  in 
God,  as  to  the  certain  performance  of  His  word  and  promises,  which,  be  they  never 
so  difficult.  He  is  so  able  to  perform.  7.  Hence  also  particularly  it  may  produce 
and  cherish  faith  in  the  sufficiency  of  God's  providence,  and  induce  us  entirely  to 
rely  on  it.  8.  It  affords  comfort  and  encouragement  to  us  in  the  undertaking  and 
prosecution  of  honest  and  prudent  enterprises,  giving  us  hope  and  confidence  in 
their  success.    III.  That  notion  of  the  word  "Almighty,"  which  implies  God's 

BEING  UNIVERSAL    PROPRIETARY  AND  POSSESSOR  OF  ALL  THINGS,   HAS  ALSO   MANY  GOOD 

uses.  We  may  thence  learn — 1.  That  we  are  not  our  own,  and  therefore  are 
obliged  to  submit  with  patience  to  His  disposal  of  us.  2.  We  ought  to  be  content 
with  that  share  of  accommodations  which  He  allows,  since  all  things  are  His,  and 
we  can  claim  nothing  from  Him.  3.  To  be  satisfied  when  He  withdraws  that  of 
which  He  has  before  afforded  us  the  enjoyment.  4.  To  be  heartily  thankful  for  all 
we  ever  have  or  enjoy.  5.  Carefully  to  manage  and  employ  all  which  is  put  into 
our  hands  for  His  interest  and  service.  6.  To  be  humble  and  sober,  not  to  be 
conceited,  or  to  glory  in  regard  to  anything  we  love.  IV.  That  sense,  according 
TO  which  the  word  signifies  God's  containing  all  things  by  His  immense 
PRESENCE,  IS  ALSO  OP  MOST  EXCELLENT  USE.  Wc  thereby  may  learn  with  what 
care,  circumspection,  modesty,  and  integrity  we  ought  always  to  manage  our 
conversation  and  behaviour,  since  we  continually  think  and  speak  and  act  in  the 
immediate  presence  of  God,  "  whose  eyes  are  on  the  ways  of  men."  Hence  also  we 
are  prompted  to  frequent  addresses  of  prayer,  thanksgiving,  and  all  kind  of  adora- 
tion. V.  The  CONSIDERATION  THAT  GOD  UPHOLDS  ALL  THINGS,  AND  CONSEQUENTLY 
OURSELVES,    IN   BEING,   MAY   POWERFULLY   DETER    US     PROM     OFFENDINO     HiM ;   for  put 

the  case  that  our  life  and  all  the  comforts  of  living  depended  on  the  bounty  and 
pleasure  of  any  person,  should  we  not  be  very  wary  and  fearful  of  offending  such 
an  one  ?     {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  XI.]  REVELATION.  433 

Ver.  19.  The  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven. — The  vision  of  the  heavenly 
temple : — I.  The  vision  of  the  heavenly  temple.  "  The  temple  of  God  was 
opened  in  heaven."  1.  A  spectacle  of  surpassing  grandeur.  Its  revealing  splen- 
dour drinks  up  the  mists  of  ages,  and  solves  enigmas  that  have  puzzled  the  wisest. 

2.  A  spectacle  of  Divine  government.  Our  God  and  King  is  enshrined  in  the 
heavenly  temple ;  from  thence  He  governs  all  things  in  the  interest  of  His 
Church,  contending  with  and  defeating  her  enemies.  The  unexplained  pro- 
cedures of  His  governtaent  will  soon  be  made  clear.  3.  A  spectacle  of  loftiest 
worship.  There  is  no  true  worship  without  thanksgiving  and  praise.  H.  The 
suggestive  disclosure  of  the  heavenly  vision.  There  was  seen  in  His  temple 
the  ark  of  the  Testament.  We  regard  the  ark  disclosed  in  this  vision  as  a  symbol 
of  God's  faithfulness.  1.  In  carrying  out  the  covenant  of  redemption.  He 
selected  the  Jews  as  the  nation  through  which  He  intended  to  reveal  His  saving 
purposes  to  the  world.  The  work  of  atonement  was  conceived,  developed,  and 
carried  out  in  harmony  with  all  the  attributes  of  the  Divine  character.  2.  In 
rewarding  the  faithful.  Designated  in  three  different  grades — ver.  18.  (1)  His 
servants,  the  prophets — men  prominently  active  in  His  cause.  (2)  The  saints^ 
eminent  for  piety.  (3)  Them  that  fear  Thy  name,  small  and  great — men  of 
varying  degrees  of  attachment  to  God.    All  rewarded  according  to  their  works. 

3.  In  taking  vengeance  on  His  enemies.  These  enemies  are  described  in  ver.  18 
as  those  who  destroy  or  corrupt  the  earth.  This  done  by  wars  and  desolations,  by 
abuse  of  secular  and  spiritual  powers,  by  evil  doctrines,  by  flagrant  sins,  which 
cry  for  vengeance.  All  such  enemies  God  will  "  punish  with  everlasting  destruc- 
tion." Lessons:  1.  The  most  imposing  revelation  in  the  heavenly  temple  will  be 
that  of  God's  faithfulness.  2.  The  contemplation  of  that  faithfulness,  while  it 
stimulates  the  righteous,  may  well  alarm  the  wicked.  {G.  Barlow.)  The  ark 
of  His  testimony. — The  ark  of  the  covenant  (with  Jer.  iii.  16) : — I.  The  symbol 
beverenced.  This  ark  was  the  object  of  great  reverence,  and  very  fitly  so,  because 
it  symbolised  God's  presence.  They  saw  no  similitude,  for  what  likeness  can  there 
be  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all  ?  But  they  knew  that  God's  excellent  glory  shone 
above  the  mercy-seat,  and  they  thought  of  the  ark  in  connection  with  the  Lord,  as 
David  did  when  he  said,  "  Thou  and  the  ark  of  Thy  strength."  It  was,  therefore,  a 
thing  greatly  to  be  reverenced,  for  God  was  there.  That  presence  of  God  meant 
blessing,  for  God  was  with  His  people  in  love  to  them.  Moreover,  the  ark  was 
held  in  reverence  by  the  Israelites  because  it  was  their  leader.  Marvel  not  that  the 
men  of  Judah  paid  great  reverence  to  this  ark  when  in  so  many  ways  it  was  a 
token  for  good  to  them.  What  they  did  to  this  ark  is  mentioned  in  the  text. 
1.  They  recognised  it  as  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord.  They  were  wont  to 
say,  "  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord."  They  spoke  much  of  it,  and  prided 
themselves  upon  the  possession  of  it.  2.  They  remembered  it,  as  the  text  plainly 
informs  us.  If  they  were  captives  they  prayed  in  the  direction  in  which  the  ark 
was  situated ;  wherever  they  wandered  they  thought  of  God  and  of  the  coffer  which 
represented  His  presence.  3.  They  visited  it.  On  certain  holy  days  they  came 
from  Dan  and  from  Beersheba,  even  from  the  uttermost  ends  of  their  land,  in  joyful 
companies,  singing  and  making  joyful  holiday  as  they  went  up  to  the  place  where 
God  did  dwell  between  the  cherubim.  4.  They  were  accustomed  also  to  speak 
highly  of  it,  for  in  the  margin  of  your  Bibles  you  will  find,  "  Neither  shall  they 
magnify  it  any  more."  They  used  to  tell  to  one  another  what  the  ark  had  done ; 
the  glory  that  shone  forth  from  it,  the  acceptance  of  the  offering  whose  blood  was 
sprinkled  upon  it  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  the  testimony  which  was  heard 
from  between  the  cherubic  wings.  U.  That  reverence  obliterated.  They  were 
to  say  no  more,  '•  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord."  Yet  that  fact  was  to  be 
a  blessing.  Observe  that  the  words  are  not  spoken  as  a  threatening,  but  as  a 
gracious  promise.  Now,  this  cannot  merely  mean  that  they  would  be  without  the 
ark,  for  they  would  certainly  understand  that  to  be  a  sign  of  Divine  anger.  Neither 
would  the  mere  absence  of  the  ark  fulfil  the  prophet's  words ;  for  if  the  ark  were 
gone  they  would  remember  it  still.  If  they  could  not  visit  it,  yet  it  would  come  to 
their  minds,  and  they  would  speak  of  it.  It  was  somehow  to  be  a  boon  to  them 
that  they  should  speak  no  more  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  for  the  text  was 
delivered  in  the  form  of  a  promise.  The  fact  is  they  were  to  have  done  with  the 
symbol  because  the  substance  would  come.  Our  Lord  Jesus  by  His  coming  has 
put  out  of  His  people's  thoughts  the  material  ark  of  the  covenant,  because  its 
meaning  is  fulfilled  in  Him,  and  this — 1.  In  the  sense  of  preservation.  We  think 
nothing  of  the  ark  now,  and  we  think  nothing  of  the  tablets  of  stone ;  but  we  do 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

think  everything  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  who  is  made  of  God  unto  us  righteousness  " ; 
for  He  has  completely  kept  the  law  ;  for  He  said,  "  Thy  law  is  within  My  heart." 
It  was  not  within  His  heart  alone,  but  within  all  His  life ;  His  whole  thoughts, 
words,  and  acts  went  to  make  up  a  golden  chest  in  which  the  precious  treasure  of 
the  perfect  law  of  God  should  be  contained.  0  come,  let  us  magnify  His  blessed 
name  !  2.  Next,  the  ark  signified  propitiation ;  for  over  the  top  of  the  sacred  box 
which  held  the  two  tables  of  the  law  was  the  slab  of  gold  called  the  mercy-seat, 
which  covered  all.  We  will  not  talk  of  that  golden  covering  now,  but  we  will  speak 
of  Jesus,  our  blessed  Lord,  who  covers  all.  3.  The  next  word  is  a  very  blessed  one  : 
and  that  is,  "  covenant."  I  thank  God  that  in  Jesus  Christ  we  have  a  covenant 
of  grace  which  can  never  fail,  and  can  never  be  broken,  and  in  Him  we  have  all 
that  our  souls  desire :  pot  of  manna  and  rod  of  Aaron ;  covenant  provision  and 
covenant  rule  we  find  in  Him.  4.  Fourthly :  because  this  ark  was  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  God  it  was  from  it  that  He  was  accustomed  to  reveal  Himself,  and  so 
it  is  called  the  "  ark  of  testimony."  Jehovah  often  spoke  from  off  the  mercy-seat 
to  His  waiting  people.  We  say  no  more,  "  the  ark  of  the  testimony,"  but  we 
rejoice  that  God  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  and  we  beheld  His  glory, 
and  saw  the  Father  in  the  Son.  5.  This  ark  also  signified  enthronement ;  for  the  top 
of  the  ark  was,  so  to  speak,  the  throne  of  God.  It  was  "  the  throne  of  the  heavenly 
grace."  There  God  reigned  and  dwelt,  that  is,  typically.  We  talk  no  longer  of 
the  ark,  and  of  its  gold,  and  of  its  crown,  and  of  its  golden  lid,  and  of  the  winged 
cherubs  ;  for  the  Lord  Jesus  is  infinitely  better  than  these.  Oh,  our  beloved  Lord 
and  Master,  Thou  dost  chase  away  these  shadows  from  our  minds,  for  the  very 
throne  of  God  art  Thou  1  6.  Out  of  this  grows  the  next  idea,  that  as  it  was  the 
place  of  God's  enthronement,  so  it  was  the  door  of  man's  approach.  Men  never 
came  nearer  to  God  on  earth  typically  than  when  they  stood  in  the  holy  place  close 
by  the  ark.  Israel  was  nearest  to  God  symbolically  on  that  day  when  the  atone- 
ment had  been  made  and  accepted,  and  her  priest  stood  before  the  ark  awe -stricken 
in  the  presence  of  God.  You  and  I  need  not  speak  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  for 
we  have  a  blessed  way  of  approach.  We  do  not  come  to  Christ  once  in  the  year 
only,  but  every  day  in  the  year,  and  every  hour  of  the  day.  He  who  came  but 
once  in  the  year  came  tremblingly.  The  Jews  have  a  tradition  that  they  put  a  cord 
about  the  foot  of  the  high  priest,  so  that  if  he  should  die  before  the  ark  they  might 
draw  out  his  corpse,  such  was  their  servile  fear  of  God.  The  tradition  shows 
what  was  the  trembhng  nature  of  that  entrance  within  the  veil :  how  different  from 
the  apostle's  words,  "  Let  us  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace  "  I 
We  are  not  afraid  of  being  stricken  with  death  there :  we  are  full  of  reverence,  but 
we  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear.  There  is  no  approaching 
God  except  in  Christ;  but  in  Christ  our  approach  to  God  may  be  as  near  as 
possible,  in.  This  revekence  transferred.  1.  First :  Let  us  say  that  Jesus  is 
our  covenant.  We  are  told,  "  They  shall  say  no  more,  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of 
the  Lord."  People  must  talk,  it  is  natural  to  them — what  else  are  their  tongues 
for  ?  Let  us,  then,  say  concerning  Christ  that  He  is  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the 
Lord.  Come,  let  us  each  one  say  it  for  himself — '*  Lord  Jesus,  I  am  in  covenant 
with  God  through  Thee.  Jesus,  thou  art  my  propitiation,  by  Thee  I  approach  unto 
the  Father."  2.  The  text  takes  you  a  step  further,  for  it  says  of  the  original  ark, 
"neither  shall  it  come  to  mind,"  or  (margin),  "  neither  shall  it  come  upon  your 
heart."  Let  Christ  come  upon  your  heart,  and  dwell  there.  Let  us  not  have 
Christ  in  the  head,  but  Christ  in  the  heart.  Know  all  you  can  about  Him ;  but 
love  Him  on  account  of  everything  you  know ;  for  everything  we  learn  about 
Christ  ought  to  be  another  argument  for  affection  to  Him.  3.  And  next,  if  we 
should  ever  grow  dull  or  cold  at  any  time,  let  us  take  the  third  step  in  the  text, 
and  let  us  remember  the  Lord.  If  I  have  not  this  enjoyment  now  I  will  remember 
it,  and  struggle  till  I  find  my  Lord  again.  0  my  Lord,  I  will  remember  Thee.  If 
I  forget  Thee,  let  my  heart  forget  to  beat.  4.  The  next  thing  is,  let  us  visit  Him. 
We  cannot  set  out  on  journeys  now  to  go  to  Jerusalem  on  foot — little  bands  of  us 
together  ;  yet  let  us  visit  Jesus.  Let  us  continually  come  to  the  mercy-seat  alone, 
^ho  that  knows  the  worth  of  prayer  but  wishes  to  be  often  there  ?  Next,  let  us 
come  up  by  twos  and  threes.  You  that  live  at  home  and  seldom  get  out,  could 
you  not  every  now  and  then  during  the  day  say  to  your  maid,  if  she  is  a  Christian, 
or  to  your  sister  who  lives  with  you,  "  Come,  let  us  have  a  five  minues'  visit  to  the 
ark  of  the  covenant ;  let  us  go  to  the  Lord  and  speak  with  Him ;  maybe  He  will 
speak  with  us  "?  5.  The  last  thing  is,  "  neither  shall  that  be  done  any  more  " ;  but 
the  margin  has  it,  "  neither  shall  that  be  magnified  any  more."     Transfer  your 


CHAP,  xn.]  REVELATION.  435 

reverence,  then,  and  as  you  cannot  magnify  the  literal  mercy-seat,  come  and 
magnify  Christ,  who  is  the  real  mercy-seat.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  ark  of  His 
covenant : — I.  The  covenant  is  alwayb  near  to  God.  1.  Whatever  happens,  the 
covenant  stands  secure.  2.  Whether  we  see  it  or  not,  the  covenant  is  in  its  place, 
near  to  God.  3.  The  covenant  of  grace  is  for  ever  the  same,  for— (1)  The  God 
who  made  it  changes  not.  (2)  The  Christ  who  is  its  Surety  and  Substance  changes 
not.  (3)  The  love  which  suggested  it  changes  not.  (4)  The  principles  on  which 
it  is  settled  change  not.  (5)  The  promises  contained  in  it  change  not ;  and,  best 
of  all — (6)  The  force  and  binding  power  of  the  covenant  change  not.  II.  The 
COVENANT  IS  SEEN  OF  SAINTS.  We  scc  it  whcu — 1.  By  faith  we  believe  in  Jesus  as 
our  Covenant-head.  2.  By  instruction  we  understand  the  system  and  plan  of 
grace.  3.  By  confidence  we  depend  upon  the  Lord's  faithfulness,  and  the  promises 
which  He  has  made  in  the  covenant.  4.  By  prayer  we  plead  the  covenant.  5.  By 
experience  we  come  to  perceive  covenant-love  running  as  a  silver  thread  through 
all  the  dispensations  of  providence.  6.  By  a  wonderful  retrospect  we  look  back 
when  we  arrive  in  heaven,  and  see  all  the  dealings  of  our  faithful  covenant  God. 
III.  The  covenant  contains  much  that  is  worth  seeing.  1.  God  dwelling  among 
men  :  as  the  ark  in  the  tabernacle,  in  the  centre  of  the  camp.  2.  God  reconciled, 
and  communing  with  men  upon  the  mercy-seat.  3.  The  law  fulfilled  in  Christ : 
the  two  tables  in  the  ark :  4.  The  kingdom  established  and  flourishing  in  Him : 
Aaron's  rod  blossomed.  5.  The  provision  made  for  the  wilderness :  for  in  the  ark 
was  laid  up  the  golden  pot  which  had  manna.  The  universe  united  in  carrying 
out  covenant  purposes,  as  typified  by  the  cherubim  on  the  mercy-seat.  IV.  Thb 
COVENANT  HAS  SOLEMN  SURROUNDINGS.  1.  The  sauctious  of  Diviue  power — con- 
firming. 2.  The  supports  of  eternal  might — accomplishing.  3.  The  movements  of 
spiritual  energy — applying  its  grace.  4.  The  terrors  of  eternal  law — overthrowing 
its  adversaries.    [Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  xn. 

Vers.  1,  2.  A  great  wonder  in  heaven ;  a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun. — The  sign 

of  the  woman  in  heaven : — Let  us  consider  the  scene.  There  is  a  woman  clothed 
with  the  sun,  crowned  with  stars,  and  having  the  moon  under  her  feet.  A  woman 
has  ever  been  the  chief  symbol  of  the  Church.  The  relation  between  the  Lord  and 
the  Church  is  most  correctly  represented  by  the  relation  between  a  true  husband 
and  a  faithful  wife.  The  husband  is  delighted  to  supply  his  wife  with  every 
comfort ;  his  counsel  guides,  his  strength  defends  her.  So  is  the  Lord  to  the  whole 
universe,  but  especially  to  heaven  and  the  Church.  A  wife,  on  the  other  hand,  loves 
her  husband,  and  him  only,  as  a  husband.  She  trusts  in  his  judgment,  she  has 
confidence  in  his  strength  and  protection,  she  delights  in  carrying  out  his  views  so 
far  as  she  can  see  them  to  be  right  (Psa.  xlv.  10,  11).  The  Church,  then,  is  the 
Lord's  wife :  she  loves  Him — leans  upon  Him — confides  in  Him — is  jealous  for  His 
honour,  worship,  and  dignity,  and  clings  fondly  to  Him  in  life,  death,  and  eternity. 
She,  therefore,  is  represented  by  this  glorious  woman.  And  the  teachings  of  this 
chapter  show  us  that  when  the  Church  would  be  manifested  to  the  world,  she 
would  be  a  great  wonder,  she  would  startle  and  astonish  mankind,  and  would  have 
to  encounter  the  fierce  opposition  of  those  who  are  meant  by  the  dragon,  which 
sends  out  floods  from  his  mouth  to  destroy  her  and  her  man  child.  The  Church, 
then,  especially  as  to  her  love  for  the  Lord,  His  law.  His  kingdom,  and  His  children, 
is  meant  by  this  woman.  And,  in  truth,  it  is  this  love  which  forms  the  very  essence 
of  the  Church  (John  xiii.  34,  35).  No  other  qualifications  have  the  Church  in  them 
if  there  be  not  charity  in  them.  To  be,  then,  in  the  love  of  truth  and  goodness,  is 
to  be  in  that  blessed  community,  the  Church,  which  is  represented  by  the  magnifi- 
cent symbol  presented  to  the  spiritual  sight  of  St.  John,  "  a  woman  clothed  with  the 
sun."  The  sun  corresponds  to  the  Divine  love,  and  this  all-essential  source  of 
blessedness  appears  to  the  angels  of  heaven  as  a  sun  immeasurably  surpassing  ours 
in  splendour,  and  while  its  holy  glow  warms,  it  also  blesses  them.  The  Lord 
(Jehovah)  is  a  sun  and  a  shield.  He  giveth  grace  and  glory :  no  good  thing  will  He 
withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).  The  sun  is  the  centre 
of  the  solar  system.    Divine  love  is  the  centre  of  the  spiritual  system.     The  sun 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

warms  all  nature,  Divine  love  warms  all  heaven,  and  every  heaven-seeking  spirit 
in  the  world.     The    soul  is  cold,  chilled,  and  barren,  until  Divine    love  cheera, 
encourages,  and  quickens  the  affections.     The  woman,  then,  was  clothed  with  the 
sun,  to  teach  us  that  the  Church  in  her  purity  is  filled,  nourished,  embosomed,  and 
blessed,  by  the  Divine  love  of  the  Lord.     To  be  clothed  with  the  sun  is  then  the 
privilege  of  the  Church,  when  she  is  single-hearted  and  true  to  the  Saviour.     She 
feels  His  presence  cheering,  purifying,  exalting,  and  blessing  her  ;  He  raising  her 
up  far  above  all  that  is  low  and  sordid,  with  "  healing  in  His  wings."     The  object 
next  offering  itself  for  our  attention  is  the  moon.  "  The  moon  was  under  her  feet." 
And  when  we  remember  the  two  great  lights  mentioned  in  Genesis,  "  the  greater 
light  to  rule  the  day,  and  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  night,"  we  shaU  readily  perceive 
that  the  moon  corresponds  to  the  light  which  shines  in  the  soul  when  we  are  in 
states  of  spiritual  night.    Our  limited  powers  tire,  and  must  have  rest,  variety,  and 
restoration.    In  spiritual  things  the  mind  opens  with  delight  to  the  beauties  of  the 
Divine  Word.     Worship  is  welcome,  and  we  enjoy  a  delightful  season  of  refreshing. 
There  are  showers  of  blessing,  and,  like  the  apostles  of  old,  we  exclaim,  "  It  is  good 
for  us  to  be  here !     Let  us  make  tabernacles  and  abide."    It  is  full  day.     But,  after 
a  season,  we  feel  the  necessity  of  a  change.     We  have  been  hearing  and  enjoying, 
now  we  must  go  and  act.    We  have  had  our  spiritual  day,  now  we  must  have  night, 
and  that  is  often  the  period  of  external  activity.    We  are  engaged  in  natural 
business,  and  our  natural  feelings  and  perceptions  become  dim.     It  is  night ;  we 
are  no  longer  conscious  of  the  cheering  presence  of  the  light  of  love  in  which  we 
formerly  rejoiced,  but  we  are  not  without  light,  we  have  the  light  of  faith :  this  is 
the  moon.    Faith,  like  a  beautiful  moon,  rules  the  night.    Upon  such  a  moon, 
then,  the  woman  was  observed  to  stand.    And  so  it  is  with  the  true  Church.     She 
rehes  on  an  enlightened  faith,  not  upon  dark  mysteries.     The  moon  reflects  light, 
and  illuminates  the  darkness,  and  just  in  proportion  as  it  faces  and  reflects  the  sun. 
Faith,  in  proportion  as  it  perceives  the  Divine  love  prevalent  in  all  things,  affords 
light  and  comfort  to  its  possessor.  While,  then,  the  sun  of  Divine  love  is  described 
as  embosoming  the  woman,  the  moon  of  faith  is  under  her  feet.     The  one  affords 
nourishment,  support,  and  joy,  the  other  yields  a  firm  foundation.    Faith  is  a  rock, 
derived  from  the  Kock  of  Ages.    And  a  clear,  firm,  heartfelt,  rational,  spiritual 
faith,  will  enable  the  members  of  the  Church  to  stand  firm  under  every  trial,  and 
to  conquer  in  every  conflict.     "  There  was  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars." 
The  stars  are  used  to  represent  the  glorious  possessions  of  this  woman,  because 
they  correspond  to  the  smaller  lights  of  religion  afforded  by  individual  truths. 
When  we  clearly  see  and  know  the  spiritual  lesson  afforded  by  each  verse  of  the 
Holy  Word,  it  becomes  a  star  in  the  firmament  of  the  soul.     When  the  mind  is 
weU  stored  with  the  sacred  knowledge  of  Divine  things,  it  is  like  the  heavens  in  the 
night-time,  when  the  sky  is  radiant  and  robed  with  brilliancy.     When  the  soul  has 
no  longer  the  bright  manifest  presence  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and  shade  and 
darkness  come  on,  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  have  one  and  then  another  small  but  holy 
light  breaking  in  upon  us  like  star  after  star,  which  shows  its  lovely  ray  in  the 
evening,  until  the  whole  gorgeous  canopy  is  lighted  up.     The  twelve  stars  represent 
all  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things.    The  number  twelve  in  the  usage  of  the  Divine 
Word  represents  all  things  both  of  goodness  and  truth  :  it  is  the  compound  of  four 
and  three  multiplied  together.    The  woman  is  said  to  have  a  diadem  of  twelve 
stars,  to  teach  us  that  she  loves  and  honours  all  the  instructions  that  come  from 
the  Lord  :  all  the  knowledges  of  goodness  and  truth  are  to  her  as  so  many  stars, 
and  she  makes  them  her  glory  and  her  crown.    The  head  represents  the  highest 
intellectual  faculty,  and  a  diadem  the  wisdom  which  enriches  and  adorns  that 
faculty  in  the  Lord's  true  servants.     They  do  not  esteem  the  knowledge  of  Him  and 
His  kingdom  as  things  indifferent ;  they  are  the  glories  of  their  intellect :  they  do 
not  wear  them  about  their  feet ;  they  are  their  crown.     "  And  she,  being  with  child, 
cried,  travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  delivered."    The  man  child  which  she 
desired  to  bring  forth  represents  the  new  system  of  doctrine  and  order  and  society, 
which  she  desired  to  initiate.    Instead  of  the  love  of  self  which  had  so  long 
desolated  society,  and  made  God's  earth  a  scene  of  turmoil,  struggle,  and  distress, 
she  desires  to  substitute  the  love  of  God,  and  love  to  one  another.     Instead  of  life's 
business  being  regarded  as  a  mere  worldly  pursuit,  she  would  teach  all  men  in  all 
things  to  Uve  the  life  of  heaven.     Such  is  the  new  system  of  doctrine  and  practice 
which  the  Lord's  new  Church  would  fain  engender.    But  ah !  she  cries,  travailing 
in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  delivered.    When  society  has  been  so  long  formed  upon 
the  two  great  sources  of  mischief,  selfishness  and  mystery,  as  so-called  Christendom 


CHAP.  XII.]  REVELATION.  437 

has,  we  need  not  wonder  that  purer  principles  should  at  first  be  received  with 
difficulty.  This  difficulty  arises  from  two  causes,  a  contrary  faith  and  a  contrary 
life.  Let  it  then  be  our  first  and  chief  aim  to  bring  the  rule  of  the  man  child  fully 
into  our  daily  conduct,  and  evincing  an  example  in  our  lives  of  the  blessedness  of 
living  for  heaven  and  earth  at  the  same  time,  we  shall  then  be  able  to  assist  others 
in  their  life-work  by  encouragement  and  counsel,  and  that  not  only  in  private  but 
in  public  matters.  For  surely  the  woman  cries  loudly  that  the  earth  is  groaning 
from  a  thousand  sorrows,  which  are  but  the  results  of  ignorance,  folly,  and  false- 
hood. {J.  Bailey,  Ph.D.)  The  sun-clothed  woman : — 1.  We  have  the  image  of 
a '-woman."  Woman  was  made  out  of  Adam.  Adam  was  "the  figure  of  Him 
that  was  to  come."  Christ  is  "  the  second  Adam."  And  the  wife  of  the  second 
Adam  is  the  Church,  made  out  of  Him  by  the  hand  and  Spirit  of  God  from  that 
deep  sleep  of  His  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  2.  This  woman  is  in  the  way  of 
motherhood.  This  is  the  characteristic  of  the  Church  in  every  period  of  its 
existence.  The  Church  is  meant  for  the  work  of  begetting  and  bearing  saints.  It 
is  not  for  show  but  for  fruitfulness — for  the  bringing  forth  of  a  royal  seed  of  God, 
to  inherit  His  kingdom,  and  to  rule  and  reign  in  the  ages  of  eternity.  3.  This 
woman  is  magnificently  arrayed.  Of  course,  no  mere  creature,  or  any  number  of 
creatures,  can  be  literally  dressed  with  the  sun.  It  is  only  a  pictorial  representation, 
which  is  to  be  figuratively  understood.  The  sun  is  the  fairest  and  most  brilliant 
thing  our  eyes  have  ever  seen.  It  is  the  great  orb  of  brightness.  To  be  clothed 
with  it,  one  would  needs  be  clothed  with  light.  And  so  it  is  with  the  Church  and 
the  people  of  God.  Jesus  says,  they  are  "  the  children  of  light "  (Luke  xvi.  8).  It 
is  the  office  and  end  of  all  God's  merciful  appointments  "  to  turn  men  from  dark- 
ness to  light"  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  The  Church  has  ever  been  an  illuminated  body. 
Its  children  are  not  of  darkness,  but  of  the  day.  While  others  grope  in  darkness 
they  are  arrayed  in  light.  The  sun  is  at  the  same  time  the  great  light- 
giver.  It  radiates  brightness  as  well  as  possesses  it.  And  to  be  clothed  with 
the  sun,  one  must  necessarily  be  a  glorious  dispenser  of  illumination.  And 
such  is  the  Church.  Its  members  and  ministers  have  been  the  brightest  lights  of 
the  ages.  It  is  constituted  and  ordained  for  the  teaching  of  the  nations,  and  the 
bearing  of  the  light  of  heaven  to  the  benighted  souls  of  men.  The  sun  is  likewise 
an  orb  of  great  excellence  and  purity.  Nothing  can  diminish  its  glory,  or  taint  its 
rays.  To  be  clothed  with  it  is  to  be  clothed  with  unsullied  excellency.  And  so  it 
is  with  the  Church.  It  may  have  shabby  members,  but  they  are  not  really  of  it. 
Light  is  the  garment  of  God.  It  is  the  symbol  of  His  own  nature.  And  as  all 
true  people  of  His  are  "  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,"  being  begotten  unto  Him 
from  above,  they  enter  also  into  the  same  clothing.  The  Church  is  robed  with  the 
sun.  4.  This  woman  is  victorious  in  her  position.  She  has  "  the  moon  under  her 
feet."  As  the  sun  is  the  king  of  day,  so  the  moon  is  the  empress  of  night,  and  is 
a  fit  picture  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  And  as  to  be  clothed  with  the  sun  is  to  be 
"  light  in  the  Lord,"  so  to  tread  the  moon  under  foot  is  the  image  of  victory  over 
the  powers  of  darkness,  whether  of  nature,  or  aught  else.  And  this  is  a  blessed 
characteristic  and  honour  of  the  Church.  All  her  true  members  are  conquerors. 
They  have  subdued  their  prejudices,  and  brought  their  bodies  and  passions  under 
the  sway  of  another  and  better  dominion  and  discipline.  The  moon  is  under  their 
feet.  And  the  same  is  equally  true  of  the  Church  as  a  body.  She  is  the  hero  of 
battles  and  victories.  Kings  have  combined  to  exterminate  her,  tyrants  have 
oppressed  her,  children  have  betrayed  her,  friends  have  deserted  her,  but  still  she 
has  lived  on.  The  moon  is  under  her  feet.  5.  Still  further :  this  woman  is  royal 
in  rank  and  dignity.  Regal  gems  glitter  about  her  brow.  There  is  "on  her  head 
a  crown  " — a  crown  "  of  stars."  Whatever  the  particular  allusion  may  be,  whether 
to  patriarchs,  or  tribes,  or  apostles,  or  all  of  these,  or  to  the  totality  of  her  teaching 
agency,  there  flashes  forth  from  this  the  unmistakable  idea  of  kinghood  and 
authority ;  yea,  of  celestial  royalty  and  dominion  (1  Peter  ii.  9).  People  look  with 
contempt  upon  the  Church.  They  think  her  mean  among  the  majesties  of  this 
world.  They  esteem  her  manner  of  life  a  letting  down  of  man's  proper  dignity  and 
consequence.  They  scorn  her  modesty  and  humility  as  efifeminacy.  But  the 
Church  is  a  royal  woman,  crowned  with  the  stars  of  heaven.  6.  And  she  is  in 
travail  to  bring  forth.  She  is  persecuted ;  but  these  are  not  so  much  pains  of 
persecution.  Persecution  has  its  spring  in  hell's  malignity;  this  agonising  has  its 
origin  in  the  love,  and  faith,  and  hope  of  a  pious  maternity.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 
Social  Ghristhood  and  social  fiendhood  : — I.  Social  Christhood.  1.  It  is  glorious. 
Encircled  with  the  solar  beams  of  Divine  truth.     Treads  down  all  worldliness  in 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap.xh. 

its  spirit  and  aims.  2.  It  is  multiplying.  (1)  Its  offspring  is  brought  forth  in 
pain.  Who  knows  the  anguish  of  those  earnestly  engaged  in  endeavouring  to  form 
Christ  in  men,  and  to  bring  Him  forth  ?  (2)  It  is  brought  forth  to  govern.  Every 
Christly  convert  is  a  king,  as  well  as  a  priest  unto  God.  (3)  It  is  destined  for  a 
Divine  fellowship.  Sublime  destiny.  II.  Social  fiendhood.  The  "  great  red 
dragon,"  the  old  serpent,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  works  in  the  children 
of  disobedience  everywhere.  1.  His  possession  of  enormous  power.  (1)  Of  intel- 
lect. "  Seven  heads."  (2)  Of  execution.  "  Seven  horns."  (3)  Of  empire.  *'  Seven 
crowns."  (4)  Of  mischief  (ver.  4).  2.  His  determined  antagonism  to  Christhood. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Church  a  woman  : — 1.  Where  John  says,  there  appeared 
a  great  wonder  in  heaven,  this  shows  us  that  God's  works  for  His  Church,  and  against 
her  enemies,  are  most  part  wonderful.  2.  In  the  comparing  the  Church  to  a  woman, 
we  see  that  of  tterself  she  is  but  weak,  but  strong  is  He  who  owns  her.  3.  By  her 
description,  we  see  that  all  her  decking  and  ornaments  are  heavenly  and  spiritual. 
4.  More  particularly,  she  is  clothed  with  the  sun :  herewith  should  we  likewise  be 
clothed,  to  make  us  glorious  before  God,  and  acceptable.  5.  She  has  the  moon 
under  her  feet,  which  teaches  aU  her  true  members  in  like  manner  to  tread  upon 
the  world  in  affection,  and  never  to  let  it  have  place,  either  in  heart  or  head.  6.  It 
is  first  said  that  she  was  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  then  that  she  trod  on  the  moon, 
to  show  us  that  we  will  never  despise  the  world  till  we  put  on  Christ,  and  know  the 
excellence  of  Christ  and  of  heavenly  things.    {Wm.  Guild,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  A  great  red  dragon. — The  great  war : — ^A  contest  here  is  waging  which 
enlists  and  engages  the  mightiest  powers  that  exist.  It  is  the  great  and  far-reaching 
conflict  between  good  and  evil,  between  truth  and  falsehood,  between  right  and  usur- 
pation, between  the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  empire  of  Satan,  between  heaven  and  hell 
— the  great  war  of  a  divided  universe,  coming  to  final  issue  upon  this  little  world  of 
ours !  It  is  largely  silent  and  invisible.  Though  raging  round  us  every  hour,  we 
perceive  so  Uttle  of  it,  that  many  doubt  its  reality.  But  its  very  hiddenness  is 
evidence  of  its  awful  greatness.  The  little  broils  and  disputes  of  a  neighbourhood 
are  loud,  and  thrust  themselves  on  every  ear,  because  they  are  confined  to  a  level 
and  limit  within  easy  observation  and  comprehension ;  but  this  conflict  we  can 
only  know  by  Divine  revelation,  because  it  encompasses  so  much  of  eternity,  and 
pertains  to  spiritual  potencies  under  and  behind  the  outward  ongoing  of  things. 
But,  whether  conscious  of  it  or  not,  such  a  mighty  strife  exists,  and  we  ourselves 
are  all  parties  to  it,  and  combatants  in  it.  If  not  of  the  glorious  woman,  we  are 
of  the  seven-headed  and  ten-horned  dragon,  at  war  with  her,  her  seed,  and  her 
God.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  dragon  foiled  and  the  Church  preserved : — Ever 
since  wrong  commenced,  there  has  been  a  bitter  antagonism  between  it  and  right. 
Though  varying  with  varied  circumstances,  all  moral  wrong  and  all  falsehood  have 
their  deep  origin  in  selfishness.  This  monster-evU  displays  itself  in  ten  thousand 
ways,  but  in  essence  it  is  always  the  same,  the  substitute  of  man's  individual  wiU 
for  the  wUl  of  God.  Every  new  unfolding  of  truth  and  goodness  from  heaven 
finds  the  state  of  society  previously  formed  by  selfishness  and  mystery  ready  to 
assail  it,  and  it  possible  to  destroy.  Thus  was  it  when  the  Lord  Himself  came 
upon  the  earth.  He  ushered  into  the  world  new  doctrines  of  love  and  light.  The 
serpent,  then,  in  His  case,  stood  ready  to  devour,  and  at  length  nailed  Him  to  the 
Cross,  crying,  "  Crucify  Him !  crucify  Him  !  "  The  great  dragon  is,  then,  a  pretended 
religion,  which  is,  however,  nothing  but  disguised  selfishness.  Let  us  look  at  each 
of  these  features  in  detail.  The  serpent,  as  being  the  form  on  earth  which  corre- 
sponds to  self-love  in  its  disorderly  state,  when  we  call  it  selfishness,  is  felt  to  be 
truly  so  instinctively  by  us  all,  and  is  so  used  throughout  the  Divine  Word.  The 
great  business  of  all  religion  is  to  conquer  this  serpent  in  every  one  of  us.  Unless 
selfishness  is  overcome,  there  can  be  no  progress  made.  We  cannot  of  ourselves 
destroy  our  serpents,  but  the  Lord  will  give  us  power  to  do  so.  He  says  (Luke  x.  19). 
By  the  help  of  Him,  then,  who  conquered  all  the  efforts  of  the  powers  of  darkness, 
and  sanctified  His  own  human  nature  that  He  might  give  us  power  to  purify  ours, 
we  can  obtain  the  victory  over  self-love  in  aU  its  unhappy  forms.  From  being 
proud  we  can  become  truly  humble ;  from  being  hard  and  stern  we  can  become 
gentle  and  considerate;  from  being  cold  and  stately  we  can  become  warm  and 
happy.  We  can  tread  on  the  serpent  of  self-love  and  the  scorpion  of  malignant 
falsehood,  and  deprive  them  of  that  life  by  which  all  things  die  around  them,  and 
fill  their  places  with  that  heavenly  life  which  is  the  source  of  every  blessedness. 
The  great  and  terrible  figure  before  us,  then,  is  indicative  of  a  system  which, 


CHAP,  xn.]  REVELATION.  439 

though  prepared  to  soar,  and  having  much  power  and  much  adornment,  yet  is 
deeply  grounded  in  selfishness,  and  would  be  ready  with  aU  its  might  to  oppose  the 
new  Church  and  its  heavenly  doctrines.  It  was  a  serpent,  but  a  serpent  with 
vmigs — a  dragon.  Wings  are  the  means  by  which  birds  soar,  and  they  correspond 
to  those  general  truths  by  means  of  which  men's  thoughts  soar.  But  the  wings  of 
the  dragon  are  false  principles  of  religion,  by  which  there  is  an  imitation  of  truth, 
but  only  an  imitation.  There  is  a  flying  upwards,  but  it  is  only  the  flying  of  a 
serpent.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  a  system  of  pretended  truth  respecting  God,  and 
heaven  and  eternal  things,  but  altogether,  in  its  interior  character,  selfish.  It 
would  be  constructed  with  great  ingenuity  and  skiU,  indicated  by  its  having  seven 
heads.  It  would  have  much  power  of  persuasiveness  and  apparent  truth  intimated 
by  its  ten  horns,  and  would  make  a  great  display  of  heavenly  wisdom,  misapplied. 
The  heads  are  seven,  to  signify,  as  that  number  ever  does,  completeness,  and  a 
relation  to  holy  things ;  but  as  they  are  heads  of  the  dragon,  they  represent  that 
completed,  but  perverted,  ingenuity  by  which  a  false  religion  satisfies  its  deluded 
adherents.  Horns  are  the  emblems  of  power.  Horned  animals  push,  and  exert 
their  power  by  means  of  their  horns.  The  crowns,  or  diadems,  as  the  Greek  word 
more  properly  expresses,  are  Uterally  fillets  or  bands  for  the  head,  beautified  with 
precious  stones.  They  represent,  therefore,  a  display  of  numerous  heavenly  truths 
of  considerable  brilhancy,  for  these  are  spiritual  precious  stones,  but  decorating 
principles  inwardly  false,  nothing  but  dragon's  heads.  Every  religion  hves  by  its 
real  or  supposed  power  of  meeting  the  demands  of  the  soul  for  inward  peace  and 
everlasting  happiness.  True  religion  is  genuine,  pure,  healthful,  and  wears  the 
glorious  beauties  of  heavenly  knowledge  gracefully.  False  religion  is  inwardly 
corrupt,  but  decorates  herself  with  many  heavenly  excellences  to  charm  by  outward 
show,  and  to  hide  its  interior  iniquity.  Such,  then,  is  the  system  before  us; 
secretly  the  same  selfishness  which  has  been  the  groundwork  in  every  age  of  all  the 
misery  which  has  afllicted  the  whole  world ;  but  having  an  apparent  air  of  great 
intelligence,  great  plausibility,  great  power,  and  an  abundant  use  of  the  holy  truths 
of  the  Word,  ready,  however,  to  oppose  the  Lord's  bride,  the  New  Jerusalem,  and 
devour  her  manly  and  genuine  doctrine.  Selfishness  has  decorated  itself  with  the 
appearance  of  religion,  but  by  its  fruits  we  may  know  it.  It  can  fly  abroad,  and 
show  itself  as  soaring  to  heaven,  but  it  is  only  a  flying  serpent.     (J.  Bailey,  Ph.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  She  brought  forth  a  man  child. — The  Church  protected ;— 1.  The  godly 
of  the  Christian  Church  brought  forth  by  the  pains  of  the  apostles  and  their  suc- 
cessors, are  called  but  one  man  child  :  which  teaches,  that  aU  the  true  members  of 
Christ's  Church  should  be  in  a  holy  unity  but  as  one  man  (Acts  iv.  32) ;  and  of 
mascuhne  courage  for  the  truth  (Jer.  ix.  3)  against  all  opposition.  2.  Whereas  that 
which  is  primely  proper  to  Christ  is  in  a  secondary  respect  attributed  to  His  Church, 
to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron ;  we  learn  the  strict  union  that  is  between 
Christ  and  His  Church  (Acts  ix.  4).  3.  Whereas  it  is  said  that  the  man  child  was 
caught  up  to  God  and  to  His  throne,  we  see — (1)  Satan's  disappointment  in  aU  his 
attempts  against  Christ's  Church  (Psa.  ii.  4).  (2)  What  happiness  and  high  pre- 
ferment abides  God's  children  at  last,  however  they  be  troubled  or  despised  here. 
(3)  How  joyful  may  death  be  to  them,  who  is  justly  called  the  king  of  terrors  to 
others.     (Wm.  Guild,  B.I).) 

Ver.  6.  The  woman  fled  into  the  wildemess. — The  emhlem  of  the  church  militant : 
— "  And  the  woman,"  there  is  the  frailty  of  her  nature  ;  "  fled,"  there  is  the  un- 
certainty of  her  state  ;  "  into  the  wilderness,"  there  is  the  place  of  her  retiredness ; 
"  where  she  is  nourished  by  God,"  there  is  the  staff  of  her  comfort ;  "  a  thousand 
two  hundred  and  three  score  days,"  there  is  the  term  of  her  obscurity,  and  the 
period  of  all  her  troubles.  1.  First  her  origin,  2.  Her  fruitfulness.  The  honour  of 
women  is  their  childbearing.  The  Church  a  fruitful  mother,  the  mother  of  all  that 
live  by  faith.  8.  Her  tenderness.  Such  is  the  temper  of  the  militant  Church,  in 
fear  always,  weeping  continually  for  her  children,  never  out  of  trouble  in  one  place 
or  other.  4.  Her  weakness  or  impotency.  Howsoever  she  be  always  strong  in  the 
Lord,  and  the  power  of  His  might.  6.  Her  frailty.  All  those  usual  simili- 
tudes whereby  the  Scripture  setteth  the  Church  militant  before  our  eyes,  show 
her  frailty  and  imbecihty.  She  is  a  vine,  a  lily,  a  dove,  a  flock  of  sheep  in  the 
midst  of  ravening  wolves.  What  tree  so  subject  to  take  hurt  as  a  vine,  which  is  so 
weak  that  it  needeth  continual  binding  and  supporting,  so  tender  that  if  it  be 
pricked  deep  it  bleedeth  to  death  ?    No  flower  so  soft  and  without  all  defence  or 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

shelter  as  a  lily ;  no  fowl  so  harmless  as  the  dove  that  hath  no  gall  at  all ;  no  cattle 
so  oft  in  danger  as  sheep  and  lambs  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  This  picture  might 
have  been  taken  of  the  Church  as  she  fled  from  Pharaoh  into  the  wilderness,  or  as 
she  fled  into  Egypt  from  Herod,  or  as  she  fled  into  all  parts  of  the  earth  in  the  time 
of  the  first  persecutions  from  heathen  emperors,  in  all  which  her  trials  she  gained 
more  than  she  lost.  For  as  Justin  Martyr  rightly  observed,  "  persecution  is  that  to 
the  Church  which  pruning  is  to  the  vine,  whereby  it  is  made  more  fruitful."  (D. 
Featly,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-11.  There  was  war  in  heaven. — War  in  heaven : — I.  The  character  of 
THE  WAR  OF  REBEL  ANGELS  IN  HEAVEN.  1.  Wilful.  They  brought  it  On  themsclvcs. 
2.  Irreconcilable.  (1)  On  the  part  of  God.  (2)  This  war  is  irreconcilable  on  the 
part  of  rebel  angels  also,  for  when  they  sinned  that  moment  their  natures  were 
changed.  The  passions  of  the  soul,  and  the  affections  of  the  heart,  which  once  so 
sweetly  harmonised,  were  thrown  into  disorder  and  became  as  jarring  elements,  or 
as  the  troubled  sea  that  cannot  rest.  3.  Unreasonable.  It  was  a  war  of  ingratitude, 
of  foUy,  of  madness — was  a  war  against  duty,  against  interest,  against  happiness 
itself ;  a  war,  in  short,  for  which  not  only  the  justice  of  God  must  for  ever  condenm 
them,  but  the  voice  of  reason,  and  the  voice  of  the  whole  intelligent  creation.  4. 
It  was  to  rebel  angels  a  most  fatal  and  disastrous  war.  They  gained  nothing,  but 
lost  much.  (1)  They  lost  the  favour  of  God,  even  that  favour  which  is  life,  and 
that  lovingkindness  which  is  better  than  life.  (2)  They  lost  their  own  moral  loveli- 
ness.    (3)  They  lost  their  seats  in  heaven.    II.  Compare  and  contrast  the  war  op 

REBEL  ANGELS  IN  HEAVEN  WITH  THE  WAR   OF   REBEL   MEN   ON  EARTH.      1.    WaS  the  War 

of  rebel  angels  a  wilful  war  ?  So  also  is  the  war  of  rebel  men.  2.  Was  the  war  of 
rebel  angels  an  irreconcilable  war  ?  Thank  God,  here  we  can  drop  the  comparison, 
and  take  up  the  contrast.  Yes,  on  this  theatre  of  war,  in  the  midst  of  heaven- 
daring  rebels,  our  blessed  Eedeemer  has,  by  the  shedding  of  His  most  precious  blood, 
made  the  great  atonement.  3.  Was  the  war  of  rebel  angels  an  unreasonable  war  ? 
And  what  shall  we  say  of  the  war  of  rebel  men  ?  Angek  sinned  against  creating 
goodness — man  against  redeeming  love.  Angels  warred  under  black  despair — man 
under  hope  of  heavenly  grace.  The  sword  of  justice  pursued  revolting  angels — the 
wings  of  mercy  were  outstretched  to  shelter  revolting  man.  And  yet  man  rebels  ! 
4.  Was  the  war  of  rebel  angels  fatal  and  disastrous  ?  So,  also,  most  assuredly,  will 
be  the  continued  war  of  rebel  men.  Millions  have  already  faUen  in  the  impious 
contest,  and  shall  rise  no  more.  {D.  Baker,  D.D.)  The  heavenly  and  the  earthly 
conflict : — 1.  It  is  here  indicated  that  we  are  members  of  a  larger  community  than 
that  which  is  apparent  to  our  senses ;  a  community  which  gathers  into  itself  all 
intelligent  souls,  all  spirits  which  God  has  made,  all  who  at  whatever  distance  can 
approach  Him  in  adoration  or  prayer.  You  and  I,  busy  as  we  are  with  our  occupa- 
tions, our  human  interests,  our  sympathies,  more  or  less  wide  with  politics  and 
society,  blind  as  we  are  to  the  eternity  in  which  even  now  we  move,  are  one  in  life 
and  hope  with  sons  and  servants  and  ministers  of  God,  whose  number  cannot  be 
counted  for  multitude.  Where  they  are  and  what  they  are,  whether  they  be  in  our 
midst  as  we  sit  here,  or  whether  they  tenant  yonder  far-off  stars ;  whether  their 
shape  be  what  Hebrew  poets  imagined,  and  Italian  painters  painted,  or  whether  it 
be  some  new  and  to  us  unknown  clothing  of  the  spirit — are  questions  about  which 
we  may  dream,  but  to  which  we  can  give  no  answer.  It  is  sufficient  for  us  to  know 
that  between  us  and  God  is  not  the  deep  void  of  an  appalling  nothingness,  but 
beings  who,  like  us,  are  conscious  of  His  presence ;  and  some  at  least  of  whom  if, 
unlike  us,  they  need  not  pray,  can  at  least,  like  us,  bow  down  their  faces  and  adore. 
2.  The  text  implies  also  that  in  that  larger  community  there  is  the  same  great  con- 
flict going  on  which  is  for  ever  raging  here — the  conflict  for  mastery  between  evil 
and  good.  This  present  world  of  human  souls  is  not  the  only  scene  of  strife.  For 
back  in  the  remote  and  incalculable  past  we  read  of  angels  who  "  kept  not  their  first 
estate  "  ;  and  far  on  in  the  perhaps  still  distant  future  we  read  of  "  war  in  heaven." 
Stretched  between  the  two  is  human  history,  and  all  the  acted  problems  of  which 
history  is  the  sum.  It  is  not  given  to  us  to  fight  the  great  battle  which  St.  Michael 
is  represented  as  fighting  with  the  dragon ;  but  it  is  given  to  us  to  fight  a  battle 
apparently  smaller,  but  in  fact  as  great,  which  involves  the  same  principles,  and 
which  is  only  another  form  of  the  same  universal  struggle.  What  is  it,  for  example, 
to  tell  a  lie  ?  It  seems  but  a  little  thing :  the  yielding  to  a  sudden  impulse — the 
movement  of  a  muscle  or  two — a  faint  vibration  of  the  air — and  the  lie  is  told.  We 
forget  it,  and  all  seems  over.    And  what  is  it  to  tell  the  truth  instead  of  a  lie  ? 


CHAP.xn.]  REVELATION.  441 

Only  a  momentary  resolution — the  perhaps  reluctant  passing  of  a  sentence  in  the 
judgment-hall  of  the  conscience— a  breath,  and  nothing  more.  And  yet  on  these 
two  courses  depend  issues  which  stretch  out  into  illimitable  space,  and  into  endless 
time.  As  the  balance  of  motives  sways  to  truth  or  to  falsehood  the  soul  ranges 
itself  in  one  of  two  great  armies ;  it  is  one  more  victory  or  one  more  defeat  for  the 
cause  of  goodness  and  of  God.  The  battlefield  is  not  some  vast  interstellar  space  in 
which  all  the  gathered  spiritual  hosts  are  massed  in  dense  array,  but  the  prosaic 
ground  of  our  studies,  our  shops,  and  our  dining-rooms.  The  battle  is  not  waged 
so  much  at  some  supreme  moments  of  mental  struggle,  when  all  the  forces  of  our 
nature  come  into  conscious  play,  but  in  the  subtler  form  of  the  setting  aside  of 
plausible  motives,  and  the  struggling  with  apparently  trivial  sins.  "  Do  this — it  is 
very  pleasant,  and  will  do  no  real  harm."  "  Do  this — it  is  almost  necessary,  and 
the  little  wrong  of  it  can  soon  be  undone."  Sometimes  we  listen  and  sometimes  we 
refuse  !  and  all  our  lives  long,  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour,  we  alternate  between 
victory  and  defeat,  in  a  struggle  which  sometimes  becomes  a  despair.  For  the  path 
of  holiness  is  not  the  calm  ascent  of  a  marble  stairway ;  it  is  for  all  of  us,  for  some 
no  doubt  more  than  for  others,  a  life-long  journey  over  a  rugged  and  sometimes 
uncertain  road,  a  stumbling  over  many  stones,  a  wandering  into  many  a  by-path, 
a  fall  into  many  a  snare ;  and  when  heaven's  gates  open  to  us  at  last,  they  open  to 
a  tattered  traveller  with  a  worn  and  weary  soul.  But  for  all  there  need  be  no 
despair.  The  victory  is  slow  to  come,  but  it  comes  at  last ;  and  its  coming,  for  this 
world  at  least,  depends,  in  God's  providence,  not  on  angels  and  archangels,  but 
upon  you  and  me  and  men  like  ourselves.  It  depends  on  our  doing  the  best  we 
individually  can,  with  the  help  which  is  given  to  us  from  above,  to  crush  in  our 
own  souls,  and  in  the  sphere  in  which  we  move,  the  daily  and  hourly  temptations 
to  selfishness,  to  injustice,  to  untruth,  to  uncharitableness,  to  indolence,  and  to 
irritability.  Every  dishonest  act  which  we  decline  to  perform,  every  falsehood  which 
we  refuse  to  utter,  every  uncharitable  word  which  we  leave  unsaid,  every  sensual 
impulse  which  we  crush,  is  for  ourselves,  for  the  world  of  men,  for  the  world  of 
spirits  of  which  we  are  members,  one  more  thwarting  of  the  power  of  evil, 
one  more  victory  of  the  power  of  good,  one  more  step  towards  that  con- 
summation when  the  great  choir  of  intelligent  souls  shall  circle  round  the 
Father  of  spirits  from  whom  both  they  and  we  derive  our  life,  and  to  whom 
both  we  and  they  alike  return.      {Edwin  Hatch,    D.D.)  Hope  of  the  final 

triumph  of  good  : — Looking  at  these  words  from  a  Christian's  point  of  view,  we  are 
reminded  by  them  that  whatever  else  was  meant  by  the  war  in  heaven  of  which  they 
speak,  they,  at  least,  mean  for  us  that  the  powers  of  evil  have  done  their  utmost  to 
overcome  Christ  and  the  powers  of  good,  and  have  failed — that  Christ  has  proved 
good  to  be  stronger  than  evil,  and  light  than  darkness.  And  the  high  hope  is  raised 
that  He  has  done  this  for  the  whole  universe,  for  the  spirits  in  every  other  world — 
if  such  there  be — as  well  as  for  the  spirits  of  us  poor  men  struggling  with  evil  in 
this.  That  He  has  done  it  for  us,  is  what  His  gospel  tells  us.  The  powers  that  are 
for  us,  we  are  taught,  are  greater  than  the  powers  that  are  against  us.  God  the 
Father  is  for  us.  Christ  the  Son,  the  express  image  of  His  person  and  character,  is 
for  us.  The  Spirit  which  communes  with  our  spirit,  and  stirs  up  conscience,  and 
keeps  it  alert  against  the  foe,  and  helps  our  weakness,  and  disturbs  and  tortures  us 
with  remorse  when  we  yield  to  temptation — this  Spirit  is  for  us.  All  good  influences 
are  for  us  and  help  us  against  sin,  and  these  influences  begin  early,  and  last  while 
life  lasts  in  some  one  or  more  of  their  manifold  shapes — the  words  of  our  parents, 
the  little  prayers  they  taught  us,  the  words  and  example  of  dear  friends  that  are 
gone,  the  softening  power  of  sorrow,  the  warnings  of  sickness  and  pain,  the  calm, 
peaceful  face  of  the  just  man,  the  turbid  complexion,  the  restless  eye,  and  repulsive 
look  of  the  wicked,  the  influence  of  a  familiar  friend,  the  influence  of  a  good  book, 
the  influence  of  the  best  of  books,  the  blessings  of  thought  and  labour,  and  of  duty 
done,  the  power  of  prayer  and  communion  with  God,  the  power  which  words  of 
truth,  of  charity,  of  wisdom  have  over  us,  the  pleasure  we  draw  from  beauty,  whether 
in  poetry,  in  painting,  or  in  music — these,  and  ten  thousand  other  influences  with 
which  all  of  us  may,  in  one  way  or  other,  surround  ourselves,  are  all  of  them  so 
many  ministering  angels  which  fight  under  Christ's  banner  on  our  side  against  that 
which  is  false  and  evil,  and  for  that  which  is  good  and  true — and  all  proclaim  a 
victory  won  elsewhere  for  good,  which  shall  in  the  end  be  a  victory  here  too— com- 
plete and  final  over  evil.  There  is  another  spiritual  and  eternal  truth  here.  We 
are  told  the  good  angels  conquered  the  bad  angels  and  their  leader,  and  drove  them 
out.    Now,  again,  whatever  we  may  choose  to  say  of  this  account,  at  least  it  suggests 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

a  very  plain  and  wholesome  lesson.  When  we  think  of  angels  at  all,  we  may 
imagine  that  the  great  difference  between  us  and  them  is  that  they  are  strong  and 
we  are  weak  ;  but  this  festival  warns  us  that  this  is  not  so.  The  great  difference 
between  us  and  them  is,  that  they  are  obedient,  and  we  are  disobedient ;  they  are 
humble,  and  we  are  proud.  All  other  differences  lie  in  that.  The  strong  good 
angels  beat  the  strong  bad  angels,  because  the  one  were  obedient  to  God's  laws,  the 
■others  were  rebellious  against  them.  Michael  overcame  the  dragon,  because 
Michael  was  God's  champion,  and  the  dragon  was  his  own.  The  one  depended 
upon  God,  the  other  depended  on  himself.  We  may  call  this  a  story,  an  allegory, 
still  there  is  an  abiding  truth  in  it.  Say,  for  a  moment,  it  is  a  story,  then  this  is 
the  moral  of  the  tale.  Obedience  is  strength ;  disobedience  ensures  defeat.  In 
science,  in  knowledge,  in  conduct,  in  religion,  obedience,  humiUty,  and  trust  in  God, 
are  qualities  without  which  no  discoveries  are  made,  no  advance  accomplished,  no 
virtue  attained,  no  holiness  perfected.  They  are  qualities  without  which  our  cha- 
racters are  poor  and  weak,  our  ways  unstable,  and  our  thoughts  and  desires  mainly 
selfish.  {John  Congreve,  M.A.)  Michael  and  his  angels  fought. — Who  is 
Michael  ? — It  is  in  itself  probable  that  the  Leader  of  the  hosts  of  light  will  be  no 
other  than  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  The 
dragon  leads  the  hosts  of  darkness.  The  Son  has  been  described  as  the  opponent 
against  whom  the  enmity  of  the  dragon  is  especially  directed.  When  the  war 
begins,  we  have  every  reason  to  expect  that  as  the  one  leader  takes  the  command, 
so  also  will  the  other.  There  is  much  to  confirm  this  conclusion.  The  name 
Michael  leads  to  it,  for  that  word  signifies  "  Who  is  like  God?  "  and  such  a  name 
is  at  least  more  appropriate  to  a  Divine  than  to  a  created  being.  In  the  New  Tes- 
tament, too,  we  read  of  "  Michael  the  Archangel  "  (Jude  9) — there  seems  to  be  only 
one,  for  we  never  read  of  archangels — and  an  archangel  is  again  spoken  of  in  cir- 
cumstances that  can  hardly  be  associated  with  the  thought  of  any  one  but  God 
(1  Thess.  iv.  16).  Above  all,  the  prophecies  of  Daniel,  in  which  the  name  Michael 
first  occurs,  may  be  said  to  decide  the  point.  A  person  named  Michael  there  ap- 
pears on  different  occasions  as  the  defender  of  the  Church  against  her  enemies 
(Dan.  X.  13,  21),  and  once  at  least  in  a  connexion  leading  directly  to  the  thought 
of  our  Lord  Himself  (Dan.  xii.  1-3).  These  considerations  justify  the  conclusion 
that  the  Michael  now  spoken  of  is  the  representative  of  Christ.  {W.  Milligan,  D.D.) 
St.  Blichael  and  all  angels  : — We  need  only  remark,  with  reference  to  the  combatants 
whom  we  find  engaged  the  one  against  the  other,  that  they  are  undoubtedly  good  and 
evil  angels,  Michael  the  archangel  being  the  leader  of  the  first,  and  Satan,  or  the  devil, 
the  leader  of  the  second.  The  battle  is  between  those  angels  which  have  never  swerved 
from  allegiance  to  God,  and  mighty  spirits  that  "  kept  not  their  first  estate."  Now, 
though  St.  John  may  have  intended  to  dslineate  a  long  subsequent  struggle  between 
evil  and  good,  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  he  derived  his  figures  from  the  first  moment 
of  apostasy,  when  rebellion  brake  out  in  the  heavenly  hosts,  and  evil  appeared  in 
the  universe.  There  is  often  muf^h  said  as  to  the  mysteriousness  of  the  entrance 
of  evil,  regard  being  had  only  to  its  entrance  into  the  world  which  we  inhabit.  But 
in  reality  the  mysteriousness  belongs  to  an  earlier  stage.  It  is  not  very  wonderful 
that  man  should  fall  when  there  was  a  devil  to  tempt  him  ;  the  wonder  is  that  there 
should  have  been  a  tempter.  We  may  proceed  from  one  order  of  being  to  another, 
and  so  observe  the  propagation  of  evil ;  but  sooner  or  later  we  must  come  to  a  point 
at  which  evil  commences  spontaneously — at  which,  that  is,  it  originates  itself  r  for 
there  is  no  way  of  explaining  how,  under  the  economy  of  God,  any  creature  can  be 
sinful,  except  by  allowing  that  some  creature  made  himself  sinful.  And  Scripture 
confirms  this  conclusion.  And  it  would  appear  to  have  been  through  pride  that 
Satan  originally  transgressed.  And  it  is  further  to  be  observed  that  idolatry  has 
been  the  chief  sin  to  which  in  all  ages  Satan  has  tempted  mankind  ;  as  though  his 
great  aim  was  to  attract  to  himself  the  worship  due  only  to  God,  so  that  he  might 
in  a  measure  substitute  himself  ior  God,  and  thus  be  upon  earth  what,  on  the  popular 
supposition,  he  had  impiously  and  profanely  attempted  to  be  in  heaven.  But  what- 
ever may  have  been  the  precise  object  at  which  his  pride  moved  Satan  to  aim,  it  is 
certain  that  it  brought  him  into  opposition  to  God,  or  placed  him  in  a  condition  of 
revolt  to  His  authority.  And  it  is  also  certain  that  he  was  not  solitary  in  rebellion. 
But  legions  there  also  were  which  stood  faithful  in  the  midst  of  the  growing  apostasy. 
And  it  would  seem  more  than  probable  that  what  is  delineated  under  the  imagery 
of  a  battle  is  nothing  but  that  contest  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  which  took 
place  through  temptation  upon  the  one  side  and  resistance  upon  the  other.  The 
battle  was  the  battle  of  principle — apostate  angels  plying  the  unfallen  with  solioita- 


CHAP,  xn.]  REVELATION.  443 

tions  to  rebellion,  and  the  unf  alien  withstanding  those  temptations  and  maintaining 
their  allegiance — certain  squadrons  of  the  heavenly  hosts,  with  Satan  at  their  head, 
endeavouring  to  draw  into  their  own  sinfulness  the  remainder  who,  with  Michael  as 
their  leader,  were  still  faithful  to  their  God.  And  it  gives  us  a  very  striking  repre- 
sentation of  the  fury  and  the  shock  of  temptation,  that  the  effort  on  the  part  of 
angels  to  involve  others  in  apostasy  should  be  set  forth  as  the  assault  of  an  army 
upon  army — nothing  less  than  the  meeting  torrents  of  hostile  battalions  being  stem 
enough  to  express  the  fearful  collision.  Alas  1  it  is  not  so  with  ourselves.  We 
know  little  of  what  may  be  called  the  shock  of  being  tempted.  There  must  be  the 
perfection  of  holiness  in  order  to  the  perfection  of  this.  It  may  help  to  satisfy  us 
as  to  what  our  Eedeemer  endured  from  temptation  in  the  struggle  maintained 
with  His  repugnance  to  evil — it  may  help,  we  say,  to  satisfy  us  as  to  this,  that  what 
good  angels  endured  while  solicited  to  rebellion  is  like  the  crash  when  one  belted 
squadron  is  sword  to  sword  with  another.  But  temptation  was  necessary ;  and  then 
it  was,  according  to  the  figurative  representation,  when  good  angels  had  been  suffi- 
ciently exposed  to  the  onslaught  of  evil,  that  God  interfered  as  a  God  of  judgment, 
and  banished  from  His  presence  those  who  disputed  His  authority.  The  great 
dragon  was  cast  to  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast  out  of  heaven.  "  Neither 
was  their  place  found  any  more  in  heaven."  It  was  a  final  expulsion  when  Satan 
and  his  angels  were  cast  out  from  heaven  ;  there  was  no  mercy,  there  was  no  plan 
of  redemption,  by  which  the  apostate  might  regain  their  lost  place.  But  though  it 
was  foreknown  to  God  that  Satan  would  prevail  over  man  though  he  had  not  pre- 
vailed over  Michael  and  his  angels,  it  was  also  foreknown  that  a  Mediator  would 
interpose,  and  should  finally  "  destroy  all  the  works  of  the  devil."  It  was  not  to 
hold  good  of  man,  when  banished  from  paradise,  '*  neither  was  their  place  found 
any  more  in  heaven."  And  therefore  there  can  be  no  ground  for  arraigning  the 
goodness  of  God,  in  that  the  dragon  and  his  angels  were  allowed  to  plant  themselves 
there.  There  was  to  be  provided  immeasurably  more  than  an  equivalent  to  all  the 
evil  wrought ;  and  what  charge  is  there  against  mercy,  when  the  gift  of  a  Saviour 
in  store  is  set  against  the  allowance  of  a  tempter  ?  Now,  hitherto  we  have  confined 
ourselves  to  what  may  be  called  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  passage  under  review. 
However  figurative  may  be  the  mode  of  description,  we  are  certified  that  there  are 
orders  of  spiritual  beings  higher  than  our  own,  that  a  large  section  of  those  creatures 
apostatised  from  God,  while  others,  though  tempted  to  rebellion,  continued  faithful 
and  were  then  confirmed  in  happiness,  so  as  to  be  placed  beyond  the  power  of  falling. 
It  is  not  necessarily  at  all  a  metaphorical  representation  that  "  Michael  and  his 
angels  fought  with  the  dragon  and  his  angels,"  but  this  actual  battle  gave  a  meta- 
phor expressive  of  other  conflicts  between  evil  and  good.  Other  conflicts,  in  short, 
are  likened  to  and  shadowed  forth  by  one  of  which  heaven  itself  was  the  scene ; 
but  this  obviously  gives  a  literal  character  to  the  first  battle,  by  which  the  imagery 
is  supplied  that  is  used  in  this  passage.  Our  text  most  probably  refers  to  the  down- 
fall of  heathenism  in  the  downfall  of  the  Eoman  empire.  The  "  war  in  heaven"  is 
the  contest  between  Christianity  and  paganism ;  the  leading  combatants  are  the 
Christian  preachers,  martyrs,  and  confessors  on  the  one  side,  and  persecuting 
emperors,  magistrates,  and  priests  on  the  other.  The  former  are  likened  to  Michael 
and  his  angels,  because  God  and  good  spirits  were  on  their  side  ;  the  latter  to  Satan 
and  his  angels,  because  their  cause  was  emphatically  that  of  the  devil,  and  all  his 
powers  were  employed  and  exerted  for  it.  And  when  Michael  and  his  angels  cast 
out  the  devil  and  his  angels,  the  great  revolution  under  Constantine  is  depicted, 
which  deposed  heathenism  from  all  rule  and  authority,  and  advanced  Christianity 
to  dominion  and  empire.  But  we  need  not  dwell  longer  on  the  prophetical  import 
of  our  text,  our  object  being  answered,  if  we  can  make  you  see  that  there  is  so 
actual  a  conflict  between  evil  angels  and  good  as  may  furnish  metaphor  for  any 
high  contest  which  goes  forward  on  the  stage  of  this  creation,  when  the  cause  of 
God  and  Christ  is  that  which  marshals  to  the  fight.  Ah  !  men  and  brethren,  ye 
who  have  not  cared  anything  for  the  soul,  who  through  that  carelessness  have 
wrought  the  defeat  of  good  angels  and  strengthened  the  devices  of  bad,  be  ye  moved 
by  the  intense  interest  which  mighty  spirits  take  in  you  to  take  some  interest  in 
yourselves,  and  not  to  throw  away  that  immortality  which  the  unfallen  cherubim 
would  have  you  spend  gloriously  with  them,  and  which  fiends  are  plotting  to  involve 
in  their  own  fearful  anguish.  "  Michael  and  his  angels  have  fought  against  the 
dragon,  and  the  dragon  has  fought  and  his  angels  "  ;  but  the  dragon  has  "  not  pre- 
vailed " ;  he  has  been  "  overcome  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  "  ;  and  so  thorough 
Is  the  moral  change,  so  complete  the  substitution  of  the  soul  now  turned  into  a 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

habitation  of  God — the  dominion  of  righteousness  for  the  dominion  of  evil,  that 
we  may  say  of  the  apostate  crew,  as  was  said  of  them  when  they  were  hurled  from 
their  original  abode,  "Neither  is  their  place  found  any  more"  in  him.  (H. 
Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  9.  The  great  dxagon  .  .  .  that  old  serpent,  called  the  Devil,  and  Satan. — The 

foes  of  God  and  of  His  Church : — I.  Our  foe  is  a  personal  one  (ver.  9). 
n.  He  is  an  old  one.  "  The  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning"  (1  John  iii.  8; 
John  viii.  44).  III.  He  is  a  daring  one.  IV.  His  attempts  are  often 
FAILURES.  "  The  dragon  warred  and  his  angels,  and  they  prevailed  not"  (ver.  8). 
V.  He  is  an  angry  foe.  '*  He  hath  great  wrath,  knowing  that  he  hath  but  a 
short  time"  (ver.  12).  VI.  He  is  a  malicious  one  (ver.  13).  VII.  He  is  a 
WATCHFUL  AND  CRAFTY  ONE  (vcrs.  4,  13,  15),  Varying  his  methods  according  to  the 
case  in  hand.  VIII.  He  is  a  circumscribed  foe.  This  chapter  tells  us  of  three 
limits  put  to  him  and  to  his  power.  1.  One,  of  space.  He  is  cast  down  to  earth. 
He  is  "  the  God  of  this  world  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  2.  A  second,  of  time.  "  A  time, 
and  times,  and  half  a  time."  3.  There  is  yet  a  third  limit,  that  of  force.  •'  The 
earth  helped  the  woman,"  &c.  (ver.  16).  We  are  taught  in  Scripture  that  there 
are  five  ways  by  which  his  power  is  restricted  and  his  intention  foiled.  (1)  There 
is  providential  dispensation  (vers.  6,  14,  16 ;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  (2)  There  is  angelic 
ministry  (ver.  7).  (3)  There  is  the  direct  exertion  of  Christ's  commanding  word 
(Matt.  xvii.  18).  (4)  There  is  the  counteracting  power  of  Divine  grace 
(2  Cor.  xii.  9).     (5)  There  is  the  intercession  of  our  Eedeemer  (Luke  xxii.  31,  32). 

IX.    He   is    a    foe    with    whose    devices     we     have    to    reckon     in     fighting    THE 

battle  of  life  (ver.  17).  Note — 1.  He  is  one  at  whom  we  cannot  afford  to 
laugh,  and  whose  existence  we  cannot  afford  to  deny.  2.  He  is  a  foe  before  whom 
we  need  not  quail.  3.  He  is  a  foe  to  whom  not  an  inch  of  room  should  be  given 
(Eph.  iv.  27).  4.  He  is  a  foe  for  whose  onsets  we  should  prepare  by  a  survey 
and  appropriation  of  heavenly  forces.  5.  He  is  a  foe  on  whose  ultimate  defeat 
and  complete  discomfiture  we  may  surely  and  confidently  reckon  if  we  look  to 
Jesus.  (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  Satan  the  great  dragon : — In  calling  him  the 
dragon,  the  Holy  Spirit  seems  to  hint  at  his  mysterious  power  and  character. 
To  us  a  spirit  such  as  he  is  must  ever  be  a  mystery  in  his  being  and  work- 
ing. Satan  is  a  mysterious  personage  though  he  is  not  a  mythical  one.  We 
can  never  doubt  his  existence  if  we  have  once  come  into  conflict  with  him ; 
yet  he  is  to  us  all  the  more  real  because  so  mysterious.  If  he  were  flesh  and 
blood  it  would  be  far  easier  to  contend  with  him  ;  but  to  fight  with  this  spiritual 
wickedness  in  high  places  is  a  terrible  task.  As  a  dragon  he  is  full  of  cun- 
ning and  ferocity.  In  him  force  is  allied  with  craft;  and  if  he  cannot  achieve 
his  purpose  at  once  by  power,  he  waits  his  time.  He  deludes,  he  deceives ;  in  fact, 
he  is  said  to  deceive  the  whole  world.  What  a  power  of  deception  must  reside  in 
him,  when  under  his  influence  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven  are  made  to 
fall,  and  myriads  of  men  in  all  ages  have  worshipped  demons  and  idols !  He  has 
steeped  the  minds  of  men  in  delusion,  so  that  they  cannot  see  that  they  should 
worship  none  but  God,  their  Maker.  He  is  styled  "  the  old  serpent " ;  and  this 
reminds  us  how  practised  he  is  in  every  evil  art.  He  was  a  liar  from  the  begin- 
ning, and  the  father  of  lies.  After  thousands  of  years  of  constant  practice  in 
deception  he  is  much  too  cunning  for  us.  If  we  think  that  we  can  match  him  by 
craft  we  are  grievous  fools,  for  he  knows  vastly  more  than  the  wisest  of  mortals  ; 
and  if  it  once  comes  to  a  game  of  policies,  he  will  certainly  clear  the  board,  and 
sweep  our  tricks  into  the  bag.  To  this  cunning  he  adds  great  speed,  so  that  he  is 
quick  to  assail  at  any  moment,  darting  down  upon  us  like  a  hawk  upon  a  poor 
chick.  He  is  not  everywhere  present ;  but  it  is  hard  to  say  where  he  is  not.  He 
cannot  be  omnipresent ;  but  yet,  by  that  majestic  craft  of  his,  he  so  manages  his 
armies  of  fallen  ones  that,  like  a  great  general,  he  superintends  the  whole  field  of 
battle,  and  seems  present  at  every  point.  No  door  can  shut  him  out,  no  height  of 
piety  can  rise  beyond  his  reach.  He  meets  us  in  all  our  weaknesses,  and  assails 
us  from  every  point  of  the  compass.  He  comes  upon  us  unawares,  and  gives  us 
wounds  which  are  not  easily  healed.  But  yet,  powerful  as  this  infernal  spirit 
certainly  must  be,  his  power  is  defeated  when  we  are  resolved  never  to  be  at  peace 
with  him.     (C.  H.  Spur g eon.) 

Vers.  10-12.  Now  is  come  salvation.— T/ie  heavenly  song  of  victory :— This  is  a 
song  of  heaven — of  that  heaven  from  which  the  dragon  had  been  cast  out.     I.  The 


CHAP.  XII.]  REVELATION.  445 

SALVATION.  It  is  "the  salvation"  that  is  here  sung  of — the  salvation  of  Him 
whose  name  is  Jesus,  the  Saviour.  It  is  salvation — not  consisting  of  one  blessing 
or  one  kind  of  blessing,  but  of  many ;  made  up  of  everything  which  can  be 
indicated  by  the  reversal  of  our  lost  condition.  It  is  not  done  at  once,  but  in 
parts  and  at  sundry  times,  each  age  bringing  with  it  more  of  "  salvation  "  in  every 
sense ;  unfolding  it,  building  it  up,  gathering  in  new  objects,  overcoming 
new  enemies,  occupying  new  ground,  erecting  new  trophies.  II.  The  power. 
This  is  the  more  common  rendering  of  the  word  (not  "strength"),  as  when 
Christ's  miracles  are  spoken  of,  or  "  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."  As  yet 
God's  power  has  not  been  fully  manifested  ;  it  has  been  hidden.  Many  trophies, 
no  doubt,  it  has  won ;  many  enemies  it  has  defeated ;  many  brands  it  has 
plucked  from  the  burning;  but  the  full  revelation  of  its  greatness  is  yet  to 
come.  When  that  day  arrives,  earth  as  well  as  heaven  shall  rejoice.  III.  The 
KINGDOM  OF  OUR  GoD.  It  is  the  kingdom — the  kingdom  of  kingdoms ;  not  of  Satan 
or  man,  as  now,  but  of  God,  nay,  our  God.  Our  God,  says  heaven ;  our  God, 
re-echoes  earth.  IV.  The  authority  of  His  Christ.  " The  Christ  of  God"  is  the 
full  name  for  Jesus  of  Nazareth — God's  Messiah — He  in  whom  all  royal,  priestly, 
judicial,  prophetical  power  is  invested.  To  this  Messiah  all  power  has  been  given, 
all  authority  entrusted,  in  heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
Victory  : — 1.  By  this  song  of  thanksgiving  we  see  what  should  be  our  rejoicing 
and  duty  in  thanking  God  in  like  manner ;  to  wit,  that  Christ,  His  Church  and 
cause  prevails ;  and  that  Satan  and  his  instruments  are  foiled.  2.  When  the 
former  prevail,  we  see  the  great  benefit  to  man  that  redounds  thereby ;  to  wit, 
salvation  comes,  and  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God  to  reign  in  men's 
hearts,  and  the  power  of  His  Christ  to  be  seen  in  their  lives.  3.  Whereas  it  is 
said  that  the  accuser  of  the  brethren  is  cast  down ;  then  as  it  is  said  (Isa.  1.  9  ; 
Bom.  viii.  33),  who  is  it  that  can  condemn,  or  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  the 
Lord's  elect  ?  It  is  He  that  helps  and  justifies  us,  and  has  cast  down  the  accuser 
of  the  brethren.  4.  Here  is  a  great  comfort  likewise,  that  there  is  such  a  sweet 
communion  between  the  glorious  saints  in  heaven  and  the  Church  militant  on 
earth  ;  that  when  they  speak  of  God  they  say,  "  our  God,"  and  when  of  the  Church 
on  earth,  "  our  brethren."  (Wm.  Guilds  D.D.)  The  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  cast 
down. — The  accuser  of  the  brethren: — I.  The  accuser.  The  accuser,  in  this 
instance,  is  the  enemy  of  our  souls.  An  accuser  need  not  necessarily  be  a  foe — a 
friend  may  accuse ;  but  his  relationship  to  us  depends  upon  the  object  he  has  in 
view  by  accusing  us.  If  his  intention  be  to  harass  and  vex  the  accused,  then  he  is 
an  enemy ;  but  if  his  design  be  to  reform,  then,  indeed,  he  is  a  friend.  Though 
the  law  accuses,  the  law  is  not  our  enemy.  The  law  is  our  "schoolmaster  to 
bring  us  unto  Christ. "  But  the  design  of  Satan  in  accusing  the  saints  is  to  afflict 
them,  and  not  that  he  may  induce  them  to  amend  their  ways ;  it  is  not  zeal  for 
the  glory  of  God  that  urges  him  to  blame  them  for  their  remissness ;  he  merely 
takes  advantage  of  their  failings  to  molest  them.  II.  The  accused.  "  The  brethren." 
He  does  not  accuse  his  own  subjects.  He  commends  in  them  the  works  which  in 
the  children  of  God  he  censures.  It  is  better  for  us  that  he  should  be  our  censor 
than  that  he  should  be  our  vindicator ;  preferable  that  he  should  impeach  us  than 
that  he  should  be  our  advocate.  III.  The  accusation.  The  impeachments  of 
Satan,  however  fictitious  they  may  be  found  to  be  in  the  aggregate,  always  have  a 
sprinkling  of  the  truth  in  them ;  just  so  much  as  will  give  an  air  of  justness  to 
the  whole  ;  for  our  arch-enemy  is  well  aware  that  falsehood  in  and  of  itself  cannot 
injure.  Were  they  charged  with  neglecting  God's  house  the  accusation  would  be 
false,  and  consequently  would  not  affect  them;  but  when  they  are  accused  of 
alienating  their  affections  from  God,  they  feel  the  justness  of  the  charges  and  are 
grieved — there  is  sufficient  force  in  the  accusation  to  afflict  their  conscience.  A 
slander  was  never  known  to  be  either  wholly  true  or  entirely  false.  Satan  is 
incapable  of  telling  the  truth  as  truth.  It  were  as  impossible  for  him  to  confine 
himself  wholly  to  it  as  that  the  sun  should  shed  showers  of  rain,  or  that  water 
should  burn.  He  is  "  the  father  of  lies  "  ;  but  he  makes  use  of  the  truth  to  keep 
his  inventions  together.  It  is  difficult  to  detect  his  devices  and  contrivances — he 
is  capable  of  transforming  himself  into  an  angel  of  light.  Yea,  he  usurps  even  the 
functions  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  he  approaches  the  Christian  while  he  is  meditating 
upon  his  performances,  and  insidiously  breathes  his  charges  of  lukewarmness  and 
worldliness,  causing  his  heart  to  bleed  thereby.  Neither  is  he  to  be  recognised  by 
the  doctrines  he  inculcates.  What  measures  does  the  Holy  Spirit  make  use  of  in 
convincing  the  sinner  of  his  wickedness  ?    Does  He  show  the  evil  of  sin  ?     Satan 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

also  does  this.  Does  He  point  to  the  stringency  and  rigour  of  the  law  ?  So  does 
Satan.  But  although  he  is  not  recognisable  in  his  doctrines,  he  may  be  easily 
detected  in  the  inferences  which  he  draws  from  those  doctrines.  The  conclusions 
which  he  invariably  draws  from  his  teachings  are  couched  in  such  language  as  the 
following :  Firstly,  thy  sins  are  too  great  to  be  forgiven.  Secondly,  thou  mayest 
as  well  suffer  punishment  for  much  as  for  little.  Thirdly,  God  is  very  unrelenting. 
IV.  The  tribunal.  It  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  Satan  gains  admittance  into 
heaven,  there  to  lay  his  charges  against  the  saints,  because  he  has  been  eternally 
banished  thence.  Neither  is  it  by  any  means  probable  that,  were  permission  granted 
him  to  enter  there,  he  would  avail  himself  of  it.  And  the  reason  of  this  is  quite 
plain.  He  that  bruised  his  head  sits  triumphant  there.  His  design  is  to  create 
enmity  between  God  and  His  children  ;  his  purpose  is  to  efiPect  a  breach  between 
the  saints  and  their  heavenly  Father.  He  endeavours  to  embitter  their  spirits 
when  they  approach  God  in  meditation  and  prayer.  He  strives  to  weaken  their 
power  in  prayer,  and  so  to  crush  their  faith  as  to  render  it  powerless  to  bear  the 
blessing  they  came  to  seek.  V.  The  victory.  "  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb."  (D.  Roberts,  D.D.)  Overcoming  the  accuser  : — 1.  The  accuser 
charges  the  servants  of  God  with  guilt.  They  are  not  worthy,  as  he  alleges,  to 
stand  in  the  Holy  Presence.  To  this,  however,  they  have  a  triumphant  reply.  They 
do  not  deny  that  they  have  sinned  and  are  unworthy ;  but  they  have  God's  free 
gift  of  pardon  since  Jesus  has  died.  There  is  a  Rabbinic  tradition  to  the  effect  that 
Satan  is  compelled  to  refrain  from  accusations  against  Israel,  and  keep  silence,  on 
one  day  of  the  year — the  great  Day  of  Atonement.  Though  it  be  a  mere  legend,  it 
indicates  some  true  perception  of  the  only  ground  on  which  the  charge  of  guilt 
before  God  can  be  successfully  met.  But  let  us  extend  the  statement.  There  is  no 
respect  of  days.  The  peace  of  conscience  which  rests  on  "  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  " 
is  not  for  one  day,  but  for  all  the  days  of  the  year.  There  is  a  continual  and 
unfaltering  answer  of  the  Satanic  accusation.  2.  The  accuser  rails  against  the 
servants  of  God  as  mere  self-seekers.  In  this  respect,  wicked  men  are  very  like  their 
father  the  devil.  Their  base  instinct  is  to  suspect  and  jibe  at  goodness.  All  virtue 
is  in  their  eyes  humbug.  All  who  seem  to  be  in  earnest  for  any  moral  or  religious 
object  are  seeking  praise  for  themselves,  and  perhaps  money  also.  Disinterested- 
ness is  a  dream,  and  holiness  a  fraud.  So  says  the  devil;  and  so  say  his 
followers.  Now  it  may  be  impracticable  in  many  instances  to  meet  this  odious 
charge  with  a  complete  refutation.  A  good  man  cannot  prove  his  inward  motives 
to  all  the  outside  world,  least  of  all  to  those  who  wish  to  think  the  worst.  To  some, 
however,  both  in  early  and  in  later  times  of  the  Church,  opportunity  and  power 
have  been  given  to  make  a  triumphant  answer  to  the  unworthy  accusation  of 
selfishness.  They  were  exposed  to  cruel  persecution,  and  obliged  to  show  whether 
their  hearts  were  so  knit  to  Christ  that  they  would  lay  down  their  lives  for  His 
sake.  These  overcame  "  because  of  the  word  of  their  testimony."  Far  from 
shirking  the  ordeal,  they  conquered  by  their  firm  endurance.  What  then  could 
Satan  allege?  3.  We  are  not  of  •'  the  noble  army  of  martyrs."  But  all  Christians 
are  called  to  be  martyrs  in  the  sense  of  witnesses,  and  all  are  subjected  to  some 
test  of  fidelity.  Yet  every  one  in  his  own  order,  and  according  to  the  measure  of 
grace  which  he  has  received  ;  not  the  least  effective  being  the  little  ones  that  honour 
the  Lord  Jesus.  (D.  Fraser,  D.D.)  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb. — How   they   conquered   the   dragon : — I.   All   the  blessed  ones  who  abb 

REJOICINO   IN   HEAVEN   WERE   ONCE  WARRIORS  AND  VICTORS  HERE   BELOW.     ,We  tOO  oftCU 

think  of  the  saints  that  have  gone  before  as  if  they  were  men  of  another  race  from 
ourselves,  capable  of  nobler  things,  endowed  with  graces  which  we  cannot  reach, 
and  adorned  with  holiness  impossible  to  us.  The  mediaeval  artists  were  wont  to 
paint  the  saints  with  rings  of  glory  about  their  heads,  but  indeed  they  had  no  such 
halos ;  their  bro\^  were  furrowed  with  care  even  as  ours,  and  their  hair  grew  grey 
with  grief.  Their  light  was  within,  and  we  may  have  it ;  their  glory  was  by  grace, 
and  the  same  grace  is  available  for  us.  1.  It  is  clear  from  our  text  that  every  one 
of  the  saints  in  heaven  was  assailed  by  Satan.  How  could  there  be  a  victory 
without  a  battle  ?  2.  The  glorified,  in  addition  to  having  been  attacked,  were  led 
to  resist  the  evil  one,  for  nobody  overcomes  an  antagonist  without  fighting.  3.  We 
find  that  these  warriors  all  overcame,  for  heaven  is  not  for  those  who  fight  merely, 
but  for  those  who  overcome.  "  I  do  fight  against  my  sin,"  says  one.  Brother, 
do  you  overcome  it  ?  Attack,  resistance,  and  victory  must  be  yours.  4.  So,  then, 
in  heaven  they  all  rejoice  because  they  have  overcome,  for  the  next  verse  to  our 
text  puts  it,  "  Therefore  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  dweU  in  them."    It  is  a 


CHAP.  XII.]  REVELATION.  447 

theme  for  gladness  in  heaven  that  they  did  fight  and  resist  and  overcome.  There 
is  joy  among  the  angels,  for  they  had  their  conflict  when  they  stood  firm  against 
temptation ;  but  ours  will  be  a  victory  peculiarly  sweet,  a  song  especially  melodious, 
because  our  battle  has  been  peculiarly  severe.  II.  The  victors  all  fought  with 
THE  SAME  WEAPONS.  1.  First,  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  :  it  was  theirs.  The  blood  of 
the  Lamb  wiU  not  help  us  until  it  becomes  our  own.  It  is  the  blood  of  the  covenant, 
and  it  secures  all  the  covenant  gifts  of  God  to  us.  It  is  the  life  of  our  life.  So, 
then,  they  had  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  they  possessed  the  privilege  which  the 
blood  brings  with  it.  2.  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  by 
the  word  of  their  testimony.  Now,  what  is  the  testimony  of  the  saints  ?  It  is  a 
testimony  concerning  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  If  ever  we  are  to  conquer  Satan  in 
the  world,  we  must  preach  the  atoning  blood.  III.  While  they  all  fought  with  the 
same  weapons  they  all  fought  with  the  same  spirit  ;  for  the  text  says,  "  they 
loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death."  1.  The  expression  indicates  dauntless  courage. 
They  were  never  afraid  of  the  doctrine  of  a  bleeding  Saviour.  Let  us  never  be 
ashamed  of  our  hope.  2.  These  men,  in  addition  to  dauntless  courage,  had 
unanswering  fidelity.  They  "loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death."  They  thought 
it  better  to  die  than  deny  the  faith.  3.  More  than  that,  they  were  perfect  in  their 
consecration.  "  They  loved  not  their  lives  unto*  the  death."  They  gave  them- 
selves up,  body  soul,  and  spirit,  to  the  cause  of  which  the  precious  blood  is  the 
symbol,  and  that  consecration  led  them  to  perfect  self-sacrifice.  No  Christian  of 
the  true  type  counts  anything  to  be  his  own.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  the  conquering  weapon : — I.  What  is  this  conquering  weapon  ?  1.  The 
blood  of  the  Lamb  signifies,  first,  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  sufferings  of 
Jesus  Christ  might  be  set  forth  by  some  other  figure,  but  His  death  on  the  Cross 
requires  the  mention  of  blood.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  death  of  sin  and  the 
defeat  of  Satan,  and  hence  it  is  the  life  of  our  hope,  and  the  assurance  of  His 
victory.  Because  He  poured  out  His  soul  unto  the  death,  He  divided  the  spoil 
with  the  strong.  2.  Next,  by  "  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  "  we  understand  our  Lord's 
death  as  a  substitutionary  sacrifice.  It  is  not  said  that  they  overcame  the  arch-enemy 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  or  the  blood  of  Christ,  but  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ;  and  the 
words  are  expressly  chosen  because,  under  the  figure  of  a  lamb,  we  have  set  before  us 
a  sacrifice.  Sin  must  be  punished ;  it  is  punished  in  Christ's  death.  Here  is  the 
hope  of  men.  3.  Furthermore,  I  understand  by  the  expression,  "  The  blood  of  the 
Lamb,"  that  our  Lord's  death  was  effective  for  the  taking  away  of  sin.  When 
John  the  Baptist  first  pointed  to  Jesus,  he  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  Our  Lord  Jesus  has  actually  taken  away  sin  by 
His  death.  U.  I  have  shown  you  the  sword  ;  now  I  come  to  speak  to  the  question, 
How  DO  Tou  USB  it?  "They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  When 
a  man  gets  a  sword,  you  cannot  be  quite  certain  how  he  will  use  it.  A  gentleman 
has  purchased  a  very  expensive  sword  with  a  golden  hilt  and  an  elaborate 
scabbard ;  he  hangs  it  up  in  his  hall,  and  exhibits  it  to  his  friends.  Occasionally 
he  draws  it  out  from  the  sheath,  and  he  says,  "Feel  how  keen  is  the  edge!" 
The  precious  blood  of  Jesus  is  not  meant  for  us  merely  to  admire  and  exhibit. 
We  must  not  be  content  to  talk  about  it,  and  extol  it,  and  do  nothing  with  it ;  but 
we  are  to  use  it  in  the  great  crusade  against  unholiness  and  unrighteousness,  tiU  it 
is  said  of  us,  "  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  Let  me  show  you 
your  battle-field.  Our  first  place  of  conflict  is  in  the  heavenlies,  and  the  second  is 
down  below  on  earth.  1.  First,  then,  you  who  believe  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  have 
to  do  battle  with  Satan  in  the  heavenlies  ;  and  there  you  must  overcome  him  "  by 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  "  How?  "  say  you.  First,  you  are  to  regard  Satan  this 
day  as  being  already  literally  and  truly  overcome  through  the  death  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Satan  is  already  a  vanquished  enemy.  By  faith  grasp  your  Lord's  victory 
as  your  ovm,  since  He  triumphed  in  your  nature  and  on  your  behalf.  I  would  have 
you  overcome  Satan  in  the  heavenlies  in  another  sense :  you  must  overcome  him 
as  the  accuser.  At  times  you  hear  in  your  heart  a  voice  arousing  memory  and 
startling  conscience  ;  a  voice  which  seems  in  heaven  to  be  a  remembrance  of  your 
guilt.  All  comfort  drawn  from  inward  feelings  or  outward  works  will  fall  short ;  but 
the  bleeding  wounds  of  Jesus  will  plead  with  overwhelming  argument,  and  answer 
all.  Still  further,  the  believer  will  have  need  to  overcome  the  enemy  in  the  heavenly 

E laces  in  reference  to  access  to  God.  The  sacred  name  of  Jesus  is  one  before  which 
e  flees.  This  will  drive  away  his  blasphemous  suggestions  and  foul  insinuations 
better  than  anything  that  you  can  invent.  We  next  must  overcome  the  enemy  in 
prayer.    2.  It  is  time  that  I  now  showed  you  how  this  same  fight  is  carried  on  on 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

earth.  Amongst  men  in  these  lower  places  of  conflict  saints  overcome  through  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb  by  their  testimony  to  that  blood.  Every  believer  is  to  bear 
witness  to  the  atoning  sacrifice  and  its  power  to  save.  He  is  to  tell  out  the 
doctrine ;  he  is  to  emphasise  it  by  earnest  faith  in  it ;  and  he  is  to  support  it  and 
prove  it  by  his  experience  of  the  effect  of  it.  You  can  bear  witness  to  the  power  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus  in  your  own  soul.  If  you  do  this,  you  will  overcome  men  in 
many  ways.  First,  you  will  arouse  them  out  of  apathy.  This  age  is  more 
indifferent  to  true  religion  than  almost  any  other.  The  sight  of  the  bleeding 
Saviour  overcomes  obduracy  and  carelessness.  The  doctrine  of  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb  prevents  or  scatters  error.  I  do  not  think  that  by  reason  we  often  confute 
error  to  any  practical  purpose.  We  may  confute  it  rhetorically  and  doctrinally, 
but  men  still  stick  to  it.  But  the  doctrine  of  the  precious  blood,  when  it  once 
gets  into  the  heart,  drives  error  out  of  it,  and  sets  up  the  throne  of  truth.  We  also 
overcome  men  in  this  way,  by  softening  rebellious  hearts.  Men  stand  out  against 
the  law  of  God,  and  defy  the  vengeance  of  God ;  but  the  love  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus  disarms  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  causes  men  to  yield  through  the  softening 
influence  of  the  Cross.  How  wonderfully  this  same  blood  of  the  Lamb  overcomes 
despair.  Glory  be  to  God,  the  blood  is  a  universal  solvent,  and  it  has  dissolved 
the  iron  bars  of  despair,  until  the  poor  captive  conscience  has  been  able  to 
escape.  There  is  nothing,  indeed,  which  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  will  not  over- 
come ;  for  see  how  it  overcomes  vice,  and  every  form  of  sin.  The  world  is  foul 
with  evil.  What  can  cleanse  it  ?  What  but  this  matchless  stream  ?  Satan  makes 
sin  seem  pleasure,  but  the  Cross  reveals  its  bitterness.  This  blood  overcomes  the 
natural  lethargy  of  men  towards  obedience  ;  it  stimulates  them  to  holiness.  If  any- 
thing can  make  a  man  holy  it  is  a  firm  faith  in  the  atoning  sacrifice.  When  a  man 
knows  that  Jesus  died  for  him,  he  feels  that  he  is  not  his  own,  but  bought  with  a 
price,  and  therefore  he  must  live  unto  Him  that  died  for  him  and  rose  again.  (Ibid.) 
The  Church's  victory  : — I.  The  Church's  victory.  The  Church  is  here  set  before 
us  in  a  state  of  triumph,  having  conquered  all  its  enemies  and  received  its  reward. 
II.  The  medium  through  which  this  victory  is  obtained.  "  They  overcame  him 
by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  III.  The  connection  that  subsists  between  the 
MEANS  AND  THE  END  OF  THE  CONFLICT.  1.  The  blood  of  the  Lamb  is  the  source  of 
the  disposition  which  regenerated  men  feel  when  entering  upon  this  spiritual  warfare. 
2.  It  is  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  that  perpetuates  the  conflict,  by  carrying  on  the 
sanctification  of  the  soul.  3.  The  blood  of  the  Lamb  alone  can  inspire  fortitude 
and  courage  for  this  conflict.  4.  The  blood  of  the  Lamb  is  the  only  source  of 
spiritual  life,  and  therefore  they  conquer  by  it.  It  was  not  spilt  as  water  upon  the 
ground,  it  was  the  opening  of  the  fountain  of  immortality  for  the  soul  of  man. 
6.  By  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  they  learned  the  example  of  conflicting  to  the  death, 
and  gathered  the  assurance  of  a  glorious  triumph  beyond  it.  Two  things  will  tend 
to  make  a  man  a  good  soldier — a  readiness  to  leave  his  body  a  corpse  on  the  battle- 
field, and  a  thorough  conviction  that  ultimately  his  cause  must  succeed.  Both  are 
requisite  in  the  spiritual  strife.  {John  Aldis.)  The  encouragement  to  increased 
missionary  effort  to  be  derived  from  the  assurance  of  final  victory  : — L  We  shall  never 
be  aroused  to  magnanimous  efforts  till  we  have  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  invisible 

ENEMY  WHO   FOMENTS   ALL   THE   OPPOSITION   AGAINST   ChRIST  AND   HiS   GOSPEL.        1.   In 

the  general  description,  mark,  first,  his  deadly  hatred  to  God  and  goodness,  implied 
in  the  names  Satan,  the  Enemy,  the  Adversary,  the  Wicked  One.  Next,  his  rage 
and  fury,  as  the  great  Ked  Dragon,  the  Apollyon  or  Destroyer.  Further,  his  craft 
and  subtilty,  as  the  Old  Serpent,  in  allusion  to  the  form  under  which  he  seduced 
our  first  parents.  Next,  the  extent  of  his  dominion,  the  whole  world  lying  in 
wickedness,  or,  in  the  wicked  one.  2.  And  what  is  the  general  method  of  Satan's 
opposition  to  Christ,  and  the  salvation  of  men  ?  His  grand  vantage-ground  is  the 
tendency  in  human  corruption  to  listen  to  all  his  suggestions.  He  thus  works  his 
way  unperceived  into  our  hearts.  3.  The  place  where  Satan  carries  on  this  oppo- 
sition is  set  forth  in  this  symbolical  passage  as  his  heaven,  from  the  popular  notion 
of  heaven  as  a  place  of  eminence,  of  ease,  safety,  and  enjoyment.  It  imports,  here, 
the  visible  kingdom  of  Satan  in  its  full  pride  and  power ;  from  which,  when  he  is 
dispossessed,  he  is  said  to  be  cast  down  unto  the  earth.  II.  The  means  of  resisting 
THIS  GREAT  ADVERSARY.  1.  The  faithful  Overcame  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ;  and 
in  what  manner  did  they  do  this  ?     (1)  By  trusting  to  it  for  their  own  salvation  ; 

(2)  By  proclaiming  it  to  others,  as  men  touched  with  the  love  of  Him  who  shed  it ; 

(3)  By  seeing  all  the  purposes  of  Almighty  God  centre  in  it.  III.  The  issue  op  the 
CONFLICT.    "  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."     (Bp.  Daniel  Wilson.) 


CHAP,  xn.]  REVELATION.  449 

Missionary  conflict  and  victory  : — I.  Let  us  consider  missions  under  the  aspect  of  a 
VICTORY  GAINED.  1.  Of  course  the  word  implies  conflict.  The  Kevelation,  resonant 
with  sounds  of  battle,  exhibits  the  King  of  Heaven  upon  earth  as  engaged  in  a 
struggle.  This  mode  of  representation  only  displays  in  pictures  ideas  common  to 
the  whole  of  the  New  Testament.  The  Church  under  the  present  dispensation  is  a 
church  militant.  Let  us  not  despise  or  underestimate  our  foe.  To  follow  Christ 
and  to  take  up  His  cause  anywhere  is  to  challenge  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil.  2.  But  the  point  now  is  that  a  victory  has  been  won,  and  this  victory  is 
distinguished  by  two  features,  celebrated  in  the  song  heard  by  John,  which  render  it 
extremely  interesting  and  important  for  those  on  the  threshold  of  life,  whose  privilege 
it  is  to  look  forward  to  service.  (1)  The  accuser  has  been  cast  down,  and  in  his 
casting  down  certain  practical  problems  have  been  solved  and  doubts  swept  out  of 
the  way.  No  great  and  good  movement  has  ever  been  inaugurated  that  did  not  stir 
up  an  accuser.  He  was  maliciously  busy  at  the  outset  of  the  missionary  enterprise, 
and  tried  to  raise  obstacles  to  harass  the  timid.  (2)  Then,  too,  in  the  gospel 
victories  is  to  be  included  a  beautiful,  delightful  social  revolution,  for  "  now  is  come 
the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  the  authority  of  His  Christ."    II.  The  principles  and 

INSTRUMENTALITIES  WHEREBY  THIS  VICTORY   WAS    GAINED.       1.    We  WOUld  not  loSC  sight 

of  the  fact  that  "  there  was  war  in  heaven."  We  have  always  had  the  supernatural 
support  of  a  leader  of  invisible  legions,  whose  name,  "  Michael,"  suggests  the  question, 
*'  Who  is  like  unto  God  ?  "  and  whose  guarantee,  conveyed  along  with  the  marching 
orders,  is,  "Lo!  I  am  with  you  alway  unto  the  consummation  of  the  age."  2. 
Looking  at  these  words  as  a  whole,  we  say  they  intimate  conquests  gained  through 
dependence  on  spiritual  forces.  It  was  so,  we  may  remind  ourselves,  in  the  conflict 
with  the  paganism  of  the  ancient  Roman  world.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose 
that  the  triumph  of  Christianity  followed  the  so-called  conversion  of  Constantine. 
On  the  contrary,  he  gave  in  his  adhesion  because  Christianity  was  already  on  the 
march,  firm  and  triumphant.  The  victory  had  been  won,  and  it  was  won  with  the 
weapons  of  faith,  hope,  love,  patience,  forgiveness,  and  prayer.  So  also  has  it  been 
in  the  conflict  with  the  paganism  of  the  modern  world.  God  in  nature,  God  in 
history,  and  God  in  grace  is  one  God,  and  we  may  expect  Him  to  be  making  each 
department  of  His  rule  dovetail  in  some  way  into  the  other,  in  order  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  His  purposes.  3.  Three  things  are,  we  take  it,  specially  necessary  to 
meet  the  fundamental  spiritual  requirements  of  the  human  heart — viz.,  redemption  ; 
revelation ;  and  these  mediated  and  ministered  by  messengers  of  intense  self- 
sacrificing  sympathies.  These  are  the  very  elements  which  are  here  displayed  as 
grounds  of  success.  (1)  "They  overcame  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 
Readers  must  note  that  in  this  book,  in  which  the  general  outlines  of  Church  history 
are  exhibited  in  symbolic  pictures,  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  holds  a  most  prominent 
place.  It  precisely  forecasts  what  has  happened  in  the  actual  event.  By  the 
atoning  sacrifice  of  Calvary  were  the  missionaries'  hearts  first  set  on  fire.  The 
provision  made  in  the  death  of  God's  dear  Son  for  meeting  their  condition  as 
sinners  was  what  deeply  agitated,  and,  like  the  touch  of  the  "Uve  coal  from  off  the 
altar,"  flamed  through  them  into  the  offer  and  entreaty,  "Here  are  we,  send  us." 
By  the  same  sacrifice  they  were  sustained  in  their  surrender.  The  Saviour's  blood 
was  their  life.  His  dying  wounds  were  not  only  fountains  of  expiation  and  cleans- 
ing, but  also  springs  out  of  which  pulsated  the  streams  of  life  through  the  lips  of 
faith  into  their  thrilled  hearts.  Advancing  with  this  experience,  it  turned  out  that 
the  "  story  of  redemption  through  His  blood"  was  just  the  good  news  the  heathen 
needed,  and  leaped  excitedly  to  welcome.  (2)  To  meet  the  cry  for  light,  the 
ministers  of  grace  delivered  "  the  word  of  their  testimony."  Observe,  "  testimony." 
Not  an  argument,  but  a  testimony ;  not  a  denunciation,  but  a  testimony ;  not  a 
destructive  attack,  but  a  testimony  ;  not  a  "  perad venture,"  but  a  testimony.  This 
testimony,  originally  received  by  apostles  from  Christ  and  His  Spirit,  was  by  them 
embodied  in  "  a  word."  This  "  word,"  again  tasted  and  tested  through  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  by  believers,  became  in  their  lips  and  lives  a  "  testimony."  They  marched 
to  the  field  with  this  testimony,  a  Pentecostal  glory  mitring  their  brows  and  firing 
their  tongues,  and  breaking  out  in  "  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs."  They 
knew  whom  they  believed,  and,  Philip-like,  joining  themselves  unto  the  chariot  of 
heathendom,  they  just  preached  and  explained  Him  of  whom  every  voice  of  truth 
in  the  Vedas  also  spoke  to  those  in  the  darkness  feeling  after  "  an  unknown  God  " 
to  be  their  Shepherd  and  King.  (3)  The  third  reason  does  not  occupy  precisely  the 
same  level  as  the  other  two.  It  is  not  joined  to  them  with  "  because."  The 
proposal  to  surrender  life,  standing  by  itself,  would  be  impotent  and  fruitless.    It  is 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

■when  united  with  "  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  the  word  of  testimony  "  that  it  is 
energised  into  an  important  factor  in  the  product.  The  mode  of  expression  seems 
based  upon  a  common  course  in  human  affairs.  A  man  takes  a  stand  from  which 
it  is  sought  to  divert  him  by  threats  of  poverty,  want,  and  hardship.  There  are 
some  in  whom  the  love  of  life  is  so  near  the  surface,  and  so  sensitive  and  ready  to 
take  alarm,  that  the  above  threat  would  be  enough  to  make  it  leap  to  its  feet 
instantly  and  shriek  out,  "  You  shall  not."  Others,  however,  are  not  conscious  of 
this  love  at  that  point,  and  the  threat  does  not  move  them.  Then  it  is  represented 
they  will  lose  caste,  be  boycotted  in  society,  be  shut  out  of  the  road  which  leads  to 
applause  and  power,  and  condemned  to  calumny,  reprobation,  scorn — or,  what  is 
■worse,  neglect.  Some  who  resisted  in  the  first  stage  would  be  sifted  out  here,  whilst 
a  remnant  would  continue  yet  untouched  and  resolute.  But  now  I  imagine  the 
ghastly  king  of  terrors  drawing  nigh  to  these  and  compelling  them  at  close  quarters 
to  look  into  his  cavernous,  cruel  face.  Proud  is  this  grisly  monarch,  and  omni- 
potent in  his  own  conceit.  But  many  think  that  Death's  bark  is  worse  than  his 
bite.  I  know  the  prospect  is  under  some  conditions  appalling,  and  yet  I  can  fancy 
those  who  had  stood  the  first  two  tests  contemplating  this  almost  with  contempt. 
There  is,  however,  another  deeper,  darker  possibility  suggested.  It  is  not  merely 
hardship ;  it  is  not  merely  shame ;  it  is  not  merely  physical  extinction ;  it  is  the 
sacrifice  of  the  opportunity  of  self-cultivation  for  what  seems  a  grander  destiny  in 
this  world,  and  even  a  better,  higher  standing  in  the  world  to  come.  Many 
missionaries,  like,  e.g.,  Carey  and  Livingstone,  possessed  surpassing  powers.  They 
■would  succeed  splendidly  anywhere.  Had  they  stayed  in  this  country  no  one  can 
predict  the  distinction  to  which  they  might  have  risen.  To  go  away,  say  into  the 
wilds  of  Africa,  as  evangelists  is  to  renounce  magnificent  chances.  Nay  more. 
They  who  feel  the  loss  most  will  leave  the  stimulus  of  Christian  society ;  the  bracing 
impulse  of  Christian  atmosphere  ;  the  sweet  help  of  the  first  day  of  the  week,  with 
its  sacred  hush  and  uplifting  worship ;  the  very  continuance  of  the  life  of  piety  ■will 
be  imperilled.  That  education  and  development  of  the  faculties  and  qualities  of 
mind  and  spirit  which  in  itself  is  so  delightful  must  be  relinquished,  and,  so  far  as 
this  world  is  concerned,  relinquished  for  ever.  They  must  cease  to  love  their  own 
soul,  and  that  unto  death.  I  believe  that  scores  of  witnesses  in  all  ages,  and,  thank 
God,  in  ours  also,  have  risen  to  this  height ;  and  it  is  in  this  way  and  by  this  means 
they  have  gained  the  victory.  K  you  want  to  capture  others,  you  must  abandon 
self.  {R.  H.  Roberts,  B.A.)  Victory  over  the  foe : — I  hope  it  is  possible  for  a  few 
minutes  to  interest  you  in  the  fortunes  of  a  battle.  "  The  fight  is  fought,  and  the 
victory  is  won.  Your  troops  have  engaged  and  conquered  the  foe."  And  we  are 
told  they  overcame  him  by  three  modes  and  weapons  of  warfare — the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  the  word  of  their  testimony,  and  the  not  loving  their  Ufe  even  unto  death. 
The  several  particulars  are  striking;  their  combination  is  wonderful.  "  They  over- 
came him  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  Strange !  But  is  it  not  true — true 
to  a  history  none  the  less  real  because  it  is,  in  part  at  least,  the  history  of  souls  ? 
Is  it  not  true  that  that  Cross  of  pain  and  shame  has  in  it  the  virtue  of  a  thousand 
times  ten  thousand  victories,  compared  with  which  Marathon  and  Salamis,  Trafalgar 
and  Waterloo,  were  events  of  temporary  and  fleeting  significance  ?  Is  it  not  true 
that  lives  have  been  remade  in  their  most  secret,  and  yet  in  their  most  practical, 
being — remade  for  strength,  remade  for  happiness,  remade  for  usefulness,  influence, 
and  blessing  to  other  lives,  entirely  by  that  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  for  sin  which 
is  here  briefly  characterised  as  "  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  "  ?  The  man  who  has 
conquered  a  besetting  sin  by  reason  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  is  a  greater  hero, 
greater  in  kind  as  well  as  in  degree,  than  the  man  who  can  count  his  slain  enemies 
in  some  death-grapple  on  the  Nile  by  tens  and  by  twenties.  But  it  is  conceivable 
that  there  might  be  in  some  heart  a  strong  sense  of  gratitude  for  the  death  of  the 
Son  of  God,  which  as  yet  has  nothing  to  say  for  itself  as  to  a  definite  work  to  be 
done  for  Him.  Therefore  the  voice  from  heaven  speaks  in  the  second  place  of  the 
word  of  their  testimony.  The  Christian  owes  his  victory,  secondly,  to  a  word — that 
is,  a  message  or  revelation  from  God,  to  the  truth  of  which  he  himself  is  witness. 
We  have  three  thoughts  here.  First,  God  has  spoken.  A  word  is  more  than  a 
sound.  A  word  has  meaning  in  it.  It  is  the  communication  of  mind  to  mind. 
Word  is  speech,  and  speech  is,  by  definition,  reason  communicating  itself.  This  is 
■why  Christ  Himself  is  called  by  St.  John  "  the  Word."  In  Christ  God  has  spoken, 
not  in  precept  and  prohibition  only,  rather  in  revelation  of  will  and  mind,  setting 
before  us  the  Divine  character  in  human  action,  and  saying,  "  This  am  I ;  this  be 
thou.    Made,  and  now  remade  in  My  imags,  bear,  act,  be  this  to  thy  brethren." 


CHAP.  XII.]  REVELATION.  451 

Thus  the  word  becomes  next  a  testimony.  The  business  of  the  Christian  is  witness- 
ing, having,  as  St.  John  says,  "  the  witness  in  himself  "  ;  able  from  experience, 
able  from  consciousness  of  the  power  and  beauty  of  the  gospel,  "  to  set  to  it  his 
seal  "  that  it  is  true.  He  goes  about  his  business,  speaks  his  daily  speech,  does  his 
everyday  work,  as  one  who  believes,  strives  not  to  contradict,  not  to  belie  his  con- 
viction, lives  as  its  witness,  dies  as  its  martyr.  And  thus,  thirdly,  he  overcomes 
because  of  it.  The  blood  of  the  Lamb  is  his  motive,  but  the  Word  of  His  testimony 
is  his  direction.  Without  this  he  might  be  well-intentioned,  but  he  would  neither 
know  his  enemy  nor  know  how  to  cope  with  him.  They  overcame  him,  therefore, 
because  of  the  Word  of  which  they  were  witnesses.  Yet  another  principal  cause 
remains.  "  They  loved  not  their  life  even  unto  death."  Contempt  for  death  is  a 
great  secret  of  victory.  Even  in  the  perpetration  of  deeds  of  darkness,  the  chance 
of  success  is  infinitely  enhanced  by  the  willingness  of  the  doer  to  die  for  it.  The 
assassin  who  will  give  life  for  life  is  half  assured  of  victory.  The  text  speaks  of  a 
nobler  strife,  that  of  the  Christian  victor,  and  it  says  of  him  that  side  by  side  with 
two  other  things,  faith  in  Christ's  sacrifice,  and  faith  in  Christ's  word,  there  stands 
this  reason  also  for  his  victory,  that  he  loved  not  his  life.  The  earthly  conqueror 
must  have  no  friendship  for  his  life  in  comparison  with  two  other  things — duty  and 
honour.  The  earthly  conqueror  must  have  no  charity  for  his  life  when  it  tries  to 
stand  between  him  and  courage,  or  between  him  and  the  love  of  his  country.  'Tis 
the  peculiarity  of  the  Christian  victor,  not  always  realised,  perhaps,  to  the  full,  even 
in  him,  that,  taking  all  things  into  account,  he  has  a  positive  desire— positive  desire 
— to  '•  depart  and  be  with  Christ."  It  is  not  only  that  there  are  so  many  dark 
features  of  the  world  he  lives  in,  it  is  rather  that  he  knows  Someone  on  the  other 
side  of  death,  whom  he  longs  to  be  with.  He  endures  as  seeing  the  Invisible,  but 
all  the  time  he  is  seeking  a  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly.  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
They  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death. — The  evidence  of  Christianity  from  the 
persecution  of  Christians  : — The  progress  of  Christianity  is  a  most  interesting  object 
of  speculation,  and  must  appear  truly  wonderful  when  it  is  considered  that  it 
prevailed  by  means  the  very  reverse  of  what  might  have  been  expected,  and  which 
have  been  used  to  establish  other  systems  of  religion  or  philosophy,  and  the  corrup- 
tions of  Christianity  itself.  Other  religions  had  either  the  aid  of  power,  or  at  least 
of  the  learning  of  the  age  and  countries  in  which  they  were  established.  The 
founders  of  them  were  either  conquerors,  legislators,  or  men  who  were  distinguished 
in  life ;  so  that  independently  of  the  doctrines  they  promulgated,  they  appeared  in 
a  respectable  light  to  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  the  Founder  of  Christianity  was 
an  obscure  person,  a  common  mechanic,  in  a  country  the  inhabitants  of  which  were 
despised  by  the  rest  of  the  world  ;  without  the  advantage  of  any  learned  education, 
where  the  greatest  account  was  made  of  that  advantage,  and  where  persons  destitute 
of  it  were  held  in  contempt.  The  first  followers  of  Christ  were,  in  general,  of  the 
same  low  rank  of  life  with  Himself,  wholly  destitute  in  power,  or  of  policy.  They 
were  all  their  lives  persecuted,  as  He  had  been,  and  many  of  them  died  violent 
deaths.  What  then  were  the  means  by  which  Christianity,  thus  extraordinarily 
circumstanced,  did  make  its  way  in  the  world,  till,  in  the  natural  course  of  things, 
the  very  powers  which  opposed  it  came  to  be  on  its  side  ?  They  were,  as  we  are 
informed  in  my  text,  the  death  of  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  and  the  testimony  of 
His  followers  to  His  doctrine,  miracles,  and  resurrection,  sealed  with  their  blood.  II 
we  consider  the  nature  of  Christianity,  and  the  object  of  it,  we  shall  see  that  it 
could  not  be  established  by  any  other  means  than  these,  how  ill  adapted  soever  they 
may,  on  a  superficial  view  of  things,  appear  to  answer  the  end.  What  is  Christianity 
but  that  firm  belief  in  a  future  life  which  produces  the  proper  regulation  of  man's 
conduct  in  this  ?  Any  attempt  to  gain  belief  to  this,  or  any  doctrine,  by  power, 
would  have  been  unavailing  and  absurd.  It  is  evident  that  nothing  could  make 
mankind  believe  that  Christ  wrought  miracles,  that  He  died,  and  rose  from  the 
dead,  and  therefore  that  there  is  a  future  life,  to  which  themselves  will  be  raised, 
but  the  proper  evidence  of  the  truth  of  those  facts.  And  in  distant  ages,  in  which 
persons  can  have  no  opportunity  of  inquiring  into  the  truth  of  the  facts  for  them- 
selves, the  only  evidence  to  them  is  the  full  conviction  that  they  who  had  that 
opportunity  did  believe  them.  Now  we  cannot  imagine  in  what  manner  any  person 
can  express  his  firm  persuasion  of  the  truth,  or  the  value,  of  any  set  of  principles, 
more  strongly  than  by  his  suffering  and  dying  for  them.  Still,  however,  there 
would  have  been  room  to  doubt,  if  they  had  not  persisted  in  their  testimony,  and  if 
they  hsA  not  also  had  both  sufiicient  opportunity,  and  sufficient  motives  to  consider 
and  reconsider  the  thing.  -  Now  the  witnesses  were  numerous,  and,  living  together, 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


they  must  have  had  frequent  opportunities  of  conversing  with  one  another  on  the 
subject,  and  of  comparing  their  observations.  And  surely  no  motive  could  be 
wanting,  when  aU  the  happiness  of  their  lives,  and  even  life  itself,  was  depending. 
How  satisfactory,  then,  is  the  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  from  the  testimony 
of  almost  all  its  proper  witnesses,  as  sealed  with  their  blood,  and  therefore  not  given 
without  the  most  deliberate  consideration,  and  in  opposition  to  the  strongest  induce- 
ments to  declare  the  reverse  of  what  they  did.  How  much  more  convincing  is  this 
kind  of  evidence  than  that  of  men  who  draw  their  swords  in  defence  of  any  cause  ? 
The  man  who  fights  hopes  to  get  the  victory,  and  most  probably  expects  to  secure 
to  himself  some  temporal  advantage.  It  cannot  by  any  means,  therefore,  be  inferred 
that  a  man  may  not  fight  for  a  falsehood,  provided  it  promises  to  be  a  gainful  one. 
We  see,  then,  the  infinite  superiority  of  the  pretensions  of  Christ  to  those  of  Mahomet, 
or  of  any  who  have  endeavoured  to  establish  a  religion  by  violence.  Our  Lord, 
confiding  in  the  power  of  truth,  disclaimed  all  other  aid,  and  therefore  ordered  His 
disciples  not  to  fight,  but  to  die.  I  would  farther  observe,  that  violence  in  support 
of  truth  is  utterly  contrary  to  the  nature  and  genius  of  the  Christian  religion  ;  and 
it  supposes  a  temper  of  mind  inconsistent  with  it,  viz.,  hatred  and  revenge.  And 
not  only  should  we  avoid  all  actual  violence,  but  everything  that  approaches  to  it, 
as  anger  and  abuse.  If  calm  reasoning  fail,  these  are  not  likely  to  succeed.  As  we 
must  not  make  use  of  violence  or  abuse  ourselves,  so  we  should  take  it  patiently 
when  it  is  offered  by  others.  It  is  generally  a  proof  that  our  adversaries  have 
nothing  better  to  offer,  and  therefore  is  a  presumption  that  we  have  truth  on  our 
side  ;  and  surely  the  sense  of  this  may  well  enable  us  to  bear  up  under  any  insult  to 
which  we  may  be  exposed.  A  state  of  persecution  has  been  the  lot  of  truly  good 
men,  and  especially  of  all  great  and  distinguished  characters  whose  aim  has  been 
to  reform  abuses,  and  introduce  new  light  into  the  minds  of  men,  in  all  ages. 
{J.  Priestley,  LL.D.)  Love  triumphant : — Geleazius,  a  gentleman  of  great  wealth, 
who  suffered  martyrdom  at  St.  Angelo,  in  Italy,  being  much  entreated  by  his 
friends  to  recant,  and  thus  save  his  life,  replied,  "  Death  is  much  sweeter  to  me  with 
the  testimony  of  truth,  than  life  with  its  least  denial." 

Vers.  12-17.  Therefore  rejoice,  ye  heavens. — The  defeatibility  of  the  devil : — I. 
Mighty  as  is  the  master-fiend  of  evil,  he  is  not  proof  against  defeats.  "  There- 
fore rejoice,  ye  heavens."  1.  Here  is  a  defeat  implied.  There  is  nothing  permanerft 
m  error,  there  is  no  stability  in  wrong.  As  light  extends,  and  virtue  grows,  all 
schemes  of  wrong,  political,  social,  and  reUgious,  crack  to  pieces  and  tumble  to  ruin. 
2.  Here  is  a  defeat  righteously  exultable.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  prisoner  quitting  his 
ceU,  of  the  patient  returning  to  health.  II.  Great  as  his  defeats  mat  be,  they  do 
not  quench  his  animosity.  "  Having  great  wrath,"  &c.  Like  the  ravenous  beast  of 
the  desert,  his  failure  to  fasten  his  tusks  in  one  victim  whets  his  appetite  for  another. 
Evil  is  insatiable.  III.  His  animosity  is  especially  directed  against  the  true 
Church.  "  He  persecuted  the  woman,"  &c.  1.  Wherever  the  spirit  of  Christ  is,  the 
spirit  of  tenderness,  humanity,  self-sacrificing  love,  this  he  hates  and  seeks  to  destroy. 
2.  Who  shall  say  what  he  pours  forth  from  his  mouth  ?  False  accusations,  pernicious 
errors,  social  persecutions,  &c.  IV.  The  true  Church,  even  in  trying  circumstances, 
is  under  the  special  protection  of  heaven.  1.  The  Church  is  in  the  wilderness. 
The  way  of  Christly  men  on  this  earth  has  always  been — (1)  intricate ;  (2)  danger- 
ous ;  (3)  gloomy.  2.  Though  in  the  wilderness,  it  has  enormous  privileges.  (1)  It 
is  endowed  with  heaven -soaring  power.  (2)  It  has  the  whole  earth  to  serve  it.  (2>. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Victorious  rejoicing  : — 1.  By  this  exhortation  of  others  that  are 

in  heaven  to  rejoice  likewise,  we  see,  that  the  saints  of  God  think  it  not  enough  for 
themselves  to  rejoice  at  the  prosperity  of  Christ  and  His  Church  ;  but  they  exhort, 
and  would  have  all  others  to  join  herein  with  them,  that  as  God  is  all  in  all,  so  He 
may  of  all  and  by  all  be  praised  and  glorified.  2.  We  see  the  contrary  disposition 
of  the  godly  and  wicked ;  that  which  is  matter  of  joy  to  the  one  is  of  sorrow  to  the 
other,  and  on  the  contrary ;  which  was  seen  at  Christ's  birth  or  first  coming,  and  shall 
beat  His  record.  3.  By  the  denouncing  of  a  woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth,  we 
see  when  it  shall  be  well  with  the  godly  then  it  shall  be  woe  to  the  wicked.  4.  Where- 
as it  is  said  that  the  devil  was  come  down  to  them  in  great  wrath,  we  see — (1)  Who 
is  the  author  of  all  unjust  wrath  and  malice.  (2)  As  they  who  serve  God  get  His 
loving  favour,  but  they  who  are  Satan's  slaves  get  nothing  but  his  wrath  as  their 
recompense  in  the  end  ;  being  first  their  tempter,  next  their  accuser,  and  at  last  their 
tormentor.  5.  It  is  said  that  he  comes  in  great  wrath,  because  his  time  is  short ; 
which,  as  it  is  a  comfort  to  the  godly,  so  it  should  be  a  lesson  of  wisdom :  as  he  is 


CHAP.  XII.]  REVELATION.  453 

busy  in  doing  ill,  so  should  they  be  in  doing  good,  because  their  time  is  short  here, 
yea,  and  most  uncertain.  {William  Guild,  D.D.)  Woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  the 
BBXth.— Woe  on  the  earth : — 1.  Note  how  dark  is  the  outlook  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
with  respect  to  this  present  world!  We  wonder  betimes  at  the  smallness  of  its 
success,  and  the  hard  struggle  it  ever  has  for  its  existence..  But  why  should  we 
wonder  ?  Think  of  the  might  of  the  devil  and  his  angels,  of  their  malignity  against 
it,  and  how  deeply  the  whole  world  is  in  their  possession.  All  that  we  can  do  is  to 
work  on,  like  Paul,  if  that  by  any  means  we  may  "  save  some."  2.  Note  the  true 
source  of  dislike  and  hatred  to  the  Church.  There  be  many  who  think  more  of 
anything  on  earth  than  of  the  Church.  They  may  consider  it  well  enough  to  have 
its  services  when  they  die,  but  whilst  they  live  they  only  neglect  and  despise  it,  and 
are  only  offended  and  enraged  when  its  claims  are  passed.  They  forget  that  this  is 
the  very  spirit  of  the  devil.  And  every  one  who  dislikes,  hates,  or  persecutes  the 
Church  and  people  of  God,  has  in  him  the  devil's  spirit,  acts  the  devil's  will,  and  is 
one  of  the  devil's  children.  3.  Note  what  a  lesson  of  rebuke  and  duty  addresses 
itself  to  Christians  from  the  devil's  example.  He  never  rests  from  his  murderous  en- 
deavours. He  stops  for  no  losses,  succumbs  to  no  adversities,  desists  for  no  hindrances, 
turns  back  from  no  encounters,  and  surrenders  not  even  to  the  Almighty's  judgments, 
so  long  as  he  has  liberty  to  act  or  time  in  which  to  operate.  Look  at  the  untiring 
energy  of  hell  for  destruction,  and  learn  wisdom  for  eternal  life.  4.  Finally,  note 
the  pressing  need  there  is  to  keep  ourselves  awake  and  in  readiness  for  the  coming 
of  our  Lord.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  devil  is  come  down  unto  you,  having  great 
wrath. — Satan  in  a  rage : — The  text  tells  us  that  the  shortness  of  Satan's  opportunity 
excites  his  wrath,  and  we  may  gather  a  general  rule  from  this  one  statement,  name- 
ly, that  in  proportion  as  the  devil's  time  is  shortened  his  energy  is  increased,  and 
we  may  take  it  as  an  assured  fact  that  when  he  rages  to  the  uttermost  his  opportunities 
are  nearly  over.  He  hath  great  wrath,  knowing  that  his  time  is  short.  I  hope  there 
will  be  something  of  instruction  in  this,  and  somewhat  of  comfort  for  all  those  who 
are  on  the  right  side.  Now,  what  is  true  on  a  great  scale  is  true  in  the  smaller  one. 
Missionaries  in  any  country  will  generally  find  that  the  last  onslaught  of  heathenism 
is  the  most  ferocious.  We  will  find,  whenever  the  truth  comes  into  contact  with 
falsehood,  that  when  error  is  driven  to  its  last  entrenchments  it  fights  for  life,  tooth 
and  nail,  with  all  its  might ;  its  wrath  is  great  because  its  time  is  short.  The  same 
truth,  will  apply  to  every  individual  man.  When  God  begins  His  great  work  in  a 
sinner's  heart,  to  lead  him  to  Christ,  it  is  no  bad  sign  if  the  man  feels  more  hatred 
to  God  than  ever,  more  dislike  to  good  things  than  before  :  nor  need  we  despair  if  he 
is  driven  into  greater  sin.  The  ferocity  of  the  temptation  indicates  the  vigour  with 
which  Satan  contends  for  any  one  of  his  black  sheep.  He  will  not  lose  his  subjects 
if  he  can  help  it,  and  so  he  puts  forth  all  his  strength  to  keep  them  under  his  power. 
The  general  fact  is  further  illustrated  in  the  cases  of  many  believers.  There  are 
times  when  in  the  believer's  heart  the  battle  rages  horribly,  when  he  hardly  knows 
whether  he  is  a  child  of  God  at  all,  and  is  ready  to  give  up  all  hope.  He  cannot  pray 
or  praise,  for  he  is  so  distracted;  he  cannot  read  the  Scriptures  without  horrible 
thoughts.  It  seems  as  if  he  must  utterly  perish,  for  no  space  is  given  him  in  which 
to  refresh  his  heart,  the  attacks  are  so  continual  and  violent.  Such  dreadful  excite- 
ments are  often  followed  by  years  of  peace,  quiet  usefulness,  holiness,  and  communion 
with  God.  Satan  knows  that  God  is  about  to  set  a  limit  to  his  vexations  of  the  good 
man,  and  so  he  rages  extremely  because  his  opportunity  is  short.  I.  How  does  Satan 
KNOW  WHEN  HIS  TIME  IS  SHORT  IN  A  SOUL  ?  He  watches  ovcr  all  souls  that  are  under 
his  power  with  incessant  maliciousness.  He  goeth  about  the  camp  like  a  sentinel, 
spying  out  every  man  who  is  likely  to  be  a  deserter  from  his  army.  1.  He  perceives 
that  his  time  is  short,  and  I  suppose  he  perceives  it  first  by  discovering  that  he  is  not 
quite  so  welcome  as  he  used  to  be.  The  man  loved  sin,  and  found  pleasure  in  it,  but 
now  sin  is  not  so  sweet  as  it  was,  its  flavour  is  dull  and  insipid.  The  charms  of  vice 
are  fading,  and  its  pleasures  are  growing  empty,  vain,  and  void,  and  this  is  a  token 
of  a  great  change.  The  adversary  perceives  that  he  must  soon  stretch  his  dragon 
wings  when  he  sees  that  the  heart  is  growing  weary  of  him  and  is  breaking  away 
from  his  fascinations.  2.  He  grows  more  sure  of  his  speedy  ejectment  when  he  does 
not  get  the  accommodation  he  used  to  have.  The  man  was  once  eager  for  sin,  he 
went  in  the  pursuit  of  vice,  hunted  after  it,  and  put  himself  in  the  way  of  temptation, 
and  then  Satan  reigned  securely  ;  but  now  he  begins  to  forsake  the  haunts  where  sin 
walks  openly,  and  he  abandons  the  cups  of  excitement  which  inflame  the  soul.  3. 
One  thing  more  always  makes  Satan  know  that  his  time  is  short,  and  that  is  when 
the  Holy  Spirit's  power  is  evidently  at  work  within  the  mind.    Light  has  come  in, 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  the  sinner  sees  and  knows  what  he  was  ignorant  of  before :  Satan  hates  the  light 
as  much  as  he  loves  the  darkness,  and  like  an  owl  in  the  daylight  he  feels  that  he  is 
out  of  place.  Joyful  tidings  for  a  heart  long  molested  by  this  fierce  fiend !  Away, 
thou  enemy,  thy  destructions  shall  soon  come  to  a  perpetual  end !  II.  Inasmuch  as 
the  shortness  of  his  tenure  excites  the  rage  of  Satan,  we  must  next  observe  how  hb 
DISPLAYS  HIS  GREAT  WRATH.  His  f  ury  rages  differently  in  different  persons.  On  some 
he  displays  his  great  wrath  by  stirring  up  outward  persecution.  The  man  is  not  a 
Christian  yet,  he  is  not  actually  converted  yet,  but  Satan  is  so  afraid  that  he  will  be 
saved  that  he  sets  all  his  dogs  upon  him  directly.  The  devil  will  lose  nothing  through 
being  behind.  He  begins  as  soon  as  ever  grace  begins.  Now,  if  the  grace  of  God  be 
not  in  the  awakened  man,  and  his  reformation  is  only  a  spasm  of  remorse,  it  is  very 
likely  that  he  will  be  driven  back  from  all  attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace  by 
the  ribald  remarks  of  the  ungodly,  but  if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  really  been 
knocking  at  his  door,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  has  begun  to  work,  this  opposition  will 
not  answer  its  purpose.  Much  worse,  however,  is  the  devil's  other  method  of  show- 
ing his  wrath,  namely,  by  vomiting  floods  out  of  his  mouth  to  drown,  if  possible,  our 
new-born  hope.  When  the  hopeful  hearer  as  yet  has  not  really  found  peace  and  rest, 
it  will  sometimes  happen  that  Satan  will  try  him  with  doubts  and  blasphemies,  and 
temptations  such  as  he  never  knew  before.  The  tempted  one  has  been  amazed  and 
has  said  to  himself,  "  How  is  this  ?  Can  my  desire  after  Christ  be  the  work  of  God  ? 
I  get  worse  and  worse.  I  never  felt  so  wicked  as  this  till  I  began  to  seek  a  Saviour." 
Yet  this  is  no  strange  thing,  fiery  though  the  trial  be.  At  such  time,  also,  Satan  will 
often  arouse  all  the  worst  passions  of  our  nature,  and  drive  them  into  unwonted  riot. 
The  awakened  sinner  will  be  astonished  as  he  finds  himself  beset  with  temptations 
more  base  and  foul  than  he  has  ever  felt  before.  He  will  resist  and  strive  against  the 
assault,  but  it  may  be  so  violent  as  to  stagger  him.  He  can  scarcely  believe  that  the 
flesh  is  so  utterly  corrupt.  The  man  who  is  anxiously  seeking  to  go  to  heaven  seems 
at  such  a  time  as  if  he  were  dragged  down  by  seven  strong  demons  to  the  eternal 
deeps  of  perdition.  He  feels  as  if  he  had  never  known  sin  before,  nor  been  so  com- 
pletely beneath  its  power.  The  Satanic  troopers  sleep  as  a  quiet  garrison  while  the 
man  is  under  the  spell  of  sin,  but  when  once  the  heart  is  likely  to  be  captured  by 
Immanuel's  love  the  infernal  soldiery  put  on  their  worst  manner,  and  trample  down 
all  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  the  soul.  Satan  may  also  attack  the  seeker  in  another 
form,  with  fierce  accusations  and  judgments.  He  does  not  accuse  some  men,  for  he 
is  quite  sure  of  them,  and  they  are  his  very  good  friends ;  but  when  a  man  is  likely 
to  be  lost  to  him,  he  alters  his  tone  and  threatens  and  condemns.  III.  How  are  we 
TO  MEET  ALL  THIS  ?  How  must  Satan  be  dealt  with  while  he  is  showing  his  great 
wrath  because  his  power  is  short  ?  1.  I  should  say,  first,  if  he  is  putting  himself  in  this 
rage,  let  us  get  him  out  all  the  more  quickly.  If  he  would  remain  quiet  even  then 
we  ought  to  be  anxious  to  be  rid  of  his  foul  company,  but  if  he  shows  this  great  rage 
let  us  out  with  him  straight  away.  2.  And  the  next  thing  is,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot 
get  him  out  by  our  own  unaided  efforts,  let  us  cry  to  the  strong  for  strength,  who  can 
drive  out  this  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  Jesus  Christ, 
and  as  soon  as  that  life  comes  away  goes  this  prince  of  darkness  as  to  his  domination 
and  reigning  power.  3.  One  more  comfort  for  you,  and  it  is  this — the  more  he  rages 
the  more  must  your  poor,  troubled  heart  be  encouraged  to  believe  that  he  will  soon  be 
gone.  I  venture  to  say  that  nothing  will  make  him  go  sooner  than  your  full  belief 
that  he  has  to  go.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  16.  The  eaxth  helped  the  woman. — The  help  of  the  earth  : — I.  Some  illus- 
TBATioNS  OF  THIS  HELP.  How  the  earth  has  rendered  help  to  God's  people  some- 
times by — 1.  Its  wide  extent.  The  primeval  going  forth  of  Abram,  the  father  of  the 
faithful,  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  was  in  all  probability  owing  to  the  discomfort, 
distress,  and  may  be  actual  danger,  for  one  who  had  renounced  idolatry  as  he 
had,  should  he  Uve  any  longer  in  an  idolatrous  land.  And  so  he  went  far  away 
westward  into  the  land  God  showed  him.  And  the  Exodus  was  another  going 
forth  into  a  far-off  land,  that  the  people  might  worship  God  as  they  could  not 
do  in  Egypt.  Pharaoh  would  not  let  the  people  go,  but  God  compelled  him, 
and  the  colonisation  of  Palestine  by  Israel,  and  all  that  followed  from  that,  was 
the  result.  2.  The  division  of  the  earth  into  separate  states  and  kingdoms 
has  been  another  great  help  to  the  Church  of  God  in  her  days  of  distress.  Egypt 
was  a  refuge  for  the  infant  Christ  when  Herod  would  have  put  Him  to  death.  One 
of  the  most  awful  results  of  the  wide-spread  Eoman  Empire  was  that  its  law — 
which  in  its  evil  days  was  but   the  will  of   the  reigning  emperor,  and  he  too 


CHAP.xn.]  REVELATION.  455 

often  one  of  the  vilest  of  men — ran  everywhere,  and  shut  off  all  retreat  from 
its  oppression.  Its  agents  met  the  fugitive  on  every  shore,  till  the  world  became 
one  vast  prison-house  for  the  oppressed.  The  shattering,  therefore,  of  that  empire, 
and  its  division  into  separate  states,  were  a  vast  relief  for  mankind,  of  which  the 
Church  of  God  often  took  advantage  in  her  days  of  trouble.  That  the  rule  of  that  red 
dragon,  like  Herod,  could  not  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  Judaea,  was  a  blessing  that 
Joseph  and  the  mother  of  our  Lord  were  quick  to  avaU  themselves  of  by  fleeing 
into  Egypt.  And  what  a  thrilling  story  of  the  earth's  helping  the  people  of  God 
has  been  the  result  of — 3.  The  earth's  varied  surface  and  form.  From  the  days  when 
David  clambered  up  the  rocky  steeps  of  the  mountains  of  Judsea,  and  hid  himself 
from  Saul  in  inaccessible  caves  and  fastnesses,  in  secret  places  on  the  mountain 
sides,  and  amid  their  frost-covered  summits — places  known  only  to  himself  and 
his  trusty  followers — from  those  days  right  down  to  the  days  when  the  Waldenses 
and  the  Christians  of  Piedmont  found  shelter  from  the  murderous  might  of  Papal 
Rome — more  fierce  and  dragon-like  than  even  Pagan  Eome — amid  Alpine  snows  and 
crags  and  cliffs,  whither  the  blood-stained  hand  of  their  adversaries  could  not 
reach  them,  though  they  often  tried.  Well  did  the  earth's  mountain  fortresses  help 
God's  people  then.  Nor  may  we  overlook — 4.  The  earth's  natural  phenomena. 
The  ten  plagues  of  Egypt  were  but  intensified  forms  of  such  phenomena,  as  any  one 
resident  long  enough  in  that  ancient  land  will  know.  The  dividing  of  the  Ked  Sea 
was  by  "  a  strong  east  wind."  The  defeat  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  like  the  pesti- 
lence which  slew  the  Assyrian  army  that  threatened  Hezekiah  and  his  city  and 
people — what  were  these  but  earth's  phenomena,  bidden  of  God  to  go  to  the  help  of 
His  people,  as  assuredly  they  did  ?  And  how  often  have — 5.  The  politics  of 
earth  been  used  in  a  similar  way.  In  303  a.d.,  an  edict  was  passed,  requiring 
Christians  to  deliver  up  their  sacred  books  under  pain  of  death.  This  was  speedily 
followed  by  another,  dooming  all  Christian  ministers  to  prison.  And  that  was 
immediately  followed  by  a  third,  authorising  the  inflicting  on  them  the  most  savage 
tortures,  uiiless  they  would  sacrifice  to  the  heathen  gods.  In  the  year  304,  a  fourth 
edict  was  issued,  ordering  the  magistrates  to  force  all  Christians  to  offer  sacrifices 
to  the  gods,  and  to  employ  all  sorts  of  torment  if  they  refused.  But  relief  was  at 
hand.  In  the  year  306  Constantine  rose  to  power,  and  soon  after  to  imperial  power. 
In  the  year  313  liberty  was  proclaimed  to  the  Christians,  "  and  in  the  year  324  the 
Emperor  publicly  declared  himself  a  Christian."  Thus  did  the  great  earthly 
power  of  Kome  help  the  people  of  God  by  swallowing  up  for  ever  the  pagan  and 
long-persisted-in  persecution,  which  had  been  designed  to  overwhelm  them  in  its 
full,  fierce-flowing  flood.  6.  Nor  have  the  passions  of  earth  played  an  unimpor- 
tant part  in  this  same  helping  of  God's  people.  God  "  maketh  the  wrath  of  man 
to  praise  Him  " ;  and  not  man's  wrath  only,  but  his  avarice,  and  at  times  even 
baser  passions  still.  As  when  that  sensual  Persian  tyrant,  for  the  sake  of 
Esther,  hurled  down  the  party  of  Haman  and  exalted  that  of  Mordecai. 
And  our  own  English  Henry  the  Eighth  leaned  not  a  little  towards  the  re- 
formed faith  because  by  means  of  it  the  beautiful  woman  he  desired  might 
more  readily  become  his.  And  what  a  sad  and  deplorable  part  did  the  lust 
after  the  Church  lands  play  in  persuading  the  peerage  and  gentry  of  that 
age  to  pull  down  the  old  Church  and  put  up  the  new.  Granted  weU-nigh  all 
that  can  be  said  against  that  old  Church  and  for  the  new,  still  the  dark  fact 
remains  that  avarice  and  greed  were  the  governing  motives  of  not  a  few.  And 
that  wild  outburst  of  a  nation's  rage,  known  as  the  French  Eevolution,  how 
that  availed  to  put  down  the  cruelties  of  the  Inquisition,  and  all  those  tortures 
whereby  the  Church  of  Kome  had  been  wont  to  force  men  to  acknowledge  her 
sway.  And  finally — 7.  The  men  of  this  world — such  as  the  apostle  speaks  of 
as  "earthly"  and  worse — then  the  very  children  of  earth  have  once  and  again 
helped  the  children  of  God,  the  chosen  of  the  Lord.  Even  Pilate  wanted  to. 
And  what  a  list  of  like  unspiritual,  worldly  men,  who  yet  have  proved  friends 
of  Christ,  the  apostolic  records  furnish — Gallio,  Lysias,  Festus,  Felix,  Agrippa,  and 
the  centurions  and  officers  of  the  guard,  who  were  kind  to  Paul,  and  stood 
between  him  and  his  enemies.  And  it  has  been  so  ever  since.  In  the  life  of 
Lord  Shaftesbury,  we  find  him  frequently  telling  how,  in  one  and  another  of  his 
benevolent  but  at  that  time  most  difficult  enterprises,  he  was  helped  far  more 
by  those  who  made  no  profession  of  religion  at  all  than  by  not  a  few  of  those  who 
did.  And  to-day,  do  we  not  know  many  who  refuse  the  Christian  creed  but  who 
will  yet  do  Christian  deeds  and  help  Christians  therein  ?  And  the  reason  is  that 
God  has  implanted  in  man  Conscience,  the  instinctlTe  love  of  justice  and  goodness, 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

and  hatred  of  injustice  and  oppression ;  and  because  the  Church  appeals  to  these 
principles  she  often  gets  the  good  will  of  worldly  men,  and  their  practical  help  and 
sympathy.  II.  Some  teachings  of  this  help.  1.  How  inevitably  it  will  be  needed. 
God's  faithful  people  being  what  they  are,  and  Satan  being  what  he  is,  how  can  it 
but  be  that  he  should  persecute  the  Church  of  God  ?  2.  It  will  surely  be  forth- 
coming. All  men  and  all  material  agencies  are  ministers  of  God  for  good  to  His 
people,  if  He  pleases  to  make  them  so.  And  He  will  do  this  if  need  arise.  3.  How 
blessed  to  be  of  the  number  of  those  for  whom  God  will  do  this.  It  is  His  faithful 
Church,  His  true  people,  for  whom  He  will  do  this.  Are  we  of  their  number  ?  {S. 
Comcay,  B.A.)  Nature  serving  Christianity  : — I.  By  its  grand  revelations. 
1.  There  is  God.  All  nature  proclaims  not  only  His  existence,  but  His  personality, 
unity,  spirituality,  wisdom,  goodness,  power.  2.  There  is  law.  3.  There  is 
mediation.  4.  There  is  responsibility.  5.  There  is  mystery.  II.  By  its  moral 
IMPRESSIONS.  1.  Sense  of  dependence.  2.  Eeverence.  3.  Contrition.  4.  Wor- 
ship. HI.  By  its  multiplied  inventions.  1.  Merchandise.  2.  Press.  3.  Paint- 
ing. 4.  Music.  5.  Government.  (D.  Thomas,  D,D.)  Science  and  the  Church  : 
— The  •'  woman  "  mentioned  here  is  a  symbol  of  the  New  Testament  Church.  She 
is  represented  as  pursued  by  the  devil,  who  ejects  from  his  mouth  a  river  of  water 
after  her.  Just  then  the  earth  opens ;  the  deluge  is  swallowed  up  ;  so  the  woman 
is  saved.  Hence  we  catch  from  so  rapidly  flitting  a  vision  at  least  as  much  as 
this  welcome  proposition :  Nature  is  on  the  side  of  genuine  religion ;  science  is 
ready  now  to  be  helpful  to  the  Church  when  it  needs  succour.  I.  Hence  it  might 
be  wise  for   us,  in   the  first  place,  to  allude  to  the  somewhat  ungenerous  way 

IN   WHICH   the    woman   HAS   BEEN   TREATING   THE   EARTH   IN   MODERN   TIMES.      There   iS 

a  violence  of  prejudice  in  the  minds  of  a  great  many  of  God's  people  which  is 
almost  inexplicable.  From  the  outset  they  suspect  all  offers  of  help  from  the  world 
of  natural  research.  Now  the  day  has  passed  for  a  mere  show  of  bigotry. 
Whoever  considers  that  his  opinions  are  settled  beyond  modification  is  simply  a 
conceited  or  obstinate  debater.  Now  if  skilled  philosophers  have  to  be  modest  in 
dealing  with  each  other,  how  much  more  wary  ought  the  rank  and  file  of  mere 
theologians  to  be !  For  they  are  a  class  of  scholars  who  do  not  claim  to  be  experts  in 
the  details  of  the  material  sciences.  Is  it  not  time  that  religious  people  recognise 
the  lapse  of  time  and  the  growth  of  ages  ?  Some  things  have  come  to  light  which 
Turretin  and  Luther  and  Calvin  did  not  know,  or  they  very  likely  would  never 
have  written  what  they  did.  The  true  prudence  for  us  all  would  be  to  welcome  aid 
in  any  difficult  field  of  labour^  no  matter  whence  it  comes.  A  fact  is  a  fact,  as  a 
diamond  is  a  diamond,  and  both  are  valuable ;  and  it  would  be  sheer  waste  of  time 
to  inquire  jealously  the  colour  of  the  first  searcher  who  found  either.  There  was  a 
day  when  the  gold  and  silver  of  Pharaoh's  people  went  into  the  heaps  of  money 
contributed  for  building  the  tabernacle  of  God  in  the  wilderness  ;  there  need  be  no 
fear  but  that  all  the  discoveries  of  every  science  in  turn,  as  soon  as  they  have 
become  fixed  and  tabulated  by  scientists  themselves,  will  range  their  valuable 
brightness  where  they  can  best  beautify  the  temple  of  God's  Word.  II.  Now  let 
us  seek  some  few  of  the  forms  of  actual  help  which  natural  science  of  every 
SORT  has  already  FURNISHED,  thus  exhibiting  its  real  friendliness.  1.  To  begin 
with,  let  us  consider  its  answer  to  what  have  beeen  termed  the  "  unconscious 
prophecies"  of  the  Bible.  2.  In  the  second  place,  the  Church  has  occasion  to 
thank  science  for  its  help  in  giving  a  constant  rebuke  to  impertinent  cavils 
which  petulant  objectors  are  in  the  habit  of  urging.  Voltaire  founded  an  argument 
against  the  truthfulness  of  the  Old  Testament  upon  what  he  termed  the  ignorant 
mistakes  of  the  writer  who  composed  the  various  books.  Among  these  he 
instanced  the  expression  of  Solomon  in  the  Proverbs,  "  Look  not  upon  the  wine  when 
it  is  red,  when  it  giveth  his  colour  in  the  glass."  Now,  said  this  witty  Frenchman, 
Solomon  could  not  have  been  the  wise  man  he  was  reputed  to  be,  or  else  he  would 
have  been  fully  informed  that  glass  was  not  known  as  a  substance  untQ  long  after 
he  was  dead ;  it  was  invented  subsequent  to  the  date  of  his  somewhat  fragmentary 
book.  Now  science  stepped  into  the  controversy,  not  precisely  for  the  Bible's 
sake  in  that  sceptical  age,  but  for  its  own.  Chronology  settled  that  Solomon 
lived  about  1004  b.c.  Then  a  historian  proved  that  glass  was  in  use  among  the 
Egyptians  far  before  that  time,  for  he  had  found  pictures  of  glass-blowing  in  the 
ruins  of  the  temples  sculptured  on  the  stone  slabs.  Archaeology  followed  with  an 
exhibition  of  a  glass  signet  engraved  with  a  monarch's  name,  and  dated  1500  b.c.  ; 
this  was  discovered  in  ancient  Thebes.  And  to  this  there  was  added  the  fact, 
announced  by  the  expedition  just  returning  from  Egypt,  that  there  were  glass  beads 


CHAP,  xu.]  REVELATION.  467 

buried  with  the  mummies  they  began  to  unroll.  At  this  moment  also  came  in 
philology  to  say  that  Solomon  had  not  in  fact  mentioned  the  name  of  glass  at 
all  in  his  proverb ;  the  original  Hebrew  word  meant  "  cup,"  a  mere  drinking- 
vessel  of  any  material ;  the  wise  man  had  warned  against  wine  "  when  it  giveth 
its  colour  in  the  cup."  Thus,  again,  four  distinct  sciences  in  turn  took  up  the 
contemptible  little  cavil  and  silenced  it.  It  seems  a  waste  of  energy ;  but  this 
has  often  been  the  result  of  such  a  demonstration.  3.  Once  more :  consider 
science  as  exemplifying  its  friendliness  for  the  Church  in  the  illustration  of 
difficult  doctrines  which  it  furnishes.  It  does  not  matter  where  we  seek  for 
examples.  The  resurrection  of  the  body,  perhaps  one  of  the  doctrines  of  the  New 
Testament  the  most  mysterious,  was  quite  a  fresh  revelation  to  the  world  at 
large.  It  is  a  hard  matter  of  belief  to  many  a  perplexed  mind  now.  But  it  is 
no  harder  than  the  mystery  of  a  tree's  growth  from  the  seed ;  and  this  is  the 
figure  which  the  Apostle  Paul  used  for  his  help  in  explaining  it.  There  are 
reserves  in  science  into  which  the  all-wise  Creator  retires  as  He  does  in  revelation. 
4.  In  the  fourth  place,  let  us  be  ready  to  acknowledge  the  help  we  receive  in  the 
reconciliation  which  science  offers  concerning  the  paradoxes  of  reason  and  faith  in 
the  Scriptures.  We  find  in  the  revealed  Word  the  statement  that  our  Maker  is 
**  the  Light  of  the  world."  Vivid  indeed  is  the  illustration  offered  by  optical  science 
just  at  this  point.  Here  are  three  primary  colours  entering  in  to  produce  perfect 
white — the  blue,  the  yellow,  and  the  red.  The  natural  philosopher  places  before 
our  eyes  a  broad  disk  of  metal ;  he  paints  on  it  segments  of  colour  in  due 
proportion,  running  from  circumference  to  centre  and  ending  at  a  point ;  then  he 
whirls  the  disk  hke  a  wheel  on  its  axis;  the  colours  disappear,  and  the  metal 
shines  whiter  than  a  silver  shield.  We  cannot  understand  it ;  but  the  fact  is  the 
three  elements  have  blended  into  one  whole :  three  are  one,  and  one  is  three.  Then 
the  lecturer  tells  us  that  the  red  gives  off  all  the  heat  in  the  sun's  ray,  the  yellow 
spreads  all  the  illumination,  the  blue  effects  the  chemical  changes  in  living 
organisms.  He  says  we  read  by  the  yellow  ray,  but  we  should  shiver  without 
the  red,  and  we  should  wither  and  die  without  the  blue.  They  are  all  needed 
as  colours,  and  they  all  work  together  as  one  beam  of  sunlight.  Now  it 
is  not  contended  that  this  is  an  explanation  of  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of 
the  trinity  of  God's  being ;  but  this  we  do  insist  upon :  whenever  cavillers 
demand  scientific  reasoning,  because  they  cannot  believe  what  they  do  not 
understand,  it  does  seem  as  if  we  might  wait  for  them  to  play  their  little 
arithmetical  puzzles  about  three  are  one  and  ond  is  three  off  upon  the  spectrum 
before  they  try  them  on  the  Trinity.  And  we  go  a  single  step  farther.  We  cannot 
help  thinking,  in  view  of  such  astonishing  analogies,  that  it  must  have  been 
infiinite  wisdom  which  said,  "  God  is  light."  6.  Finally,  let  us  consider  the 
friendliness  of  science  as  manifested  in  the  positive  help  which  it  offers  in  the 
interpretation  of  obscure  passages  in  the  Word  itself.  Think  of  the  helpfulness 
of  Layard's  discoveries  at  Nineveh  to  the  students  in  explaining  the  books  of 
Jonah  and  Nahum.  So  of  the  other  forgotten  cities  and  empires;  we  are  to 
read  concerning  the  fall  of  Tyre,  the  overthrow  of  Egypt,  the  extinction  of  Edom, 
the  destruction  of  Babylon,  in  the  light  of  late  investigations  of  the  ruins  in  those 
lands,  all  made  in  the  interest  of  science.  (G.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  earth 
helps  the  woman  : — The  names  of  worldly-minded  subscribers  to  religious  societies 
prove  how  greatly  the  earth  helps  the  woman.  {W.  Wayte  Andreio,  M.A.)  The 
dragon.  .  .  went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant. — War  against  the  remnant : — 
1.  We  see  that  the  dragon's  wrath  against  the  woman  breaks  out  in  war :  which 
shows  us,  that  even  so  wrath  or  any  sin  harboured  in  the  heart,  will  at  last  break 
forth  in  action.  Cain.  2,  We  see  who  is  the  principal  author  of  the  bloody 
wars  and  massacres  that  have  been  in  sundry  nations.  3.  It  is  said  that  he 
went  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed :  to  show  us  hereby  the  insati- 
able blood-thirstiness  of  Satan  and  his  instruments  :  who,  when  they  had  killed  the 
Lord's  witnesses  and  so  many  more,  yet  cannot  rest  till  in  like  manner  they  have 
killed  the  remnant.  4.  This  seed  of  the  woman  is  described  from  keeping  of  the 
commandments  of  God,  and  having  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ :  by  this  mark, 
therefore,  let  us  try  ourselves  if  we  be  of  this  number  who  are  the  members  of 
Christ's  true  Church  ;  to  wit,  if  we  hold  fast  the  profession  of  the  truth  constantly, 
and  make  our  practice  or  conversation  conform  thereunto.    {Wm,  Guildy  D.D.) 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 


CHAPTER  Xin. 

Vebs.  1-18.  A  beast  rise  up  out  of  the  Bea..—The  domain  of  antichrist ;— L  It 
HAS  A  MANiTOiiD  DEVELOPMENT.    In  the  commerce  of  the  world,  in  the  government 
of  the  world,  in  the  campaigns  of  the  world,  in  the  literature  of  the  world,  in  the 
religions  of  the  world,  antichrist  appears  in  aspects  as  hideous,  and  in  a  spirit  as 
savage  and  blasphemous  as  the  monsters  depicted  in  this  vision.     11.  It  has  one 
MASTER-spiBiT.     1.  He  is  cndowcd  with  tremendous  power.     2.  His  grand  pursuit 
is  moral  mischief.     He  promotes — (1)  Blasphemy  ;  (2)  Deception ;  (3)  Destruction. 
He  has  no  fight  with  fiends,  but  with  saints.     3.  His  sphere  is  co-extensive  with 
the  world.    Wherever  falsehood,  dishonesty,  impurity,  revenge  are,  there  he  is. 
And  where  are  they  not  ?   4.  However  great  his  influence,  he  is  under  a  restraining 
law.    5.  His  mission  will  ultimately  prove  self-ruinous.     In  every  act  the  devil 
performs,  he  is  forming  a  link  in  that  adamantine  chain  that  shall  bind  him,  not 
merely  for  a  thousand  years,  but  for  ever.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  two  wild 
beasts ;  or,  the  world  and  its  wisdom  : — I.  The  antichristian  world  answers  to  the 
first  of  the  wild  beasts  of  which  we  here  read.     See  the  resemblance.    Eome  and 
Nero's    were  not  more  exact.      1.  It  has    assumed  successive  forms.    "  Seven 
heads "  we  read  of,  and  they  denote  the  multiplication  and  succession  of  hostile 
powers  arrayed  against  the  Church  of   God.     2.  And  it  has  ever  had  immense 
strength.     "  Ten  horns,"  and  these  encircled  with  diadems,  telling  how  the  world- 
spirit  has  ever  made  use  of  the  princes  and  potentates  of  earth  to  work  its  will. 
3.  And  it  has  ever  raged  against  the  Church  as  a  wild  beast.     Under  all  its  forms 
it  has  hated  the  people  of  God.    From  Pharaoh  even  to  the  last  of  the  persecutors 
it  has  been  the  same.     4.  And  its  deadly  wounds  heal  (ver.  3).     If  its  dominion 
be  overthrown  in  a  given  locality,  or  in  your  heart,  do  we  not  know  how  the  evil 
spirit,  who  has  left  for  a  while,  comes  back?    5.  It  is  popular.     "All  the  world 
wondered  after,"  and  "worshipped."      6.  And  it  blasphemes   still.     It  claims 
Divine  power.     7.  And  it  wages  war  and  wins  (ver.  7).    Let  families.  Churches, 
congregations,  tell  how  this  war  has  been  waged  in  tneir  midst,  and  how  some, 
often  many,  of  their  most  hopeful  members  have  fallen.     8.  And  none  but  those 
who  are  reaUy  Christ's  withstand  (ver.  6).     Yes,  we  are  sent  forth  as  sheep  amid 
wolves.     II.  The  wisdom  of   this  world  answers   to  the  second  "  beast."    St. 
James  tells  us  that  "  this  wisdom  descendeth  not  from  above,  but  is  earthly, 
sensual,  devilish."    This  monster  (ver.  11)  is  seen  to  ascend  from  "  the  earth,"  as 
St.  James  tells.    In  chap.  xix.  20  it  is  called  the  "false  prophet."   1.  It  is  said  to 
have  "  deceived."    It  deceives — (1)  By  its  innocent  appearance,  its  lamb-like  look. 
True,  it  had  ten  horns,  but  they  meant  nothing,  so  small,  so  slight,  so  incapable  of 
injury.     So  this  wisdom.     No  one  would  ever  suspect  it  of  being  a  fierce  beast.    It 
is  known  as  modern  thought,  science,  philosophy,  liberal  culture — lamb-like  words 
whom  none  would  suspect  to  harbour  iU.    (2)  By  its  words,  so  subtle  and  serpentine. 
"  He  spake  as  a  dragon,"  that  is,  as  a  serpent,  as  did  the  "old  serpent."    So  this 
wisdom  of  the  world  is  plausible,  popular,  prevalent.     But  it  further  deceives — (3) 
By  its  "  lying  wonders"  (ver.  14).     The  juggleries  and  tricks  of  heathenism,  its 
magic  and  sorcery,  explain  St.  John's  words.     Have  not  most  eminent  names, 
most  wonderful  discoveries,  most  famous  reputations,  been  amongst  the  rewards  it 
has  given  ?    2.  Its  falsity  may  be  detected.     See,  then — (1)  It  is  an  alliance  with 
the  God-defying  world  (cf.  vers.  12-15).    Mere  brute  force  could  not  get  on  without 
the  tricks  and  frauds  which  this  lamb-like,  lying  thing  concocts  and  displays.    The 
first  beast  would  be  powerless  without  the  cunning  of  the  second.     And  here  is  a 
test  for  us.     Do  we  find  that  any  set  of  opinions,  any  new  beliefs  and  maxims  we 
may  have  adopted,  are  such  as  the  godless  and  antichristian  world  choose  and 
cherish  as  of  great  advantage  to  them  ?     Can  they  claim  them  as  on  their  side  ? 
If   so,  that  is  a  very  suspicious  fact.      (2)  It  transforms  you  into  the  world's 
likeness  (see  ver.  16).     On  the  forehead  or  on  the  right  hand  the  mark  of  this  beast 
was  to  be.     {S.  Conway,  B.A.)         His  deadly  wound  was  healed. — His  deadly 
wound    was    healed : — Who   would    have    suspected    this    inference    from    these 
premises  ?    But  is  not  this  the  lively  emblem  of  my  natural  corruption  ?     Some- 
times I  conceive  that,  by  God's  grace,  I  have  conquered  and  killed,  subdued  and 
slain,  maimed  and  mortified  the  deeds  of  the  flesh :  never  more  shall  I  be  molested 
or  buBfeted  with  such  a  bosom  sin :  when,  alas  1  by  the  next  return  the  news  is,  it 
is  revived  and  recovered.     Thus  tenches,  though  grievously  gashed,  presently 
plaster  themselves  whole  by  that  slimy  and  unctuous  humour  they  have  in  them ; 


CHAP,  xin.]  REVELATION,  459 

and  thus  the  inherent  balsam  of  badness  quickly  cures  my  corruption — not  a  scar 
to  be  seen.  I  perceive  I  shall  never  finally  kill  it,  till  first  I  be  dead  myself. 
{Thomas  Fuller,  D.D.)  All  the  world  wondered  after  the  beast. — Admiration 
of  the  beast : — Can  you  not  hear  the  words  coming  across  all  these  centuries  from 
the  lips  of  two  Roman  youths,  talking  with  each  other,  as  they  lounge  together  in 
the  Forum  ?  They  had  noble  thoughts  once  ;  they  had  heard  of  the  deeds  of  their 
fathers  ;  they  had  dreamed  that  there  might  be  some  possible  good  for  their  age. 
But  they  had  become  sottish,  licentious,  gamblers,  ^d  one  more  gigantically 
sottish,  licentious,  gambling  than  themselves  has  become  their  ideal  of  what  is 
desirable  and  possible.  Who  is  like  to  him?  Who  can  make  war  with  him? 
These  two  youths  fairly  represent  the  age  on  which  they  have  fallen.  There  is  no 
originality  in  them.  They  think  what  every  one  else  thinks.  ■■^  Their  private  opinion 
is  the  public  opinion  of  the  city  and  of  the  world.     {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  To  make  war  with  the  saints. — War  with  the  saints : — Observe — 
1.  A  war  proclaimed;  the  beast  makes  war  upon  the  saints,  by  bloodshed  and 
persecution,  and  by  the  force  of  those  weapons  overcomes  them  ;  that  is  to  outward 
appearance  and  in  the  opinion  of  the  world.  But  really  do  the  saints  overcome  him 
by  their  patience  under  sufferings,  and  by  adhering  to  the  truth.  2.  The  large 
extent  of  the  beast's  power  that  was  given  him,  namely,  over  all  kindreds,  tongues, 
and  nations.  Christ's  flock  is  a  little  flock,  compared  with  antichrist's  herd  :  how 
wrong  a  note  then  is  multitude  of  the  right  Church  ?  3.  That  as  the  power  of 
the  beast  is  universal,  so  is  the  worship  also.  "  All  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall 
worship  him."  4.  We  have  a  number  excepted,  "  Whose  names  are  written  in  the 
book  of  life."  Christ  has  His  number  of  faithful  ones,  who  are  not  defiled  by 
antichrist's  pollutions ;  a  number  whose  conversations  are  in  heaven.  5.  The 
title  here  given  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  He  is  styled  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  (W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  The  Lamb  slain  from  the  foun- 
dation  of  the  world. — Christ  sacrificed  in  eternity  : — I.  The  things  that  abe  to 

HAPPEN     IN     THE     UNIVERSE     IN     THE     MOST     DISTANT    FUTUBE     ABE     TO    GOD    AS   FACTS 

albeady  accomplished.  1.  God's  intelligence  is  infinite.  2.  God's  purposes  are 
unfrustrable.  H.  The  pbinciple  of  self-sacbificing  love  is  an  etebnal  prin- 
ciple IN  THE  CBEATioN.  1.  It  is  the  loot  of  the  universe.  2.  It  is  typified  in  all 
material  existences.  3.  It  agrees  with  the  moral  constitution  of  the  soul,  which  is 
so  formed — (1)  That  it  can  recognise  nothing  as  morally  praiseworthy  that  does  not 
spring  from  it.  (2)  Its  conscience  can  approve  of  no  act  of  its  own  that  is  not 
inspired  by  it.  (3)  Its  happiness  can  be  realised  only  as  it  is  controlled  by  it. 
in.  Redemption  is  no  aftebthought  in  the  abbangements  of  the  univebse. 
IV.  OuB  planet  was  pbobably  fobmed  fob  the  special  pubpose  of  becoming  thb 
theatbe  of  God's  bedemptivb  love  to  man.  Small  in  bulk  as  our  planet  is, 
compared  with  that  of  other  orbs  that  roll  in  splendour  under  the  eye  of  God,  it 
has  a  grand  moral  distinction.  Its  dust  formed,  its  fruit  fed  the  body  of  the  Son 
of  God.  Here  He  lived,  laboured,  suffered,  and  was  buried,  and  here  His  grand 
work  is  being  carried  on.  If  it  be  moral  facts  that  give  importance  to  places, 
is  there  a  more  important  spot  than  this  earth?  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Eternal 
atonement : — The  prevalent  opinion  no  doubt  has  been  that  the  atonement  is  simply 
an  historic  fact,  dating  back  now  some  fourteen  hundred  years ;  and  that  only  the 
purpose  of  it  is  eternal.  But  Johann  Wessel,  the  great  German  theologian,  who  died 
only  six  years  after  Martin  Luther  was  born,  got  hold  of  the  idea  that  not  election 
only,  but  atonement  also  is  an  eternal  act.  And  this,  it  seems  to  me,  is  both 
rational  and  Scriptural.  Eternal  election,  profoundly  considered,  requires  eternal 
atonement  for  its  support.  Both  are  eternal,  as  all  Divine  reahties  are  eternal. 
And  so  the  relationship  of  God  to  moral  evil  stands  forth  as  an  eternal  relationship. 
Not  that  evil  is  itself  eternal ;  but  God  always  knew  it  and  always  felt  it.  It  may 
help  our  thinking  in  this  direction  to  remember  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
creation  itself  is  eternal  ;  not  independently  eternal,  but,  of  God's  will,  dependently 
eternal.  There  must  nothing  be  said,  or  thought,  in  mitigation  of  the  ethical 
verdict  against  moral  evil.  The  hatefulness  of  it,  no  matter  what  its  chronology 
may  be,  is  simply  unspeakable.  Wrong  doing  is  the  one  thing  nowhere,  and 
never,  to  be  either  condoned  or  endured.  Nor  should  any  attempt  be  made  to  get 
at  the  genesis  of  moral  evil.  The  beginning  of  it  is  simply  inconceivable.  The 
whole  thing  is  a  mystery,  and  must  be  let  alone.  Moral  evil  is  not  eternal ;  or 
ihere  would  be  two  infinities.  Nor  is  it  a  creature  of  God;  or  God  would  be 
divided  against  Himself.     And  yet  it  had  the  Divine  permission,  whatever  that 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

may  be  imagined  to  have  been.  Practically,  historic  sin  finds  relief  in  historic 
redemption.  Apparently,  there  was  little,  if  any,  interval  between  the  two.  But 
the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  suggests  a  far  sublimer 
theodicy.  We  are  taken  back  behind  the  human  ages,  behind  all  time,  into  awful 
infinite  depths,  into  the  very  bosom  of  the  Triune  God.  Trinity  is  another  name 
for  the  self-consciousness,  and  self-communion  of  God.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Spirit  are  vastly  more  than  the  revelation  of  God  to  man ;  they  are  the  revelation 
of  God  to  Himself,  and  the  intercourse  of  God  with  Himself.  They  suggest 
infinite  fulness  and  richness  of  being.  Our  scientific  definitions  of  God  do  not 
amount  to  much.  What  we  need  is  to  see  God  in  the  life,  both  of  nature  and  of 
man.  God  creates,  governs,  judges,  punishes,  redeems,  and  saves ;  but  love  is  the 
root  of  all.  This  yearning,  grieved,  and  suffering  God  is  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ:  Son  of  God,  Son  of  Mary.  This  sinless 
child  should  have  had  no  sins  of  His  own.  His  sorrows  could  have  been  only 
those  old  eternal  shadows  of  permitted  sin.  The  Cross  on  which  He  died,  flinging 
out  its  arms  as  if  to  embrace  the  world,  lifted  up  its  head  toward  the  Lamb 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Our  hearts  now  go  back  to  Calvary  ;  and 
from  Calvary  they  go  up  to  God.  One  word  more.  This  stupendous  idea  of 
eternal  atonement  carries  with  it  the  idea  of  universal  atonement.  Whatever  it 
was,  and  is,  it  must  needs  have  been  infinite.  No  magnitude  of  sin,  no  multitude 
of  sinners,  can  bankrupt  its  treasury  of  grace.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  is  its 
everlasting  refrain.  "  He  that  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 
{R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)  The  Lamb  slain  : — L  The  designation  here  given  to 
the  Saviour.  He  is  called  "the  Lamb."  This  is  a  most  appropriate  title, 
since  we  look  upon  a  lamb  as  the  emblem  of  innocence,  gentleness,  and  submission ; 
qualities  of  goodness  in  which  the  blessed  Redeemer  was  preeminent,  and 
fairer  than  the  children  of  men.  IL  The  slaughter.  "The  Lamb  slain."  The 
slaughtered  Lamb  was  a  prominent  element  in  the  Jewish  ritual,  and  a  standing 
type  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  whose  obedience  unto  death  procured  the  life  of  the 
world.  There  were  three  remarkable  instances  of  this  under  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  The  first  is  the  case  of  Abraham  in  offering  his  son  Isaac.  St.  Paul 
tells  us  that  this  was  a  figure  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.  The  second 
distinct  instance  of  the  typical  allusion,  is  the  paschal  lamb.  This  is  shown 
by  the  observation  of  St.  Paul,  "  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us ;  therefore 
let  us  keep  the  feast."  The  third  instance  in  which  this  animal  is  used  as  a  type 
of  Christ  was  on  the  daily  sacrifice.  HI.  The  date  of  this  transaction — "  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world."  How  is  this  to  be  understood  ?  1.  He  was  slain  in 
the  purpose  of  God.  Contingency  with  man  is  certainty  with  God.  Purpose  and 
accomplishment  are  the  same  with  Him.  2.  Not  only  in  purpose  but  in  type  is 
the  doctrine  true.  3.  He  was  so  in  effect.  {American  National  Preacher.)  The 
place  of  the  Cross  in  the  world : — The  Lamb  is  said  to  have  been  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  It  was  not  the  result  of  an  accident ;  it  was  not  the 
result  of  an  emergency;  it  was  something  involved  in  the  plan  of  the  creation 
itself — a  design  of  its  being.  Its  first  stone  was  laid  with  a  view  to  the  develop- 
ment of  the  sacrificial  life.  Was  St.  John,  then,  an  optimist,  or  a  pessimist?  In 
the  worldly  sense  of  these  words  he  was  something  different  from  either,  and 
something  which  admitted  a  truth  in  both.  On  the  one  hand  he  holds  with  the 
worldly  optimist  that  all  things  do  work  for  the  highest  good ;  the  universe  ie  to 
him  the  product  of  love.  But  on  the  other  hand,  just  because  it  is  the  product  of 
love,  he  could  never  admit  that  it  is  a  field  for  self-gratification.  He  found  in  it  a 
sphere  that,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  day,  disappointed  every  selfish 
hope,  wrecked  every  ship  that  sailed  only  for  its  own  cargo.  And  why  so  ?  Because 
to  him  the  essence  of  God  was  love.  If  God  be  love,  the  highest  good  must  be  to 
be  made  in  the  image  of  love.  St.  John  asked  himself  how  that  could  be  done  on 
the  Greek  principle  of  self-indulgence,  or  the  Jewish  principle  of  a  physical  Messiah. 
He  felt  that  if  the  end  of  life  were  simply  to  wear  purple  and  fine  Unen,  and  fare 
sumptuously  every  day,  and  if  life  itself  were  amply  suited  to  such  an  end,  then 
life  was  incompatible  with  love.  This  world,  in  short,  is  to  St.  John  a  development 
and  an  upward  development;  but  it  is  a  development  of  self-sacrifice.  The 
Apocalypse  has  been  called  a  sensuous  book ;  it  is  to  my  mind  the  least  sensuous 
book  in  the  Bible.  It  describes  the  process  of  the  ages  as  a  process  of  self-surrender. 
This,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  the  passage,  "  The  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world."  It  means  that  Christ  was  all  along  the  goal  of  creation,  and  that 
all  creation  is  a  making  for  Christ.     More  particularly,  it  means  that  the  line  of 


CHAP,  xm.]  REVELATION.  461 

this  world's  progress  has  been  a  development  of  self-sacrifice.  It  seems  to  me  that 
in  this  last  point  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse  has  come  nearer  to  a  philosophy  of 
history  than  all  who  went  before  him.  If  you  take  any  other  line  of  progress  you 
will  fail,  in  my  opinion,  to  prove  that  there  has  been  an  advance  in  the  march 
from  the  old  to  the  new.  Shall  we  take  intellect  ?  Do  we  feel  that  the  amount  of 
mind  force  is  greater  in  the  modern  Englishman  than  it  was  in  the  ancient  Greek  ? 
It  would  be  difficult  to  feel  it,  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  prove  it :  are  Plato  and 
Aristotle  inferior  to  the  best  intellects  among  us?  Shall  we  take  imagination? 
Have  we  reached  the  architectural  conception  which  planned  the  pyramids? 
Have  we  outrun  the  triumphs  of  Greek  sculpture  ?  Have  we  surpassed  the  poetry 
of  Homer  ?  Have  we  sustained  the  fame  of  the  medieeval  painters  ?  Have  you 
ever  considered  how  much  of  invention  is  itself  due  to  the  spread  of  the  unselfish 
principle  ?  Why  have  the  great  ages  of  discovery  been  the  ages  after  Christ  ?  Is 
it  not  just  because  Christ  has  been  before  them  ?  Is  it  not  because  the  spirit  of 
sacrifice  has  awakened  man  to  the  wants  of  man  ?  The  times  of  self-seeking  were 
not  the  times  of  invention.  St.  John  says  creation  is  moving  toward  a  type — a 
lamb  slain,  and  it  is  moving  toward  that  type  in  a  straight  line — the  line  of 
sacrifice.  It  is  climbing  to  its  goal  by  successive  steps  which  might  be  called  steps 
downward — increasing  limitations  of  the  self-life.  To  what  extent  did  St.  John 
see  this  ?  He  saw  in  visible  nature  a  series  of  gospel  pictures  ;  everything  seemed 
to  live  only  by  losing  itself.  He  saw  the  waves  of  the  sea  of  Patmos  passing  into 
waves  of  hght ;  he  beheld  the  waves  of  light  passing  into  eddies  of  the  sea.  It 
seemed  to  him  that  even  in  that  lonely  spot  God  had  inscribed  upon  the  walls  of 
nature  the  image  of  a  cross.  By  and  by,  before  the  eyes  of  the  seer  there  flashed 
a  higher  order  'of  creation,  and  it  was  clothed  in  the  same  garb — the  robe  of 
sacrifice.  He  passed  from  the  pictorial  representation  of  sacrifice  in  nature  to  its 
actual,  though  involuntary,  representation  in  animal  life.  The  very  reference  to  a 
slain  lamb  is  a  reference  to  an  animal  sacrifice.  How  did  St.  John  reconcile 
himself  to  that  spectacle  of  an  involuntary  sacrifice  of  the  animal  life  prescribed  by 
the  Old  Testament  ?  He  said  it  was  a  type  of  Christ.  If  sacrifice  be  the  law  of 
the  highest  being,  it  is  desirable  to  reach  it.  You  can  only  reach  anything  by  a 
repeated  experience  of  it.  There  passed  before  him  the  natural  sacrifices  of  the 
human  heart.  I  believe  that  the  cares  of  the  heart  prevent  every  man  from  living 
the  full  amount  of  his  natural  years.  What  is  the  difference,  then,  between  the 
sacrifice  of  the  animal  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  man  ?  It  is  an  inward  difference  ; 
the  obligatory  has  become  the  voluntary.  What  has  made  it  voluntary?  It  is 
love,  a  force  to  which  in  the  animal  world  nothing  exactly  corresponds,  a  force 
which  adds  to  the  sacrifice,  and  at  the  same  time  helps  to  bear  it.  And  yet  merely 
natural  love  is  far  from  having  reached  the  goal.  It  is  noble ;  it  is  beautiful ;  but 
it  is  not  the  topmost  triumph.  The  mother's  love,  the  brother's  love,  the  husband's 
love,  the  son  and  daughter's  love,  are  each  and  all  the  search  for  something  kindred 
to  ourselves.  St.  John  looks  out  for  a  vaster  type — a  love  that  can  come  where 
there  is  no  kindred,  no  sympathy.  He  seeks  a  love  that  shall  strive  for  the  survival 
of  the  unfittest — the  blood  of  a  spotless  soul  that  can  wash  the  sins  of  the  absolutely 
impure.  This  is  to  John  the  perfect  type  of  altruism — the  Lamb  that  was  slain. 
It  is  the  progress  towards  this  type  that  constitutes  to  St.  John  the  philosophy  of 
history.     (G.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  He  that  leadeth  Into  captivity  shall  go  into  captivity. — Retribution  on 
the  enemies  of  the  Church  : — Observe  here — 1.  That  this  acclamation,  "  If  any  man 
have  an  ear,  let  him  hear,"  is  added  in  Scripture  when  something  required 
a  spiritual  understanding  to  discern  the  meaning.  Let  him  consider  what  is  here 
revealed  concerning  this  beast,  and  take  heed  that  he  be  not  found  amongst  the 
number  of  the  worshippers  of  it.  2.  The  consolation  here  given  to  the  saints  from 
the  consideration  of  God's  just  retribution  to  His  and  their  enemies,  "He  that 
leadeth  into  captivity  shall  go  into  captivity,"  that  is,  the  beast  who  has  brought 
many  of  the  saints  into  captivity  shall  himself  at  length  be  taken  captive  (chap.  xix. 
20).  With  what  measure  antichrist  metes  to  others  it  shall  be  measured  to  him 
again  ;  God  has  as  many  ways  to  hurt  His  Church's  enemies  as  they  have  to  hurt 
His  people.  3.  The  end  and  design  of  God  in  suffering  antichrist's  rage  to  break 
forth  against  the  Church  ;  it  is  for  the  trial  of  the  Church's  faith  and  patience. 
Note — (1)  That  none  can  stand  under  or  bear  up  under  sufferings  like  saints.  (2) 
That  under  great  sufferings  saints  themselves  will  have  great  occasion  for  the 
exercise  of  faith  and  patience.     (3)  That  the  faith  and  patience  of  the  saints  will  be 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

made  very  conspicuous  by  great  and  sharp  sufferings.  (4)  That  faith  and  patience 
must  accompany  each  other  in  suffering  times.  Patience  is  the  soul's  shoulder  to 
bear  what  is  afflictive  at  present :  faith  is  the  Christian's  eye  to  discover  a  glorious 
deliverance  to  come ;  where  no  patience  is  it  is  a  token  of  no  faith ;  and  where  no 
faith  is  there  will  appear  great  impatience.  Behold,  then,  the  faith  and  patience 
of  the  saints.     (IF.  Burkitt,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Another  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  earth. — The  second  beast : — 
The  antichrist,  though  an  individual,  is  not  alone.  He  not  only  has  the  ten 
sovereignties  working  into  his  hand  with  all  "  their  power  and  strength,"  but  he 
has  a  more  intimate  and  more  potent  companion,  hardly  less  remarkable  than  him- 
self, duplicating  his  power,  and  without  whom  he  could  not  be  what  he  is.  This 
second  beast  has  "  two  horns  like  a  lamb."  Horns  are  the  symbols  of  power  ;  but 
these  horns  have  no  diadems,  and  are  like  the  horns  of  a  gentle  domestic  animal. 
Political  sovereignty,  war,  conquest,  and  the  strength  of  military  rule  are  therefore 
out  of  the  question  here.  This  beast  is  a  spiritual  teacher,  and  not  a  king  or 
warrior.  His  power  has  a  certain  softness  and  domesticity  about  it,  which  is 
sharply  distinguished  from  the  great,  regal  horns  of  the  first  beast,  although  in 
reality  of  the  same  wild  beast  order,  and  belonging  to  the  same  dragon  brood. 
What,  then,  are  we  to  understand  by  these  two  lamblike  horns  or  the  twofold  power 
of  this  beast  ?  Taking  the  whole  history  of  all  religions,  true  and  false,  from  the 
beginning  until  now,  and  searching  for  the  elements  of  their  hold  on  men's  minds, 
their  power,  it  will  be  found  to  reside  in  two  things,  which,  in  the  absence  of  better 
terms,  we  may  call  naturalism  and  supernaturalism,  that  is,  the  presence  of 
revelations,  or  what  are  accepted  as  revelations,  from  the  superior  powers,  and  held 
to  be  Divine  and  binding  ;  or  conclusions  of  natural  conscience  and  reason,  deemed 
sacredly  obligatory  because  believed  to  be  good  and  true.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive 
on  what  other  foundation  a  religion  can  rest ;  and  analysis  will  show  that  on  one 
or  the  other  of  these,  or  on  both  combined,  all  religions  do  rest,  and  must  rest. 
Here  is  the  seat  of  their  strength,  their  power,  whether  true  or  false,  the  horns  by 
which  they  push  their  way  to  dominion  over  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  They 
are  just  two,  and  no  more.  As  a  religionist,  therefore,  this  beast-prophet  could 
have  but  two  horns.  But  he  has  two  horns,  and  hence  both  the  two  only  powers  in 
a  religion ;  therefore  he  is  at  once  a  naturalist  and  a  supernaturalist — a  scientist 
and  a  spiritualist — a  rationalist,  yet  asserting  power  above  ordinary  nature  and  in 
command  of  nature.  In  other  words,  he  claims  to  be  the  bearer  of  the  sum  total 
of  the  universal  wisdom,  in  which  all  reason  and  all  revelation  are  fused  into  one 
great  system,  claimed  to  be  the  ultimatum  of  all  truth,  the  sublime  and  absolute 
universeology.  And  professing  to  have  everything  natural  and  supernatural  thus 
solved  and  crystallised  as  the  one  eternal  and  perfect  wisdom,  he  must  necessarily 
present  himself  as  the  one  absolute  apostle  and  teacher  of  all  that  ought  to  com- 
mand the  thought,  faith,  and  obedience  of  man.  The  same  helps  to  a  right  idea  of 
the  further  particular  concerning  this  beast,  to  wit,  that,  though  having  but  the  two 
horns  like  a  lamb,  he  yet  speaks  like  a  dragon.  He  is  lamblike  in  that  he  proposes 
to  occupy  only  the  mild,  domestic,  and  inoffensive  position  of  spiritual  adviser. 
What  more  gentle  and  innocent  than  the  counselling  of  people  how  to  live  and  act 
for  the  securement  of  their  happiness  1  But  the  words  are  like  the  dragon,  in  that 
such  professions  and  claims  are  in  fact  the  assumption  of  absolute  dominion  over 
the  minds,  souls,  consciences,  and  hearts  of  men  to  bind  them  irrevocably,  and  to 
compel  them  to  think  and  act  only  as  he  who  makes  them  shall  dictate  and 
prescribe.  Only  to  the  eternal  God  belongs  such  a  power  ;  and  when  claimed  by 
a  creature  is,  indeed,  the  speech  of  the  devil,  the  spirit  of  hell  usurping  the  place 
and  prerogatives  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hence,  also,  in  so  far  as  this  beast  is  able  to 
maintain  and  enforce  these  prophetic  claims,  "  he  exerciseth  all  the  authority  of 
the  first  beast."  There  is  no  more  complete  or  exalted  dominion  under  the  sun 
than  such  a  sway  over  the  intellect  and  will  of  universal  humanity.  The  first 
beast,  in  all  his  imperial  power,  has  no  greater  authority  than  the  common 
acknowledgment  of  such  claims  would  give.  When  this  is  exercised  all  the 
authority  of  the  first  beast  is  exercised.  But  the  first  beast  is  quite  willing  that  his 
hellish  consociate  should  assert  and  press  these  claims  ;  for  the  two  are  but  different 
persons  in  the  same  infernal  trinity,  the  second  witnessing  to  the  first  as  the  Spirit 
witnesseth  to  the  Son.  And  a  most  efficient  minister  does  this  false  prophet  prove 
to  be.  Eight  times  it  is  written  of  him  that  *'  he  causeth."  First,  we  have  the 
statement  that  "  he  causeth  the  earth  and  those  that  dwell  in  it  to  worship  the  first 


CHAP.  XIII.]  REVELATION.  463 

beast,  whose  stroke  of  death  was  healed."  They  are  induced  to  accept  the  beast  as 
the  deity,  and  to  worship  him  as  God.  It  seems  like  a  fable.  But,  with  all  the 
weird  strangeness  of  the  record,  the  literal  realisation  of  it  is  neither  impossible  nor 
improbable.  There  is  nothing  in  it  to  which  depraved  human  nature  is  not  com- 
petent, and  even  predisposed  and  prone.  The  King  of  Parthia,  kneeling  before 
Nero,  said  to  him,  •'  You  are  my  god,  and  I  am  come  to  adore  you  as  I  adore  the 
sun.  My  destiny  is  to  be  determined  by  your  supreme  will,"  to  which  Nero  replied, 
♦'  I  make  you  King  of  Armenia,  that  the  whole  universe  may  know  it  belongs  to  me 
to  give  or  to  take  away  crowns."  It  may  be  said  that  these  were  ancient,  pagan, 
and  benighted  times,  and  that  such  abominations  can  never  again  be  palmed  upon 
mankind.  But  they  were  the  times  which  produced  our  classics.  The  same  has 
also  occurred  in  later  days  with  far  less  reason  or  apology,  and  among  those  who 
claimed  to  be  the  most  advanced  and  enlightened  of  mortals.  How  was  it  in  the 
comparatively  recent  period  of  the  French  Revolution  ?  How  was  it  with  those 
world-renowned  savants,  whose  boast  was  to  dethrone  the  King  of  heaven  as  well  as 
the  monarchs  of  the  earth  ?  Did  they  not  sing  halleluias  to  the  busts  of  Marat  and 
Lepelletier,  not  only  in  the  streets  of  Paris  and  Brest,  but  in  many  of  the  churches 
all  over  France?  How  came  it  that  Robespierre  was  named  and  celebrated  as 
a  divinity,  a  superhuman  being,  "  The  New  Messiah ! "  Can  we  blot  out  what 
Alison  and  Lacretelle  and  Thiers  have  written,  that  "  Marat  was  universaDy 
deified,"  that  the  churches  received  his  statues  as  objects  of  sacred  regard,  and  that 
a  new  worship  was  everywhere  set  up  in  their  honour  ?  Is  it  to  be  ignored  how  the 
foremost  men  of  the  nation,  in  state  ceremony,  conveyed  a  woman  in  grand  pro- 
cession to  the  Cathedral  of  Notre  Dame,  unveiled  and  kissed  her  before  the  high 
altar  as  the  Goddess  of  Reason,  and  exhorted  the  multitude  to  cease  trembling  before 
the  powerless  thunders  of  the  God  of  their  fears,  and  "  sacrifice  only  to  such  as 

this"?     (J.  A.  Seiss,  B.I).)        He  spake  as  a  dragon. — Speaking  as  a  dragon: 

The  words  remind  us  of  the  description  given  by  our  Lord  of  those  false  teachers 
who  "  come  in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  are  ravening  wolves."  {W.  Milligan, 
D.D.)  His  speech  is  as  a  dragon :— 'Not  as  the  former  beast — the  mouth  of 
a  lion,  and  "speaking  great  things" — but  rather  with  subtlety  and  feigned  per- 
suasion, as  the  old  serpent  in  paradise.  "  For  he  would  not  be  like  a  lamb,"  says 
Tichonius,  "  if  he  spake  openly  ;  he  feigns  Christianity."     {Isaac  Williams,  B.D.) 

Vers.  13-18.  Deceiveth  ...  by  the  means  of  those  miracles. — Miracles: 
a  counterfeit  supernaturalism : — Miracles  have  ever  been  the  chief  evidence  of  the 
presence  of  what  is  worshipful  and  Divine.  It  is  by  these  especially  that  men's 
faith  is  begotten  and  controlled.  It  is  by  seeing  and  experiencing  what  is  manifestly 
above  and  beyond  all  natural  human  power,  and  what  cannot  be  accounted  for  on 
natural  principles,  that  the  human  mind  is  forced  to  a  conviction  of  the  presence  of 
some  great  and  worshipful  potency  superior  to  Nature.  And  this  arch-prophet  of 
falsehood  knows  well  how  needful  and  mighty  is  the  force  of  miracles  to  establish 
his  credit,  and  to  secure  belief  in  his  claims.  The  religion  of  God  is  a  rehgion  of 
miracles,  and  to  make  his  infernal  deception  appear  the  only  true  and  rightful 
religion  he  needs  to  mimic  and  counterfeit  all  that  supernaturalism  on  which  the 
true  faith  reposes.  To  this,  therefore,  he  sets  himself,  and  becomes  one  of  the 
greatest  workers  of  signs  and  wonders  the  earth  has  ever  seen.  Nor  need  we  be 
surprised  at  this.  There  is  a  supernatural  power  which  is  against  God  and  truth, 
as  well  as  one  for  God  and  truth.  A  miracle,  simply  as  a  work  of  wonder,  is  not 
necessarily  of  God.  There  has  always  been  a  devilish  supernaturalism  in  the  world 
running  alongside  of  the  supernaturalism  of  Divine  grace  and  salvation.  "  The 
magicians  of  Egypt  also  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchantments  ;  for  they  cast 
down  every  man  his  rod,  and  they  became  serpents."  Here  was  devil  miracle  in 
imitation  of  the  Divine.  The  test  of  a  miracle  is  its  supernaturalness  ;  the  test  of 
its  source  is  the  doctrine,  end,  or  interest  for  which  it  is  wrought.  If  in  support  of 
anything  contrary  to  God  and  His  revealed  will  and  law,  it  is  no  less  a  miracle ; 
but  in  that  case  it  is  a  work  of  the  devil,  for  God  cannot  contradict  Himself  (1  John 
iv.  1-3).  It  is  also  plainly  intimated  in  the  Divine  Word  that,  in  judgment  upon 
the  wicked  world  for  its  refusal  of  Christ,  and  its  setting  at  naught  of  all  the  Divine 
miracles,  the  present  bonds  and  limitations  of  satanic  power  will  be  relaxed,  the 
devil  and  his  demons  allowed  freer  range  upon  this  planet,  and  those  in  love  with 
falsehood  and  unrighteousness  given  over  to  delusions  then  so  much  stronger  than 
ever  before  (1  Kings  xxii.  18,  22  ;  2  Chron.  xviii.  18,  22  ;  Isa.  vi.  9,  10  :  Ezek  xiv 
9  ;  Rom.  i.  21,  25,  28  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12).     {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

Ver.  16.  He  causeth  all  ...  to  receive  a  mark. — Soul-marks : — The  words  "  he 
causeth  "  clearly  ascribe  this  operation  to  the  second  beast.  If  it  had  been  the 
first  we  might  imagine  that  some  outward  mark  or  sign  was  meant,  for  that  beast 
deals  with  the  visible  and  outward.  But  this  one  stamps  an  image  on  the  souls  of 
men  ;  this  writes  a  name  on  all  their  inward  thoughts,  which  afterwards  expresses 
itself  in  their  common  daily  acts.  Men  fancy,  when  they  read  and  talk  of  some 
great  tyrant-power  which  has  established  itself  in  their  country  or  their  age,  that 
they  are  reading  and  talking  of  something  which  is  far  off  from  them.  They  can 
comment  upon  it,  measure  its  effects,  calculate  the  chances  of  its  continuance  or  of 
its  fall.  If  any  complain  of  it  as  bad  in  its  origin  or  immoral  in  its  practices,  wise 
persons  will  whisper,  "  But  it  does  not  hurt  you.  You  can  buy  and  sell  happily 
under  the  shadow  of  it.  Your  gains  are  not  seriously  lessened.  You  incur  no  great 
risks  of  loss."  And  all  the  time  these  wise  persons  are  not  aware  that  they  them- 
selves, as  well  as  those  with  whom  they  are  conversing,  have  received  the  mark  of 
this  power  on  their  foreheads  and  their  right  hands ;  that  the  image  of  it  is  graven 
in  their  hearts ;  that  they  are  showing  in  these  very  discourses  of  theirs  that  they 
bear  the  name  and  character  of  that  which  they  are  excusing.  {F.  D.  Maurice^ 
M.A.)  Animalism  :  the  mark  of  the  beast : — The  question  that  I  want  to  ask  is 
this.  Whoever  the  beast  is,  what  makes  him  a  beast  ?  What  is  the  bestial  element 
in  him,  whoever  he  be  ?  And  the  answer  is  not  far  to  find.  Godless  selfishness,  that 
is  "  the  mark  of  the  beast."  Wherever  a  human  nature  is  self-centred,  God- 
forgetting,  and  therefore  God-opposing  (for  whoever  forgets  God  defies  Him),  that 
nature  has  gone  down  below  humanity,  and  has  touched  the  lower  level  of  the 
brutes.  Men  are  so  made  as  that  they  must  either  rise  to  the  level  of  God,  or 
certainly  go  down  to  the  level  of  the  brute.  And  wherever  you  get  men  living  by 
their  own  fancies,  for  their  own  pleasure,  in  forgetfulness  and  neglect  of  the  sweet 
and  mystic  bonds  that  should  knit  them  to  God,  there  you  get  "  the  image  of  the 
beast  and  the  number  of  his  name."  And  besides  that  godless  selfishness,  we  may 
point  to  simple  animaUsm  as  literally  the  mark  of  the  beast.  He  who  lives  not  by 
conscience  and  by  faith,  but  by  fleshly  inclination  and  sense,  lowers  himself  to  the 
level  of  the  instinctive  brute-life,  and  beneath  it,  because  he  refuses  to  obey  faculties 
which  they  do  not  possess,  and  what  is  nature  in  them  is  degradation  in  us.  Look 
at  the  unblushing  sensuality  which  marks  many  "  respectable  people  "  nowadays. 
Look  at  the  foul  fleshliness  of  much  of  popular  art  and  poetry.  Look  at  the  way  in 
which  pure  animal  passion,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the 
love  of  good  things  to  eat  and  plenty  to  drink  is  swaying  and  destroying  men  and 
women  by  the  thousand  among  us.  Look  at  the  temptations  that  lie  along  every 
street  in  Manchester  for  every  young  man  after  dusk.  Look  at  the  thin  veneer  of 
culture  over  the  ugliest  lust.  Scratch  the  gentleman  and  you  find  the  satyr.  Is  it 
much  of  an  exaggeration,  in  view  of  the  facts  of  English  life  to-day,  to  say  that  all 
the  world  wanders  after  and  worships  this  beast?  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
number  of  his  name. — The  number  of  the  name  : — It  is  indeed  remarkable  that  the 
seer  should  speak  at  all  of  "  the  number  "  of  the  name  of  the  beast.  Why  not 
be  content  with  the  name  itself  ?  1.  St.  John  may  not  himself  have  known  the 
name.  He  may  have  been  acquainted  only  with  the  character  of  the  beast,  and  with 
the  fact,  too  often  overlooked  by  inquirers,  that  to  that  character  its  name,  when 
made  known,  must  correspond.  No  reader  of  St.  John's  writings  can  have  failed 
to  notice  that  to  him  the  word  "  name  "  is  far  more  than  a  mere  appellative.  It 
expresses  the  inner  nature  of  the  person  to  whom  it  is  applied.  No  man  could  know 
the  new  name  written  upon  the  white  stone  given  to  him  that  overcometh  "  but  he 
that  receiveth  it."  In  other  words,  no  one  but  a  Christian  indeed  could  have  that 
Christian  experience  which  would  enable  him  to  understand  the  "  new  name."  In 
like  manner  now,  St.  John  may  have  felt  that  it  was  not  possible  for  the  followers 
of  Christ  to  know  the  name  of  antichrist.  But  this  need  not  hinder  him  from 
giving  the  number.  The  "  number  "  spoke  only  of  general  character  and  fate ;  and 
knowledge  of  it  did  not  imply,  like  knowledge  of  the  "  name,"  communion  of  spirit 
with  him  to  whom  the  name  belonged.     (W.  Milligan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Six  hundred  three  score  and  six. — Sixes  and  sevens: — I.  The  beast 
WHOSE  NUMBER  IS  6  6  6.  The  beast  is  not  one,  but  three.  It  is  evident  the  last 
verse  sums  up  the  two  chapters,  and  gives  its  total  number  like  the  answer  in  an 
addition  sum.  1.  The  first  beast  is  the  "  great  red  dragon  "  of  chap.  xii.  He  has 
"  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  seven  crowns  upon  his  heads."  He  appears  in 
heaven  in  open  revolt  against  all  authority,  and  with  special  enmity  against  the 


CHAP,  xin.]  REVELATION.  465 

man  child.     Who  is  this  daring,  determined  fiend  who  disturbs  heaven's  peace, 
and  is  thirsty  for  the  blood  of  the  saints  ?     In  ver.  9  we  are  *told  he  is  "  that  old 
serpent,  called  the  devil,  and  Satan."     That  point  is  clear  enough  at  any  rate  ;  we 
have  heard  of  him  before.     2.  The  second  beast  rises  up  out  of  the  sea,  and  is 
Daniel's  four  beasts  (Dan.  vii.  1-8)  rolled  into  one.     Unto  this  beast  the  "  great  red 
dragon,"  the  devil,  "  gave  his  power,  his  throne,  and  great  authority."    A  throne 
means  kingship  and  a  kingdom.     He  takes  up  the  rebellion  against  God,  heaven, 
and  the  saints,  and  extends  his  authority  over  all  kindreds  and  tongues  and  nations. 
"  The  prince  of  this  world."    A  title  thrice  given  by  Jesus  Christ  to  His  adversary. 
3.  The  third  beast  rises  up  out  of  the  earth,  and  in  many  respects  differs  from  its 
fellow  beasts.     Instead  of  being  a  combination  of  terrors,  it  is  meek  and  gentle  in 
its  appearance.     Its  mild  and  innocent  looks  are  belied  by  its  words,  which  carry  its 
real  character ;  they  are  fierce,  treacherous,  and  cruel.     This  lamb-like  dragon  has 
no  throne,  neither  does  it  rule  over  conquered  peoples.     It  is  the  servant  of  the 
beast-royal.    It  is  zealous  for  his  honour,  wields  his  authority,  works  miracles  for 
his  glory,  makes  men  worship  his  image,  and  rejoices  to  lose  itself  in  the  splendour 
and  glory  of  its  lord.     4.  Here,  then,  we  see  "  the  great  red  dragon,"  and  two 
beasts,  varying  in  form  and  sphere  of  operation,  but  one  in  nature  and  purpose. 
And  their  relationship  to  each  other  is  such  as  to  suggest  at  once  the  evangelist's 
conception  of  a  trinity  of  evil  in  deadly  conflict  with  the  Divine  and  holy  Trinity  of 
good.     II.  What  is  the  significance  of  his  number  6  6  6?      The  numbers  are 
signs,  and  must  be  taken,  not  in  their  literal  or  numerical  value,  but  in  their 
symbolic  sense.     They  stand  for  something  altogether  outside  arithmetic.     For 
instance,  three  is  a  number  of  mysterious  sanctity,  and  refers  to  deities ;  four  repre- 
sents the  earth  in  all  its  four  corners  ;  and  six  is  everywhere  the  unlucky  number. 
The  Jew  dreaded  it,  and  to  this  day  there  linger  many  superstitions  about  the  sixth 
day  (Friday),  the  sixth  hour,  &c.     The  reason  given  is  that  it  falls  fatally  below 
seven,  the  emblem  of  completeness,  perfection,  totality.     Six  is  nearest  to  seven,  but 
always  falls  one  short  of  completeness.      III.   The   highest   possible    point    of 
ATTAINMENT,  APART  FROM  GoD,  IS  6  6  6.     This  admits  that  without  God  six  can  be 
reached.     In  Church  life  we  can  do  a  great  deal  without  God.     Crowded  Churches 
and  overflowing  coffers  are  no  infallible  sign  of  the  Divine  Presence.     In  individual 
reform  much  can  be  done  without   God.    I  have  known  men  give  up  drink, 
gambling,  lust,  swearing,  and  almost  every  form  of  vice,  and  reform  so  completely 
that  they  have  been  held  up  in  "  reports  "  as  miracles  of  grace ;  and  afterwards 
they  have  confessed  there  was  no  grace  in  it,  they  had  never  prayed,  nor  sought 
help  from  God.     Science  has  wrought  wonders  in  the  last  fifty  years.     If  any  one 
had  told  our  grandfathers  of  the  achievements  of  steam  and  electricity  they  would 
have  thought  him  mad    But  wonderful  as  science  is,  its  number  is  only  6.    Coming 
from  America  in  the  Augusta  Victoria,  a  clever  fellow  with  whom  I  had  had  seversJ 
talks  came  up  to  me  on  Sunday  morning.     Seeing  I  was  reading  my  Bible,  he 
expressed  surprise  that  I  read  "  that  book."    I  told  him  I  was  surprised  to  hear  him 
say  so.     '*  Oh  i  '  he  said,  "  the  world  has  grown  out  of  that  long  since."     "  In- 
deed," I  replied  ;  "  and  into  what  has  it  grown  ?  "     Then  he  extolled  the  work  of 
science.    And  I  asked  him  the  simple  question,  •'  Whence  did  you  and  I  come  ?  " 
And  he  took  me  through  the  mysteries  of  evolution,  performing  two  or  three 
intellectual  somersaults  in  the  course,  and  at  last  put  his  finger  on  the  first  form  of 
organic  life,  and  said  proudly,    "  That's  where  we  began !  "      "  Indeed,"  I  said, 
•'  and  where  did  it  begin  ?  "     Then  he  said,  "  We  come  now  to  what  is  variously 
described  as  the  First  Cause,  Eternal  Force,  and  the  Unknowable."     "  It  won't  do," 
I  said  ;  "  your  explanation  does  not  explain."     His  science  was  only  6.     I  turn  to 
my  Bible,  and  I  find  the  missing  link.     "  In  the  beginning  God  !  "     Life  has  no 
explanation  with  Him  left  out.     So  long  as  He  is  absent  the  "  one  thing  needful " 
is  lacking.     It  is  the  same  with  philosophy.     It  is  only  6.     It  needs  God  to  tell  me 
whence  I  came,  what  I  am,  and  whither  I  go.     He  alone  can  supply  what  lies 
between  "  6  "  and  "  7."     The  modern  gospel  without  God  is  only  6.     Keform  is 
popular.     Politicians  of  all  grades  vie  with  each  other  in  their  zeal  for  the  uplifting 
of  society.     All  this  is  very  well  as  far  as  it  goes ;  but  its  number  is  only  the 
number  of  the  beast.     The  gospel  of  to-day,  apart  from  Christ,  is  expressed  in  thiea 
words  :  economics,  sanitation,  education.     I  believe  in  all  three.     I  have  been  too 
long  in  the  ranks  of  the  toilers  not  to  sjnupathise  with  their  struggle  for  better  con- 
ditions of  work  and  life.      But  when  you  have  given  the  workman  the  eight-hours 
day  and  the  living  wage,  who  is  going  to  give  him  a  pair  of  legs  that  will  carry  him 
past  the  first  public-house  ?   So  also  with  sanitation.  By  all  means  let  us  have  clean 

30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

dwellings,  pure  air,  and  good  drains.  But  good  sanitation  does  not  make  saints.  It 
is  not  the  stye  that  makes  the  pig,  but  the  pig  that  makes  the  stye.  As  a  reforming 
power  sanitation  is  good  as  far  as  it  goes  ;  but  it  gets  no  farther  than  the  skin  and 
the  sewer.  Its  number  is  only  6.  Education  touches  the  man  more  directly  ;  but 
experience  has  amply  proved  how  insufi&cient  it  is  to  effect  such  radical  change  in 
men  as  will  make  them  just  and  good.  The  fact  is,  this  generation  has  fallen  in 
love  with  the  social  conditions  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  It  has  become  the  great 
ideal — the  age's  utopia.  But  it  has  not  adopted  Christ's  method  to  bring  it  about. 
It  wants  a  shorter  cut.  Christ's  method  is:  make  men  good,  and  the  "new 
creature  "  will  produce  a  new  social  order  and  a  new  world.  But  to  make  men 
good  is  such  slow,  hopeless  work  ;  so  we  will  try  making  the  world  good,  and  then 
surely  men  must  be  good.  It  did  not  work  in  the  garden  of  Eden.  Neither  will  it 
now.  Jesus  Christ  is  still  the  only  Saviour.  He  will  reconstruct  society  by 
regenerating  the  individual ;  and  the  host  of  Christian  workers,  despised  preachers 
of  the  gospel,  Sunday-school  teachers,  and  old-fashioned  people,  who  stiU  go  to 
prayer  meetings,  are,  after  all,  the  best  social  reformers  this  world  has.  They 
have  the  one  complete  gospel ;  all  others  are  but  6  6  6.  IV.  What  is  toub 
NUMBER  ?  Apply  this  to  your  own  life.  What  is  your  number  ?  Is  it  6  or  7  ? 
You  can  get  a  good  deal  out  of  a  life  of  sixes.  You  may  get  a  lot  of  real  pleasure 
out  of  life  without  religion.  But  the  best  of  the  world's  pleasure  is  only  6.  The 
provoking  thing  about  it  is  that  there  is  always  something  short.  It  never  quite 
satisfies.  Jesus  Christ  said  of  it,  **  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  water  shall  thirst 
again  " ;  and  the  more  he  drinks  the  more  he  thirsts.  But  He  gives  the  water  of 
life  that  leaves  no  thirst ;  and,  after  all,  you  never  know  what  happiness  is  till  yon 
drink  of  that  stream.  In  character,  too,  you  may  be  good  without  Christ.  I  admit 
it.  But  your  goodness  is  only  6.  A  fine  specimen  of  the  "  6  "  order  came  to  Jesus 
one  day.  He  had  kept  the  commandments ;  he  was  greatly  respected  ;  so  excellent 
was  he  that  when  Jesus  saw  him  "  He  loved  him."  But  He  said  unto  him,  "  One 
thing  thou  lackest."  Only  one,  but  it  was  the  one  thing  needful.  {S.  Chadwick.) 
The  number  of  the  beast : — The  opening  words  of  this  verse,  "  Here  is  wisdom," 
seem  almost  ironical  in  the  light  of  the  subsequent  treatment  that  the  verse  has 
received,  for  it  has  been  chosen  as  one  of  the  favourite  spots  where  sober  under- 
standing shall  be  forgotten.  The  people  that  have  been  busiest  in  reckoning  up  the 
number  of  the  beast  have,  far  from  revealing  the  wisdom  of  which  the  passage 
speaks,  only  served  to  show  us  how  foolish  and  fantastic  even  some  good  and 
earnest  men  can  be.  The  name  of  anything,  when  used  in  the  ideal  and  symbolic 
"Way  in  which  it  is  used  in  this  passage,  is  used  to  denote  its  real  and  essential  being. 
The  ideal  function  of  a  name  is  to  express  accurately  and  completely  what  the 
thing  is.  In  actual  life  names  are  very  far  from  doing  this,  but  symbolic  pictures 
deal  with  the  ideal,  and  not  the  actual.  So  the  name  of  the  beast  denotes  its  true 
nature,  its  living  collection  of  qualities.  The  number  of  the  name  gives  mystic 
indication  of  the  fate  that  lies  hidden  in  and  for  such  a  character.  It  is  the  destiny 
of  the  life  written  in  the  name.  Therefore,  while  it  is  called  "  the  number  of  the 
name  of  the  beast  "  in  one  verse,  it  is  simply  called  "  the  number  of  the  beast "  in 
another.  It  is  not  an  external  label,  an  arithmetical  puzzle,  but  is  vitally  related 
to  the  life  and  character  of  the  beast.  Now,  I  don't  think  there  can  be  the  slightest 
doubt  that  the  "  beast "  is  a  general  expression  for  the  kingdom  of  evil.  The  apt- 
ness of  the  term  needs  no  exposition.  Ferocity  and  baseness  and  all  else  that  is 
included  in  brute-force  serve  well  to  symbolise  the  fierce  and  lawless  power  of  evil. 
I.  The  kingdom  of  evil,  though  apparently  strong,  is  essentially  weak.  This 
is  the  first  truth  symbolised  by  the  number  6  6  6.  It  is  eternally  incapable  of 
becoming  7  7  7,  and  therefore  eternally  incapable  of  imperilling  the  supremacy  of 
God.  II.  The  height  of  its  power  is  the  certain  hour  of  its  downfall.  How 
vividly  the  symbols  point  out  this  !  6  6  6  almost  the  summit  of  attainment ;  but 
when  it  seems  almost  on  the  point  of  scaling  the  heavens  and  seizing  the  throne, 
out  flash  the  fierce  lightnings  from  the  heart  of  regnant  truth  and  purity,  and  the 
black  mass  is  scattered  to  the  earth  crushed  and  impotent.  It  is  the  curse  of  evil 
that  it  cannot  stop,  that  it  must  go  on  trying  to  swell  itself  out  into  the  dimensions 
of  God,  and  because  it  has  eternal  incapacity  for  reaching  such  a  magnitude,  it 
necessarily  follows  that  after  it  has  swollen  to  a  certain  point,  hke  the  frog  in  the 
fable,  it  bursts  and  collapses.  Just  like  a  bubble,  the  more  it  swells  the  nearer  it  is 
to  destruction.  The  larger  its  dimensions,  the  less  power  it  has  to  hold  itself 
together.  The  most  effectual  way  of  crushing  a  weak  and  ambitious  man  is  to  load 
him  with  power  and  responsibiUty,  for  the  weak  spirit  will  not  be  able  to  sustaia 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION,  467 

tlie  burden,  and  will  fall  under  it.  Then  his  inherent  weakness  will  be  made 
manifest,  and  the  number  of  his  name  be  revealed.  So  beastism,  or  the  kingdom 
of  evil,  can  go  so  far  and  no  further.  It  is  fatally  flawed  by  the  fact  that  its  own 
power  is  its  own  destruction.     {John  Thomas,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Ybbs.  1-13.  A  Lamb,  .  .  .  and  with  Him  an  hundred  forty  and  four  thousand. — 
The  144,000 :— I.  Who  are  tpese  144,000  ?  They  are  the  identical  144,000  sealed 
ones  spoken  of  in  chapter  vii.,  with  only  this  difference,  that  there  we  see  them  in 
their  earthly  relations  and  peculiar  consecration  ;  and  here  we  see  them  with  their 
earthly  career  finished,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  heavenly  award  for  their  faith- 
fulness. II.  What  are  the  chief  marks  or  characteristics  of  these  144,000? 
1.  The  first  and  foremost  is  that  of  a  true  and  conspicuous  confession.  They  have 
the  name  of  the  Lamb  and  the  name  of  His  Father  written  on  their  foreheads. 
This  is  their  public  mark  as  against  the  mark  of  the  worshippers  of  the  Beast. 
There  is  nothing  more  honourable  in  God's  sight  than  truth  and  faithfulness  of 
confession.  2.  Another  particular  is  their  unworldliness.  Whilst  most  people  in 
their  day  "  dwell  upon  the  earth,"  sit  down  upon  it  as  their  rest  and  choice,  derive 
their  chief  comfort  from  it,  these  are  "  redeemed  from  the  earth" — withdrawn  from 
it,  bought  away  by  the  heavenly  promises  and  the  Divine  grace  to  live  above  it, 
independent  of  it.  They  are  quite  severed  from  the  world  in  heart  and  life. 
3.  A  third  point  is  their  pureness.  "  They  are  virgins,"  in  that  they  have 
lived  chaste  lives,  both  as  to  their  faithfulness  to  God  in  their  religion,  and 
as  to  their  pureness  from  all  bodily  lewdness.  4.  A  further  quality  is  their 
truthfulness.  "In  their  mouth  was  not  found  what  is  false."  These  people 
were  truthful  in  speech,  had  also  a  higher  truthfulness.  They  have  the  true  faith; 
they  hold  to  it  with  a  true  heart ;  they  exemplify  it  by  a  true  manner  of  life.  They 
are  the  children  of  truth  in  the  midst  of  a  world  of  untruth.  HI.  What,  then,  is 
their  reward  ?  1.  Taking  the  last  particular  first,  they  stand  approved,  justified, 
and  accepted  before  God.  "  They  are  blameless."  To  stand  before  God  approved 
and  blameless  from  the  midst  of  a  condemned  world — a  world  given  over  to  the 
powers  of  perdition  by  reason  of  its  unbeUef  and  sins,  is  an  achievement  of  grace 
and  faithfulness  in  which  there  may  well  be  mighty  exultation.  2.  In  the  next 
place,  they  have  a  song  which  is  peculiarly  and  exclusively  their  own.  Though 
not  connected  with  the  throne,  as  the  Living  Ones,  nor  crowned  and  seated  as  the 
Elders,  they  have  a  ground  and  subject  of  joy  and  praise  which  neither  the 
Living  Ones  nor  the  Elders  have ;  nor  is  any  one  able  to  enter  into  that  song  except 
the  144,000.  None  others  ever  fulfil  just  such  a  mission,  as  none  others  are  ever 
sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  living  God  in  the  same  way  in  which  they  were  sealed. 
They  have  a  distinction  and  glory,  a  joy  and  blessedness,  after  all,  in  which  none 
but  themselves  can  ever  share.  3.  They  stand  with  the  Lamb  oh  Mount  Zion.  To 
be  "  with  the  Lamb,"  as  over  against  being  with  the  Beast,  is  a  perfection  of 
blessing  which  no  language  can  describe.  It  is  redemption.  It  is  victory.  It  is 
eternal  security  and  glory.  To  be  with  the  Lamb  '*  on  Mount  Zion  "  is  a  more 
special  position  and  relation.  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  Jerusalem  which  have 
never  yet  been  fulfilled.  On  His  holy  hill  of  Zion  Grod  hath  said  that  He  will  set 
up  His  King,  even  His  Son,  who  shall  rule  all  the  nations  (Psa.  ii.).  The  Lamb  is 
yet  to  take  possession  of  the  city  where  He  was  crucified,  there  to  fulfil  what  was 
written  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin  over  His  head  when  He  died.  And  when  that 
once  comes  to  pass,  these  144,000  are  with  Him,  His  near  and  particular  associates 
in  that  particular  relation  and  administration.  4.  They  are  '•  a  firstfruit  to  God 
and  to  the  Lamb,"  not  the  firstfruit  of  all  the  saved,  for  the  Liying  Ones  and  the 
Elders  are  in  heavenly  place  and  glory  above  and  before  them ;  but  a  firstfruit  of 
another  and  particular  harvest ;  the  firstfruit  from  the  Jewish  field,  in  that  new 
beginning  with  the  Israelitish  people  for  their  fathers'  sakes,  which  is  to  follow  the 
ending  of  the  present  "  times  of  the  Gentiles."  They  are  brought  to  the  confession 
of  Christ,  and  sealed  in  their  foreheads  with  the  name  of  both  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  during  the  time  that  the  rest  of  their  blood-kin  are  covenanting  with  and 
honouring  the  Antichrist  as  Messiah.    IV.  What,  now,  of  the  angel-messages  ? 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

1.  The  first  message.  That  an  angel  is  the  preacher  here  is  proof  positive  that  the 
present  dispensation  is  then  past  and  changed.  It  is  no  longer  the  meek  and 
entreating  voice,  beseeching  men  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  but  a  great  thunder  from 
the  sky,  demanding  of  the  nations  to  fear  the  God,  as  over  against  the  false  god 
whom  they  were  adoring — to  give  glory  to  Him,  instead  of  the  infamous  Beast 
whom  they  were  glorifying — to  worship  the  Maker  of  all  things,  as  against  the 
worship  of  him  who  can  do  no  more  than  play  his  hellish  tricks  with  the  things 
that  are  made  ;  and  all  this  on  the  instant,  for  the  reason  that  "  the  hour  of  judg- 
ment is  come."  2.  The  second  message.  With  the  hour  of  judgment  comes  the 
work  of  judgment.  A  colossal  system  of  harlotry  and  corruption  holds  dominion 
over  the  nations.  God  has  allowed  it  for  the  punishment  of  those  who  would  not 
have  Christ  for  their  Lord,  but  now  He  will  not  allow  it  longer.  Therefore  another 
angel  comes  with  the  proclamation  :  "  Fallen,  fallen,  the  great  Babylon,"  &c.  The 
announcement  is  by  anticipation  as  on  the  very  eve  of  accomplishment,  and  as 
surely  now  to  be  fulfilled.  The  particulars  are  given  in  chapter  xvii.  and  xviii. 
There  also  the  explanation  of  the  object  of  this  announcement  is  given.  It  is  mercy 
still  struggling  in  the  toils  of  judgment,  if  that  by  any  means  some  may  yet  be 
snatched  from  the  opening  jaws  of  hell ;  for  there  the  further  word  is,  "  Come  out 
of  her.  My  people,"  &c.  3.  The  third  message.  And  for  the  still  more  potent 
enforcement  of  this  call  a  third  angel  appears,  preaching  and  crying  with  a  great 
voice,  that  whosoever  is  found  worshipping  the  Beast  and  his  image,  or  has  the 
Beast's  mark  on  his  forehead  or  on  his  hand,  even  he  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the 
wrath  of  God  which  is  mingled  without  dilution  in  the  cup  of  His  anger,  and 
shall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  and  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascends  to  the  ages  of  ages, 
and  they  have  no  rest  day  and  night  1  It  is  an  awful  commination ;  but  these  are 
times  of  awful  guilt,  iniatuation,  and  wickedness.  And  when  men  are  in  such 
dangers,  marching  direct  into  the  mouth  of  such  a  terrible  perdition,  it  is  a  great 
mercy  in  God  to  make  proclamation  of  it  with  all  the  force  of  an  angel's  eloquence. 
The  same  is  also  for  the  wronged  and  suffering  ones  who  feel  the  power  of  these 
terrible  oppressors.  It  tells  them  how  their  awful  griefs  shall  be  avenged  on  their 
hellish  persecutors.  4.  The  fourth  message.  There  is  no  suffering  for  any  class  of 
God's  people  in  any  age  like  the  sufferings  of  those  who  remain  faithful  to  God 
during  the  reign  of  the  Antichrist.  Here,  at  this  particular  time  and  juncture,  is 
the  patience  or  endurance  of  them  that  keep  the  commandments  of  God  and  the 
faith  of  Jesus.  To  come  out  of  Babylon,  and  to  stand  aloof  from  its  horrible 
harlotries,  is  a  costly  thing.  Therefore  there  is  another  proclamation  from  heaven 
for  their  special  strengthening  and  consolation.  Whether  this  word  is  also  from 
an  angel  we  are  not  told  ;  but  it  is  a  message  from  glory  and  from  God.  And  it  is 
a  sweet  and  blessed  message.  It  is  a  message  which  John  is  specially  commanded 
to  write,  that  it  may  be  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  God's  people  of  every  age,  and 
take  away  all  fear  from  those  who  in  this  evil  time  are  called  to  lay  down  their 
lives  because  they  will  not  worship  Antichrist.  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in 
the  Lord  from  henceforth."  And  when  violence,  cruelty,  and  slaughter  are  the 
consequence  of  a  life  of  truth  and  purity,  the  sooner  it  is  over  the  greater  the 
beatitude.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  communion  of  saints  : — I.  The  communion 
of  saints  is  the  kestoration  of  fellowship  between  God  and  man.  There  are 
in  the  will  and  work  of  God  three  perfect  and  eternal  unities  :  the  unity  of  three 
Persons  in  one  nature ;  the  unity  of  two  natures  in  one  Person ;  and  the  unity 
of  the  Incarnate  Son  with  His  elect— the  Head  with  the  members  of  His  Body 
mystical.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the  communion  of  God  and  man.  "  A  Lamb 
stood,"  &c.  n.  The  communion  of  saints  is  the  restoration  of  the  fellowship 
OF  MEN  with  each  OTHER.  Our  regeneration  unites  us  to  the  Divine  Person  in 
whom  God  and  man  are  one;  and  by  union  with  Him  we  are  reunited  to  all 
whom  He  has  likewise  united  to  Himself.  As  the  vine  has  one  nature  in  root 
and  stem,  branch  and  spray,  fibre  and  fruit,  so  the  mystical  and  true  Vine  in 
earth  and  heaven  has  one  substance  and  one  life,  which  is  the  basis  of  all 
fellowship  in  love  and  will,  in  sympathy  and  action,  in  mutual  intercessions  of 
prayer,  and  in  mutual  ministries  of  power.  Lessons :  1.  Let  us  learn,  first,  that 
we  can  never  be  lonely  or  forsaken  in  this  life.  No  trial  can  isolate  us,  no 
sorrow  can  cut  us  off  from  the  communion  of  saints.  There  is  but  one  thing  in 
which  the  sympathy  of  Christ  has  no  share,  and  that  is,  the  guilt  of  wilful  sin. 

2.  And  let  us  learn  further,  by  the  reality  of  this  heavenly  fellowship,  to  live  less  in 
this  divided  world.     3.  Lastly,  let  us  learn  from  this  communion  of  saints  to  live 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  469 

in  hope.  They  who  are  now  at  rest  were  once  like  ourselves — fallen,  weak,  faulty, 
sinful,  &c.  But  now  they  have  overcome.  Only  one  thing  there  is  in  which  we  are 
unlike  them :  they  were  common  in  all  things  except  the  uncommon  measure  of 
their  inward  sanctity.  In  all  besides  we  are  as  they ;  only  it  is  now  our  turn  to  strive 
for  the  crown  of  life.  (Archdeacon  Manning,)  Havingr  His  Father's  name  written 
in  their  foreheads. — The  sublimest  hnman  distinction: — I.  It  is  the  most  beautiful. 
The  face  is  the  beauty  of  man ;  there  the  soul  reveals  itself,  sometimes  in  sunshine, 
and  sometimes  in  clouds.  The  beauty  of  the  face  is  not  in  features,  but  in  expres- 
sion, and  the  more  it  expresses  of  purity,  intelligence,  generosity,  tenderness,  the 
more  beautiful.  How  beautiful,  then,  to  have  God's  name  radiating  in  it !  God's 
name  is  the  beauty  of  the  universe.  II.  It  is  most  conspicuous.  "  In  their  fore- 
heads." It  is  seen  wherever  you  go,  fronting  every  object  you  look  at.  Godliness 
cannot  conceal  itself.  Divine  goodness  is  evermore  self -revealing.  III.  It  is  most 
HONOURABLE.  A  man  sometimes  feels  proud  when  he  is  told  he  is  like  some  great 
statesman,  ruler,  thinker,  reformer.  How  transcendently  honourable  is  it  to  wear 
in  our  face  the  very  image  of  God !  Let  us  all  seek  this  distinction.  With  the 
Father's  name  on  our  foreheads  we  shall  throw  the  pageantry  of  the  Shahs,  the 
Czars,  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  into  contempt.  {Homilist.)  The  name  on 
the  forehead : — I.  A  claim  of  appropriation.     II.  A  sign  of  office.     III.  A  mark 

OF   DIGNITY.       IV.    A   PLEDGE    OF   SECURITY.        V.    A   MEMENTO   OF   OBLIGATION.        1.    To 

remember  that  ye  are  not  your  own.  2.  To  prof  ess  openly.  3.  Faithfully  to  discharge 
functions.  4.  To  the  exercise  of  unvarying  trust.  5.  To  be  holy.  (Preacher's  Portfolio.) 
Harpers  harping  with  their  harps. — Musical  art  in  its  relation  to  Divine  worship  : — 
We  claim  for  music  the  first  place  among  the  fine  arts.  1.  Because  it  is  the  most 
ideal,  for  the  ideal  is  the  highest.  2.  Because  it  most  thoroughly  expresses  the 
various  emotions  of  the  human  mind,  and  therefore  has  the  widest  reach  over 
human  life.  3.  Because,  like  love,  it  is  eternal.  I.  What  kind  of  music  is  best? 
Universal  agreement  on  the  subject  is  not  to  be  expected,  because  the  subject  is  so 
mixed  up  with  questions  of  expediency,  of  taste,  of  knowledge.  People  have  a  right 
to  expect  that  the  canticles  and  hymns  shall  be  sung  to  music  in  which  they  can 
join,  but  devout  people  who  can  sing  must  be  taught  that,  while  spiritually  alert, 
they  must  be  vocally  silent  in  many  parts  of  Divine  worship.  II.  How  can  we  best 
SECURE  THE  BEST  MUSIC  FOR  DivTNE  WORSHIP?  As  to  the  voiccs,  assuming  that 
those  of  the  men  are  sweet  in  quality,  the  success  of  a  male  choir  may  be  said  to 
depend  on  three  things  mainly  :  First,  that  the  voices  of  the  boys  shall  be  properly 
trained,  so  that  they  produce  a  clear  and  flute-like  tone.  Secondly,  that  no  music 
should  be  attempted  which  is  beyond  the  ability  of  the  choir  to  execute.  Thirdly, 
that  nothing  be  put  on  the  programme  until  it  is  thoroughly  rehearsed  and  well 
known.  Then  let  everything  be  done  "  decently  and  in  order."  Then  will  our 
Church  music  be  a  real  help  to  devotion.  Hearts  will  be  uplifted,  voices  upraised. 
Then  will  our  sacred  songs  be  as  the  echo  of  the  angelic  songs  above,  and  God  will 
be  glorified.  (J.  W.  Shackelford,  D.D.)  Music  in  heaven  : — There  is  music  in 
heaven,  because  in  music  there  is  no  self-will.  Music  goes  on  certain  laws  and 
rules.  Man  did  not  make  these  laws  of  music  ;  he  has  only  found  them  out ;  and 
if  he  be  self-willed  and  break  them,  there  is  an  end  of  his  music  instantly  ;  all  he 
brings  out  is  discord  and  ugly  sounds.  The  greatest  musician  in  the  world  is  as 
much  bound  by  those  laws  as  the  learner  in  the  school,  and  the  greatest  musician 
is  the  one  who,  instead  of  fancying  that,  because  he  is  clever,  he  may  throw  aside 
the  laws  of  music,  knows  the  laws  of  music  best,  and  observes  them  most  reverently. 
And  therefore  it  was  that  the  old  Greeks,  the  wisest  of  all  the  heathens,  made  a 
point  of  teaching  their  children  music  ;  because  they  said  it  taught  them  not  to  be 
self-willed  and  fanciful,  but  to  see  the  beauty  of  order,  the  usefulness  of  rule,  the 
divineness  of  laws.  And  therefore  music  is  fit  for  heaven ;  therefore  music  is  a 
pattern  and  type  of  heaven,  and  of  the  everlasting  life  of  God,  which  perfect  spirits 
live  in  heaven  ;  a  life  of  melody  and  order  in  themselves  ;  a  life  of  harmony  with 
each  other  and  with  God.  (C.  Kingsley.)  They  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song, — 
The  new  song  in  the  soul  (with  Eph.  v.  19) : — The  text  from  St.  Paul  is  the  necessary 
introduction  to  the  one  from  St.  John.  They  both  suggest  for  us  the  necessary 
connection  of  inner  and  outer  harmony  of  being.  What  makes  martial  music 
noisy,  blatant,  offensive  ?  It  is  when  a  spirit  of  mere  savage  quarrelsomeness  is  in 
connection  with  it.  And  what  makes  it  majestic  and  able  to  marshal  and  lead 
hosts  ?  It  is  the  force  of  national  duties  and  earnestness,  giving  it  commanding 
power.  Our  texts  give  the  highest  Christian  form  of  this  truth,  the  connection  of 
inner  and  outer  harmony.     It  declares  that  no  man  can  learn  the  new  song  who 


470  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

has  not  been  redeemed  in  nature ;  none  can  sing  it  who  has  not  made,  first,  melody 
in  the  heart  unto  the  Lord.  First,  consider  this  in  connection  with  the  statement 
that  holiness,  goodness,  is  a  concord.  Every  virtue  is  a  harmony.  It  is  the  result 
of  combining  different  and  separate  tendencies.  It  is  complex.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a 
chord  of  the  inner  music,  formed  by  striking  different  notes  of  character  together, 
and  combining  them  in  one.  And  that  is  what  makes  virtue  so  hard  of  acquisition 
and  a  virtuous  Christian  life  such  a  struggle.  The  true  graces  are  harmonies  of 
different  notes ;  are  chords  of  character ;  not  merely  a  single  note  of  character, 
struck  with  a  single  finger,  easily,  and  at  once ;  but  each,  a  combination  of  various 
notes  of  character,  revealed  only  by  using  all  the  hand,  and  both  hands  of  life ; 
including  different  parts  and  requiring  earnest,  anxious  toil,  before  it  is  harmoniously 
and  truly  struck — struck  with  pleasure  to  the  great  Hearer,  to  whose  ear  your 
character  makes  melody  in  your  heart,  the  Lord.  Look  at  some  of  the  several 
virtues,  and  see  if  it  be  not  so ;  that  each  one  is  a  chord,  a  combination,  a  harmony. 
Take  love,  or  charity,  the  most  winning  and  prominent  of  virtues.  It  is  not 
simple.  In  its  true  height  it  is  a  combination.  It  is  composed  of  the  union  of 
self-sacrifice  and  benevolence  to  others.  Passion  is  never  true  love,  for  it  is  selfish. 
Or  take  another  human  virtue,  true  human  courage,  and  see  its  component  parts. 
Who  is  a  brave  man,  but  he  who,  keenly  alive  to  pain,  tingling  through  and 
through  with  sensitiveness  of  danger  and  love  of  life,  is  yet  also  full  of  the  sense  of 
duty  and  the  glow  of  patriotism,  and  out  of  those  two  very  different  parts  constructs 
the  delicate,  perfect  harmony  of  his  courage  ?  Or  again,  select  a  third  one  out  of 
the  catalogue  of  noble  human  characteristics ;  and  see  how,  in  its  true  form,  it  is  a 
harmony,  a  combination  of  differing  elements.  Take  freedom,  liberality,  or  liberty 
of  spirit.  There  is  a  true  and  a  false  freedom.  The  false  freedom  is  simply 
license.  It  has  only  one  thought — to  do  its  own  will,  to  get  its  own  desire,  to  be 
imbound  by  others'  will.  It  has  no  harmony.  It  has  but  a  single  note,  a  single 
tone,  and  it  is  easily  gained.  There  is  no  struggle,  no  argument  to  reconcile  and 
combine  any  differences  in  a  melody.  But  there  is  a  truer  human  liberty  than 
this ;  that  which  Paul  describes  when  he  says,  "  as  free,  but  as  servants  "  ;  one 
which  strives,  while  doing  its  own  will,  to  be  sure  that  it  is  also  doing  the  will  of 
God  and  truth ;  one  which  labours  to  combine  obedience  with  freedom,  to  be 
obediently  free  and  to  be  freely  obedient ;  to  make  it  the  freest  action  of  the  human 
will  to  do  God's  will,  and  to  obey  the  commandments  of  His  love  and  truth.  That 
is  a  hardly  gained,  but  a  very  rich  harmony.  Take  still  one  more  example  of  the 
fact  that  every  virtue,  in  its  true,  essential  form,  is  a  concord,  a  combination  of 
tones.  You  will  fiind  it  in  the  trait  of  justice.  To  be  just  is  not  a  very  simple 
operation.  It  requires,  first,  wisdom,  judgment,  intelligent  power  of  discerning 
and  discriminating.  It  requires,  secondly,  courage,  freedom  to  announce  the 
decision  of  wisdom,  without  fear  or  prejudice.  It  requires,  thirdly,  temperateness, 
power  of  self-restraint,  that  there  be  no  excess,  or  passion,  or  over-statement  of 
one's  decisions  in  the  vehemence  of  his  convictions.  Every  act  of  justice  must 
include  these  three.  But  let  us  think  on  a  little  further.  The  Bible  calls  human 
virtues  and  graces  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit."  Their  harmony  is  produced  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Have  you  ever  stood  and  wondered  at  the  wild,  sweet  music  of  an  ^olian 
harp — held  by  no  human  hands,  resonant  under  no  human  fingers,  but  swayed  by 
the  breathing  winds  of  nature,  bringing  forth  its  strange  combined  melodies  ?  Such 
an  instrument  is  the  human  soul.  Strung  and  held  by  no  human  hands,  with  the 
spiritual  breath  of  God  the  Spirit  passing  over  its  strings,  seeking  to  awaken  them 
to  speak  in  those  perfect  harmonies  which  we  call  "  virtues,"  but  which  the  Bible 
calls  "  fruits,"  or  results  "  of  the  Spirit."  Oh,  let  us  not  quench  the  Spirit.  It  is 
about  us,  fraught  and  laden  with  all  the  airs  and  strains  of  God ;  able  and  waiting 
to  call  them  out  of  our  hearts,  and  the  materials  of  our  character  and  nature.  By 
it  we  may  be  able  to  make  melody  in  our  hearts  to  the  Lord.  By  it  we  may  strive 
to  do  here  what  the  redeemed  shall  do  by  it  at  last  before  the  throne,  in  that  land 
of  the  Spirit.  We  may  learn  from  the  Spirit  that  perfect  new  song  which  can  only 
be  stmg  by  a  melodious  heart  and  nature.  {Fred.  Brooks.)  The  music  of  heaven : 
— 1.  The  heavenly  song  is  described  as  "  a  new  song."  And  it  is  so  in  that  the 
theme  of  it  will  be  new.  *'  They  sing,"  says  St.  John,  "  the  song  of  Moses  the 
servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb."  The  song  of  Moses  celebrated 
redemption  out  of  Egypt.  Here,  on  earth,  the  Church  cannot  fully  comprehend 
the  whole  development  of  the  plan  of  Divine  mercy.  The  process  is  still  going  on, 
and  not  until  all  the  saved  are  brought  to  glory  will  it  be  completed ;  and  hence 
tiiose  songs  which  most  appropriately  express  our  holiest  thoughts  and  aspirations 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  471 

here  will  not  be  suited  to  our  condition  hereafter.     "  The  new  song  "  is  adapted  to 
our  enlarged  powers  and  to  our  altered  circumstances.     2.  Continued  freshness 
will  characterise  the  song  of  heaven.     The  sweetest  strains  lose  more  or  less  of 
their  freshness  by  constant  repetition.     3.  Further,  the  music  of  heaven  shall  give 
rise  to  new  emotions.     In  the  life  of  the  celebrated  composer  Handel  it  is  stated 
that  upon  being  asked  how  he  felt  when  composing  *'  the  Hallelujah  Chorus,"  he 
replied,  "  I  did  think  I  did  see  all  heaven  before  me,  and  the  great  God  Himself." 
And  it  is  said  that  a  friend  called  upon  him  when  he  was  in  the  act  of  setting  to 
music  the  pathetic  words,  "  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  and  found  him 
absolutely  sobbing.     What  will  be  the  emotions  of  joy  and  gratitude  which  will  be 
experienced  when  all  the  redeemed,  gathered  out  of  every  nation,  and  kindred  and 
tongue  shaU  unite  as  with  one  heart  and  one  voice,  and  sing  "  the  song  of  Moses 
and  of  the  Lamb  "  ?    4.  And  then  unlike  the  songs  of  earth,  "  the  new  song  "  shall 
never  be  interrupted.     Sin,  sorrow,  death,  are  all  unknown  there !     The  song  of 
heaven  shall  be  an  eternal  song,  and  the  strains  of  the  music  of  the  heavenly 
harpers  shaU  flow  on  for  evermore !     Have  you  the  prospect  of  joining  the  heavenly 
throng  ?     {S.  D.  Hilhnan.)        A  song  of  freedom  : — A  "  new  song,"  it  is  doubtless 
the  song  of  a  new  and  higher  victory.     A  song  is,  above  all,  an  expression  of  the 
heart,  something  spontaneous,  the  irrepressible  upspringing  of  an  inward  emotion. 
A  bird  sings  because  it  cannot  help  singing,  and  because  its  little  heart  is  thrilling 
with  an  overflowing  joy  ;  and  so  they  who  sing  the  *'  new  song  "  have  had,  doubt- 
less, some  true  experience  of  a  great  good  and  joy  which  causes  them  to  sing.     I 
think  that  it  is  the  experience  of  every  thoughtful  man  that  all  the  real  misery 
springs,  in  some  way,  from  spiritual  wrong.     If  he  have  lost  friends,  which  is  one 
of  our  great  natural  griefs,  yet  if  sin  had  not  thrust  itself  into  this  sorrow,  if  the 
soul  of  the  friend  as  well  as  one's  own  had  been  perfectly  true  to  God,  and  to  right, 
one  would  find  in  the  bereavement  a  cause  to  rejoice,  for  to  the  holy  dead  God 
reveals  the  fulness  of  His  love.     It  is  the  conscious  want  of  the  love  of  God,  mani- 
festing itself  in  acts  of  selfishness,  ingratitude,  and  treason  to  truth  and  duty — it  is 
always  this  that  has  made  the  human  spirit  wail.     Selfishness  is  a  constant  pain, 
and  love  a  constant  joy.     I  do  not  deny  the  many  natural  sorrows  of  Ufe,  and  that 
they  are  sometimes  painful  beyond  human  power  to  endure,  but  we  would  be  strong 
from  a  Divine  strength  to  bear  troubles  and  sufferings  which  fall  to  our  lot  in  this 
life,  and  they  would  be  only  for  our  discipline  and  perfection,  were  we  without 
transgres'sion.     These  would  be  outside  sufferings.    But  it  is  the  feeling  that  we 
have  acted  unrighteously,  that  we  have  stained  our  soul's  honour,  that  we  have 
been  unthankful  to  the  heavenly  Father.    It  is  this  that  consumes  the  spirit  within 
us.    If  we  are  raised  for  one  instant  by  the  quick  motion  of  faith,  by  the  absorbing 
exercise  of  prayer,  by  the  unselfish  act  of  pure  obedience,  into  the  light  and  Hberty 
of  God's  presence,  we  gain  inward  freedom  and  peace,  we  experience  an  absolute 
deliverance  from  the  tyranny  of  evil,     We  may  perceive,  then,  why  the  power  of 
sin  in  our  human  nature  is  called  in  the  Scriptures  a  '•  bondage."    It  is  pure 
absolutism.     Let  the  bondsman  strive  once  to  free  himself,  to  shake  himself  loose 
from  his  bonds,  to  change  his  own  nature,  and  he  wiU  see  what  a  grasp  evil  has. 
To  be  freed  from  the  power  of  evil  would  soothe  aU  pangs,  would  wipe  away  all 
tears,  sorrow,  care,  and  would  restore  to  the  life-giving  presence  and  joy  of  God. 
Can  we  not  then  begin,  in  some  feeble  manner  I  grant,  to  perceive  or  imagine  what 
may  be  the  significance  of  the  "  new  song  "  ?    It  is  in  truth  a  song  of  freedom,  and 
we  need  not  wonder  that  it  is  represented  to  be  Uke  the  sound  of  many  waters,  the 
outpouring  of  innumerable  hearts  on  the  free  shore  of  eternity,  for  God  has  made 
the  soul  to  be  free  and  to  have  no  law  over  it  but  the  law  of  love.     There  are, 
indeed,  but  few  such  chords  that  vibrate  in  human  hearts.     Sorrow  is  one  of  these. 
Coleridge  said  that  at  the  news  of  Nelson's  death  no  man  felt  himself  a  stranger  to 
another ;  and  of   these  universal  chords,  that  of  freedom  is  also  one.     Such  a 
spontaneous  cry  rises  from  an  enslaved  nation,  whose  chains  are  broken  by  some 
God-inspired  man.    Never  shall  I  forget  the  mighty  shout  I  heard  that  went  up 
from  the  whole  people  of  Florence,  gathered  together  in  the  great  market-square  of 
the  beautiful  city  on  the  Arno,  at  the  news  of  a  decisive  victory  gained  over  the 
powerful  enemy  of  Italian  independence — Austria.     A  new,  unlooked-for  joy  poured 
into  the  hearts  of  the  suffering  and  long -oppressed  Italian  people  that  they  were  at 
length  free  !     It  made  them  one.     It  overflowed  their  hearts  with  sudden  strength, 
and  men  fell  upon  each  other's  necks  and  kissed  each  other,  and  their  joy  found 
expression  in  shouts  and  songs.     So  it  will  be  a  new  joy  in  heaven  to  be  free — to  be 
|ree  from  the  shameful  oppression  of  evil.    The  believer  may,  in  some  feeble  and 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrv. 

imperfect  measure,  in  his  best  times,  when  Christ  his  Light  is  near,  be  able  to 
conceive  of  this  state  of  entire  victory  over,  or  deliverance  from,  sin,  because  he 
has  in  the  present  life  yearnings  after  it,  and  prophecies  of  it ;  but  to  the  unrenewed 
mind  this  truth  is  not  quite  clear.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  thought  which  gives 
that  mind,  when  it  thinks  at  all,  much  uneasiness  and  confusion.  For  it  has  had 
fleeting  tastes  of  sweetness  in  this  earthly  life,  and  in  those  pleasures  into  which 
God  does  not  come,  poor  though  they  be,  and  it  fears  to  lose  those  alloyed  and 
swift-passing  experiences  of  happiness  in  being  holy.  It  would  not  release  entirely 
its  hold  upon  these,  for  fear  of  losing  its  happiness  altogether.  But  we  must  let  go 
one  to  win  the  other.  We  must  push  off  from  the  shore  of  this  world  to  gain  the 
free  shore  of  eternity ;  and  so  complete  is  the  victory  of  heaven,  that  not  even  such 
an  electric  thought  of  evil  as  has  been  described,  shall  pass  over  the  soul.  Holiness 
is  happiness.  Goodness  is  joy.  Love  is  freedom.  There  are  no  remains  of  the 
conflict  of  temptation.  The  spell  of  sin  is  broken  ;  and  as  freedom  is  one  of  those 
things  that  never  grows  old,  so  the  song  of  heaven  shall  be  a  "new  song."  II.  But 
another  and  higher  sense  remains,  in  which  it  would  seem  that  the  song  of  heaven 
is  called  a  "  new  song,"  arising  from  the  fact  that  this  heavenly  freedom  which  is 
sung,  does  not  end  in  ourselves,  in  our  freedom  or  holiness  or  joy,  but  ends 
in  Christ,  and  in  the  Divine  will  in  which  dwells  this  pure  and  mighty 
power  of    the  soul's  deliverance  from  evil.     {J.  M.  Hoppin.)  The  song    of 

the  redeemed  : — I.  Theer  character.  They  are  "  redeemed  from  the  earth." 
Eedemption,  in  their  case,  was  not  merely  virtual,  but  actual ;  not  in  price 
only,  but  also  in  power.  It  was  a  redemption  carried  into  their  personal  experience. 
Such  must  ours  be,  or  the  price  of  our  redemption  has  been  paid  for  us  in  vain. 
There  is  pardon,  finely  represented  as  implying  submission  to  God,  and  acceptance 
and  acknowledgment  by  him.  The  Father's  name  is  written  in  their  foreheads. 
There  is  confession  of  God  before  men.  They  practised  no  vmholy  concealment ; 
their  religion  was  public,  and  declared  at  all  hazards.  They  were  undefiled. 
They  were  unspotted  from  the  world,  even  its  more  prevalent  errors — 
errors  recommended  by  example,  justified  by  sophistry,  alluring  by  interest, 
and  enforced  by  persecution.  There  is  their  obedience.  This  is  impressively 
described  by  their  following  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  There  is  their 
completeness.  Sanctified  throughout,  they  were  preserved  blameless  in  spirit,  soul, 
and  body.  And  there  is  their  redemption  from  earth.  They  were  redeemed  from 
its  corporate  society,  as  the  world.  That  remained ;  they  were  chosen  out  of  it. 
They  were  redeemed  from  its  cowardly  and  selfish  principles,  by  which  truth  is 
sacrificed  to  ease  and  gain  ;  whereas  these  sacrificed  ease  and  gain  for  truth.  From 
its  example  ;  for,  while  the  multitude  were  wandering  after  the  beast,  these  were 
following  the  Lamb.  From  its  pollutions  ;  for  they  had  been  washed  from  their 
sins  by  the  blood  of  Him  who  loved  them.  From  earth  itself ;  for  they  are  now 
before  the  throne.  II.  Their  place.  "  Before  the  throne."  1.  It  is  the  place  of 
glorious  vision.  2.  It  is  the  place  of  eternal  security.  Day  is  there,  never  succeeded 
by  night.  There  is  quiet,  unbroken  by  alarm  :  the  gates  of  the  city  are  not  shut 
by  day  or  night.  There  is  life,  never  to  be  quenched  in  death.  For  ever  does  the 
river  flow  from  under  the  throne,  and  the  tree  of  life  feels  no  winter.  III.  Thb 
KEPRESENTED  ACTION.  1.  "  They  saug."  Powerful  emotions  of  joy  seek  for  outward 
expression.  This  is  one  of  the  laws  of  our  very  nature.  The  expression  will  be 
suitable  to  the  emotion.  Grief  pours  forth  its  wailings ;  joy  is  heard  in  the  modula- 
tions of  verse,  and  the  sweet  swells  and  cadences  of  music.  2.  They  sang  "  a  new 
song,"  Every  deliverance  experienced  by  the  saints  of  God  calls  for  a  new  song  : 
How  much  more,  therefore,  this,  the  final  deliverance  from  earth  !  Their  song  is 
new,  as  demanded  by  new  blessings.  John  saw  before  the  throne  "  a  Lamb,  as  it 
had  been  newly  slain."  The  phrase  intimates  that  blessings  for  ever  new  will  flow 
from  the  virtue  of  His  atonement,  and  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  perfections 
by  Him.  Nor  shall  the  song  be  new  as  to  iadividuals  only,  but  as  to  the  whole 
glorified  Church.  3.  They  sang  it  "  before  the  throne."  The  glorious  fruit  of  "  the 
travail  of  His  soul."  IV.  The  peculiarity  of  their  employment.  "  No  man  could 
learn  that  song."  Not  so  much  to  the  sound,  the  music,  of  the  song,  as  to  its 
subject,  does  this  language  refer  ;  and  such  subjects  only  can  be  turned  into  song, 
as  dwell  in  the  very  spirits  of  the  redeemed.  1.  There  are  remembered  subjects. 
The  redeemed  from  earth  recollect  the  hour  when  light  broke  in  on  their  darkness. 
2.  There  are  present  subjects.  {R.  Watson.)  Tlie  unlearned  song  of  the  redeemed  : 
— What  can  be  the  meaning  of  this  singular  announcement  of  a  song  not  to  be 
taught  even  to  the  other  inhabitants  of  heaven  ?     We  need  but  refer  to  a  familiar 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  475 

principle  of  the  mind's  operations,  whose  religious  significance  is  often  not  per- 
ceived ;  by  which  toil,  pain,  and  trial,  however  grievous  in  the  experience,  turn  to 
comfort  and  delight  in  the  retrospect.  As,  by  the  influence  of  chemical  attraction, 
the  most  glossy  white  is  brought  out  on  textures  originally  of  the  blackest  dye,  or  as 
the  mere  constant  falling  of  the  bleaching  sunlight  makes  a  dull  surface  glisten  like 
snow,  so  do  the  soul's  melancholy  passages  change  as  they  are  acted  on  by  reflection, 
and  the  darkest  threads  of  its  experience  brighten  in  the  steady  light  of  memory. 
There  are  few  enjoyments  more  exquisite  than  the  father  feels  in  telling  his  son  of 
the  hardships  of  his  early  life.  How  he  dilates  on  the  efforts  and  sacrifices  with 
which  he  began  his  career  1  But  would  he  spare  one  hard  day's  labour,  though  it 
wore  and  bent  his  frame  ?  one  hour's  thirst,  with  which  his  lips  were  parched  ? 
Not  one :  not  one  act  of  self-denial,  not  one  patient  stretch  of  endurance ;  for  all 
these,  by  this  transforming  principle,  have  become  most  pleasant  to  his  mind.  On 
the  same  principle,  we  can  understand,  without  referring  to  unworthy  motives, 
the  soldier's  interest  in  his  oft-repeated  narratives.  Oh,  the  dark  and  deadly 
scene  1  the  ground  wet  with  blood,  and  the  smoke  of  carnage  mounting  heavy  and 
slow  over  the  dead  and  the  dying  !  It  is  not  necessarily  that  his  soul  breathes  the 
spirit  of  war ;  but  it  is  that  these,  like  other  trials,  turn  to  joys,  as  viewed  from  the 
height  of  his  present  thought,  stretching  picturesquely  through  the  long  valley  of 
the  past.  The  same  principle  operates  in  the  hardships  of  peaceful  life.  The  sailor 
has  a  like  gladness  from  the  dangers  with  which  he  has  been  environed  on  the 
stormy  deep.  He  interprets  the  almost  intolerable  accidents  that  overtook  him  into 
a  good  and  gracious  providence,  and  sings  of  his  calamity,  privation,  and  fear.  So 
all  the  sweetest  songs,  and  all  the  grandest  and  most  touching  poetry,  that  have 
ever  been  on  earth  breathed  into  sound  or  written  in  characters,  have  sprung  out  of 
such  work  and  strife,  sorrow  and  peril.  And  why  should  not  a  new  song,  unknown 
even  to  the  elder  seraphs,  be  so  composed  and  framed  in  heaven,  out  of  all  life's 
trouble  and  disaster;  while  the  mercy  of  God,  the  atoning  influence  of  Christ,  all 
heavenly  help  and  guidance  that  they  have  received  in  their  struggles,  shall  add 
depth  and  melody  to  those  voices  of  the  redeemed  ?  Such  is  the  mystery  and  bounty 
of  the  Divine.  Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  God  means  not  only  to  make  us  good, 
but  to  make  us  also  happy,  by  sickness,  disaster,  and  disappointment.  For  the 
truly  happy  man  is  not  made  such  by  a  pleasant  and  sunny  course  only  of  indulged 
inclinations  and  gratified  hopes.  Hard  tasks,  deferred  hopes,  though  they  "  make 
the  heart  sick,"  the  beating  of  adverse  or  the  delay  of  baffling  winds,  must  enter 
into  his  composition  here  below,  as  they  will  finally  enter  into  his  song  on  high. 
There  is  more  than  pleasant  fancy  or  cheering  prediction  in  that  language  about 
beauty  being  given  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise 
for  the  spirit  of  heaviness  ;  for  out  of  dust  and  ashes  alone  beauty  can  grow ; 
supreme  gladness  glistens  nowhere  but  upon  the  face  where  grief  hath  been  sitting ; 
and  the  highest  praise  to  God  is  sung  when  He  hath  delivered  us  from  the  pit  of 
woe  and  despair.  The  opening  of  one  of  the  most  strangely  beautiful  flowers,  from 
the  roughest  of  prickly  and  unsightly  stems,  is  an  emblem  of  the  richest  blooming 
of  moral  beauty  and  pleasure  from  thorns  and  shapes  of  ugliness  in  the  growth  of 
the  immortal  mind.  But  there  is  a  strict  condition.  They  who  would  blend  their 
voices  in  that  happy  choir,  to  which  the  hosts  of  heaven  pause  to  listen,  must  be 
faithful  in  performing  this  toil,  in  overcoming  this  temptation,  in  enduring  this 
trial.  An  ancient  poet  says,  it  is  a  delight  to  stand  or  walk  upon  the  shore,  and  to 
see  a  ship  tossed  with  tempest  upon  the  sea  ;  or  to  be  in  a  fortified  tower,  and  see 
hosts  mingled  upon  a  plain.  But  what  is  such  pleasure  compared  with  that  felt  by 
those  who  look  down  from  the  firm  ground  of  heaven  upon  their  own  tossings  in  the 
voyage  they  have  with  a  sacred  and  religious  faithfulness  accomplished,  and  fix 
their  retrospective  eye  on  the  fight  they,  with  a  holy  obstinacy,  waged  with  their 
own  passions  and  besetting  sins?  {G.  A.  Bartol.)  The  new  song: — We  shall 
begin  our  meditation  on  this  vision  by  considering  the  occupation  of  those  referred 
to.  They  sing.  Praise  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  chief  occupation  of  the  saints  in 
heaven.  Nor  need  we  wonder  that  such  is  the  case.  They  have  passed  to  the  land 
of  pure  delight.  They  mingle  in  congenial  society.  Above  all,  they  behold  Him, 
whom  they  have  long  adored  afar  off,  and  with  Him  they  maintain  unbroken  com- 
munion. His  presence  and  voice  fill  their  hearts  with  joy,  deep  and  intense.  Nor 
does  the  inspiration  of  their  song  come  only  from  the  present ;  it  comes  also  from 
the  past.  Then  they  fully  learn  what  has  been  done  to  them  and  for  them  during 
their  earthly  journey.  This  praise,  too,  is  unceasing.  Other  engagements  and 
interests  concern  men  in  this  Ufe.     They  have  wants  that  must  be  supplied  ;  they 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

have  burdens  that  must  be  borne ;  they  have  battles  that  must  be  fought.  And 
these  urge  them  to  prayer  as  often  as  to  praise.  Even  up  to  the  Jordan's  bank  they 
must  stretch  forth  their  hands  and  raise  their  voice  in  supplication.  But,  in  that 
better  land,  they  enjoy  satisfaction  and  rest.  Full  provision  has  been  made,  and 
they  have  only  to  celebrate  the  goodness  that  has  done  it  all.  That  which  they 
sing  is  called  "  a  new  song."  It  is  heavenly  in  origin  and  character.  It  is  no 
feeble  strain  of  earth,  weak  in  thought  and  poor  in  expression.  It  far  transcends  in 
matter  and  in  form  the  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs  of  the  Church  below. 
These  were  suited  to  the  partial  knowledge  of  this  lower  sphere,  but  they  are 
inadequate  to  the  fuller  view  and  the  deeper  experience  to  which  the  redeemed  have 
risen.  Of  that  anthem  we  catch  some  echoes  in  the  revelation  which  John  has 
given  us.  It  is  a  song  of  salvation,  it  is  a  shout  of  triumph.  It  is  called  "  the  song 
of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb,"  and  this  title  is  suggestive  of  its  tenor.  From  a 
danger  greater  than  that  to  which  the  Israelites  were  exposed  have  those  who  are 
with  the  Lamb  been  delivered.  Not  from  physical  evil  or  an  earthly  enemy,  but 
from  spiritual  loss  and  death,  and  from  the  power  of  the  wicked  one,  have  they 
been  rescued.  Not  only,  therefore,  do  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  ;  they  sing  also 
the  song  of  the  Lamb.  Being  a  new  song,  it  must  be  learned  by  those  who  would 
sing  it.  But  the  text  warns  us  that  this  is  possible  only  for  those  who  have  under- 
gone a  certain  training.  Without  discipline  we  cannot  take  our  place  in  the  choir 
above,  engage  in  the  occupations,  or  enjoy  the  beauties  and  delights  of  the  Paradise 
above.  This,  indeed,  we  might  understand  apart  from  revelation.  All  experience 
combines  to  suggest  it.  In  the  material  world  everything  has  its  place  and  work, 
and  is  specially  fitted  for  filling  the  one  and  performing  the  other.  We  recognise 
in  that  sphere  the  reign  of  law.  Every  branch  of  industry  has  its  own  rules  and  its 
own  methods.  To  learn  these  an  apprenticeship  must  be  undergone.  And  this  is 
as  applicable  to  the  moral  region  as  it  is  to  the  social  and  the  intellectual.  Place  a 
man  of  dissolute  habits,  of  vicious  temper,  of  impure  thought,  of  blasphemous 
speech,  in  the  company  of  men  and  women  who  are  spiritual  in  tone,  pure  in  thought, 
reverent  in  speech,  and  what  will  his  experience  be  ?  Not  certainly  one  of  satis- 
faction and  enjoyment.  He  will  be  wretched.  He  will  long  to  escape  that  he  may 
go  to  his  own  company  and  to  his  own  place.  Now,  this  truth,  which  is  received 
and  acted  on  in  all  spheres  of  human  activity,  has  force  beyond  the  limits  of  earth. 
It  touches  the  constitution  of  things :  it  rests  on  our  nature,  and  must,  therefore, 
determine  our  experience  not  only  here  but  hereafter.  To  occupy  our  minds  with 
the  foolish,  if  not  the  wicked,  things  of  earth,  is  to  render  ourselves  incapable  of 
dealing  with  the  concerns  of  heaven  ;  that  before  we  can  even  learn  the  song  of  the 
redeemed  we  must  have  been  prepared,  for  not  every  one  can  learn  the  new  song 
that  is  being  sung  before  the  throne,  before  the  four  beasts,  and  before  the  elders. 
But  we  are  not  only  warned  that  preparation  is  required  ;  we  are  also  taught  in 
what  it  is  to  consist.  Its  general  character  may,  indeed,  be  gathered  from  what  has 
just  been  said.  We  have  been  reminded  that  to  engage  heartily  in  any  occupation 
we  must  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  its  rules  and  methods,  that  to  enjoy  any 
Bociety  we  must  have  in  some  measure  risen  to  the  attainment  of  its  members.  In 
order,  then,  to  discover  what  is  needful,  by  way  of  training,  before  we  can  join  this 
company,  enjoy  their  fellowship,  and  sing  their  song,  we  have  only  to  inquire  by 
what  features  they  are  marked.  They  are  spiritual  in  character,  they  are  with  the 
Lamb  on  Mount  Zion,  they  are  pure  and  holy.  From  this  it  foUows  that  the 
education  which  those  who  would  join  them  must  undergo  is  spiritual.  It  is  not 
Intellectual  only.  Mere  acquaintance  with  what  concerns  persons  is  not  of  necessity 
sympathy  with  them.  Only  when  knowledge  touches  heart  and  life  can  there  be 
fellowship,  for  only  then  are  companions  animated  by  the  same  spirit  and  interested 
in  the  same  subjects  and  pursuits.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  can  the  training  be 
merely  mechanical.  By  no  outward  washing  or  cleansing  can  we  free  the  soul  from 
its  foul  blot  ;  can  we  make  ourselves  pure,  worthy  to  stand  before  the  great  white 
throne  and  Him  who  sits  thereon.  The  one  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand 
who  do  learn  the  song  are  said  to  have  been  '•  redeemed  from  the  earth."  They 
have  been  "redeemed."  This  indicates  that  by  nature  they  are  not  fit  for  the 
occupation  referred  to.  The  faculty  qualifying  them  for  it  has  been  lost,  and  has  to 
be  restored.  The  dormant  faculties  must  be  roused  and  developed,  the  powers  that 
have  been  misapplied  must  be  converted.  The  term  "  redemption  "  is  employed 
in  Scripture  in  two  different  senses,  or  rather  to  suggest  two  aspects  of  the  change 
which  it  indicates.  At  one  time  it  signifies  release  from  the  bondage  of  the  Evil 
One  without ;  at  another,  release  from  the  bondage  of  the  evil  nature  within.    Here 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  475 

it  is  the  inner  rather  than  the  outer  reference  that  is  in  view.  It  is  less  escape  from 
slavery  and  danger  than  purity  and  elevation  of  character  that  is  thought  of.  Not 
at  once  are  we  made  fit  for  heaven  in  the  fullest  sense :  not  at  once  is  the  hold 
which  sin  has  gained  on  us  relaxed.  That  comes  by  struggle,  by  warring  against 
the  powers  and  principalities  arrayed  against  us,  and  to  which  we  have  submitted. 
Emancipation  in  this  view  is  education,  growth,  advance.  The  possibility  of  it 
rests  on  living  faith,  and  the  realisation  of  it  is  gradual,  to  be  carried  forward  day 
by  day.  We  have  not  yet  attained,  neither  are  we  already  perfect,  but  we  follow 
after,  pressing  "  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize*  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus."  In  His  footsteps  we  should  be  seeking  to  walk,  and  only  as  we  are  doing 
so  are  we  preparing  ourselves  for  the  engagements  and  the  delights  of  the  Better 
Land.  That  such  is  the  nature  of  the  redemption  spoken  of  in  the  text  becomes 
still  clearer  when  we  observe  that  those  spoken  of  are  to  be  redeemed  "  from  the 
earth."  By  the  earth  is  meant  the  lower  nature,  and  what  stands  related  to  it.  To 
be  redeemed  from  the  earth  is  to  be  lifted  above  it,  to  use  it  without  abusing  it,  to 
act  under  the  control  of  the  Spirit,  and  this  is  a  movement  that  should  be  upward  as 
well  as  onward — not  monotonous  progress  on  a  dead  level,  but  achievement,  victory, 
exaltation.  It  must  be  apparent  to  every  one  that  redemption  from  earth  means 
meetness  for  heaven.  Heaven  and  earth,  in  their  spiritual  use,  stand  opposed  to 
each  other.  To  be  subject  to  the  one  is  to  be  beyond  the  range  and  influence  of  the 
other.  We  should  then  be  striving  after  this  redemption  ;  we  should  be  seeking 
to  value  aright  the  things  around,  and  we  should  be  endeavouring  to  free  ourselves 
from  their  dominion  ;  we  should  be  struggUng,  that  the  evil  powers  within  may  be 
subdued — knowing  that  only  thus  can  we  be  prepared  for  joining  the  glorious  com- 
pany above,  for  learning  the  new  song,  and  for  celebrating  the  praise  of  Him  who 
hath  wrought  salvation  for  us.  {Jas.  Kidd,  B.A.)  The  new  song  : — Whilst 
passing  in  early  manhood  through  a  stage  of  deep  dejection,  John  Stuart  Mill  found 
occasional  comfort  in  music.  One  day  he  was  thrown  into  a  state  of  profound 
gloom  by  the  thought  that  musical  combinations  were  exhaustible.  The  octave  was 
only  composed  of  five  tones  and  two  semi-tones.  Not  all  the  combinations  of  these 
notes  were  harmonious,  so  there  must  be  a  limit  somewhere  to  the  possibilities  of 
melody.  No  such  possibility  can  limit  the  range  of  the  "  new  song,"  for  it  shall  be 
pitched  to  the  key  of  God's  ever-renewed  mercies.  We  need  not  dread  an  eternity 
of  monotonous,  miU-round  worship.  The  originality  of  God's  mercy  will  be 
a  spring  of  originality  in  us.  {T.  G.  Selby.)  No  man  could  learn  that 
song  but  the  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand. — Man  training  for  heaven : 
— ^I.  Heaven  requires  his  training.  Man  cannot  blend  in  the  happy  harmony  of 
the  celestial  state  without  previous  training.  Analogy  would  suggest  this.  In  the 
physical  system,  every  being  is  fitted  to  his  position  ;  his  organism  is  suited  to  his 
locality.  In  the  social  system  the  same  principle  of  fitness  is  required.  The  stolid 
clown  could  not  occupy  the  professor's  chair  ;  nor  could  he  who  is  reckless  con- 
cerning law,  right,  and  order,  occupy  the  bench  of  justice.  It  is  just  so  in  relation 
to  heaven.  To  feel  at  home  in  the  society  of  the  holy,  cheerfully  to  serve  the 
Creator  and  His  universe,  and  to  be  in  harmony  with  all  the  laws,  operations,  and 
beings,  in  the  holy  empire,  we  must  manifestly  be  invested  with  the  same  character. 
But  what  is  the  training  necessary  ?  It  is  moral — the  training  of  the  spiritual 
sympathies  ;  the  heart  being  brought  to  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  U.  Kedemption 
is  the  coNmTioN  OF  HIS  TRAINING.  "  Those  who  were  redeemed  from  the  earth." 
The  redemption  here  referred  to  is  evidently  that  procured  by  the  system  of  Christ 
(chap.  V.  9).  The  training  requires  something  more  than  education  ;  it  needs 
emancipation — the  delivering  of  the  soul  from  certain  feelings  and  forces  incom- 
patible with  holiness — a  deliverance  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  evU.  The  grand 
characteristic  of  Christianity  is,  that  it  is  a  power  "  to  redeem  from  all  evil."  HI. 
The  EARTH  IS  THE  SCENE  OF  HIS  TRAINING.  "  Kcdecmed  from  the  earth."  The 
brightest  fact  in  the  history  of  the  dark  world  is,  that  it  is  a  redemptive  scene. 
Amidst  all  the  clouds  and  storms  of  depravity  and  sorrow  that  sweep  over  our  path, 
this  fact  rises  up  before  us  as  a  bright  orb  that  shall  one  day  dispel  all  gloom  and 
hush  all  tumult.  Thank  God,  this  is  not  a  retributive,  but  a  redemptive  scene. 
But  it  should  be  remembered  that  it  is  not  only  a  redemptive  scene,  but  the  only 
redemptive  scene.  {Homilist.)  Angelic  incojnpetency  : — It  seems  that  when  the 
song  of  grace  rises  in  heaven,  there  are  a  great  multitude  who  are  incompetent  to 
take  part  in  it.  What  is  the  song  that  utterly  defies  the  unf alien  spirits  of  heaven? 
It  is  the  song  of  redemption,  and  I  shall  give  you  two  or  three  reasons  why  those 
unf  alien  spirits  find  it  an  impossibility  to  sing  it.     1.  First,  they  never  were  redeemed 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

from  sins.  Standing  in  the  light  of  heaven,  they  know  nothing  about  the  joy  of 
rescue.  Having  sailed  for  ages  on  the  smooth  seas  of  heaven,  they  know  nothing 
about  the  joy  of  clambering  out  from  the  eternal  shipwreck.  Beautiful  and 
triumphant  song,  but  they  cannot  sing  it.  It  is  to  them  an  eternal  impossibility.  2. 
Again,  these  unfallen  spirits  of  heaven  cannot  mingle  in  that  anthem  because  they 
do  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  comforted  in  suJGfering.  You  sometimes  find  a  pianist 
who  has  been  through  all  the  schools,  and  has  his  diploma ;  but  there  seems  to  be 
no  feeling  in  his  playing.  You  say  :  "  What's  the  matter  with  that  musician  ?  " 
Why,  I  will  tell  you  :  he  has  never  had  any  trouble.  But  after  he  has  lost  children, 
or  been  thrust  into  sickness,  then  he  begins  to  pour  out  the  deep  emotion  of  his  own 
soul  into  the  instrument,  and  all  hearts  respond  to  it.  So,  I  suppose  that  our  sor- 
rows here  will  be  somewhat  preparative  for  the  heavenly  accord.  It  will  not  be  a 
cold  artistic  trill,  but  a  chant  struck  through  with  all  the  tenderness  of  this  world's 
sufferings.  3.  Again,  I  remark  that  the  unfallen  spirits  of  heaven  cannot  join  in 
the  anthem  of  grace  in  heaven,  because  they  never  were  helped  to  die.  Death  is  a 
tremendous  pass.  Do  you  not  suppose  when  we  get  through  that  dark  pass  of  death, 
we  are  going  to  feel  gratitude  to  Christ,  and  that  we  will  have  a  glorious  anthem  of 
praise  to  sing  to  Him  ?  But  what  will  those  unfallen  spirits  of  heaven  do  with  such 
a  song  as  that  ?  They  never  felt  the  death  shudder.  They  never  heard  the  moan 
of  the  dismal  sea.  But  you  say :  "  That  makes  only  a  half  and  half  heaven  ;  so 
many  of  these  spirits  will  be  silent."  Oh,  there  will  be  anthems  in  which  all  the 
hosts  of  heaven  can  join.  The  fact  that  there  will  be  a  hundred  and  forty  and  four 
thousand,  as  stated  in  the  text,  intimates  that  there  will  be  a  vast  congregation 
participating.  That  song  is  getting  sweeter  and  louder  all  the  time.  Some  of  our 
friends  have  gone  up  and  joined  in  it.  If  our  hearing  were  only  good  enough,  we 
would  hear  their  sweet  voices  rippling  on  the  night  air.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage) 
Not  defQed  with  women. —  Vndefiled : — Thei  words  cannot  be  literally  understood,  but 
must  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  similar  words  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  when,  writing  to 
the  Corinthians,  he  says,  "  For  I  am  jealous  over  you  with  a  godly  jealousy ;  for 
I  espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that  I  might  present  you  as  a  pure  virgin  to  Christ." 
Such  a  "  pure  virgin  "  were  the  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  now  standing 
upon  the  Mount  Zion.  They  had  renounced  all  that  unfaithfulness  to  God  and  to 
Divine  truth  which  is  so  often  spoken  of  in  the  Old  Testament  as  spiritual  fornica- 
tion or  adultery.  They  had  renounced  all  sin.  In  the  language  of  St.  John  in  his 
first  Epistle,  they  had  *'  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life."  They  had  "  guarded  them- 
selves from  idols."  {W.  Milligan,  D.D.)  Follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He 
goeth. — The  followers  of  the  Lamb  : — I.  An  outline  of  the  chabacter  of  those 
BLESSED  ONES  WHILE  THEY  ABE  HEBE.  1.  First,  Hotice  their  adherence  to  the 
doctrine  of  sacrifice  while  they  are  here :  "  These  are  they  which  follow  the  Lamb." 
2.  And,  next,  it  is  clear  of  these  people  that  they  followed  the  Lamb  by  practically 
imitating  Christ's  example,  for  it  is  written,  "  These  are  they  which  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth."  Try  to  put  your  feet  down  in  the  footprints  that  He 
has  left  you.  Do  aim  at  complete  conformity  to  Christ ;  and  wherein  you  fail, 
mark  that.  3.  Now,  notice  in  the  sketch  of  these  people  that  they  recognised  a  special 
redemption  :  "  These  were  redeemed  from  among  men."  Christ  had  done  some- 
thing for  them  that  He  had  not  done  for  others.  4.  And  as  they  recognized  a  special 
redemption,  they  made  a  full  surrender  of  themselves  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb : 
"  These  were  redeemed  from  among  men,  being  the  firstfruits  unto  God  and  to  the 
Lamb."  If  you  are  the  firstfruits  unto  God,  be  so  ;  if  you  belong  to  yourself,  serve 
yourself  ;  but  if,  by  the  redemption  of  Christ,  you  are  not  your  own,  but  bought  with 
a  price,  then  live  as  those  who  are  the  King's  own,  who  must  serve  God,  and  cannot 
be  content  unless  their  every  action  shall  tend  to  the  Divine  glory,  and  to  the 
magnifying  of  Christ  Jesus.  6.  These  people  who  are  to  be  with  Christ,  the  nearest 
to  Him,  are  a  people  free  from  falsehood.  "  In  their  mouth  was  found  no  guile." 
If  we  profess  to  be  Christians,  we  must  have  done  with  all  craft,  policy,  double- 
dealing,  and  the  like.  The  Christian  man  should  be  a  plain  man,  who  says  what 
he  means,  and  means  what  he  says.  6.  And  then,  once  more,  it  is  said  that  they 
are  free  from  blemish  ;  "  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  U.  A 
GLIMPSE  OF  THE  PEBFECT  PICTURE  IN  HEAVEN.  1.  Well,  first,  those  who  are  with 
Christ  enjoy  perfect  fellowship  with  Him.  Up  there,  they  "follow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  He  goeth."  They  are  always  with  Him.  2.  Well,  now,  notice  in 
this  complete  picture,  next,  that  up  there  they  are  perfectly  accepted  with  God : 
*'  These  were  redeemed  from  among  men,  being  the  firstfruits  unt^  God  and  to  the 
Lamb."     God  always  accepts  them  ;   He  always  looks  upon  them  as  His  firstfruits, 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  477 

bought  with  His  Son's  blood,  and  brought  by  His  Son  into  His  heavenly  temple,  to 
be  His  for  ever.  Sometimes  here  we  mar  our  service  ;  but  they  never  mar  it  there. 
3.  Observe,  also,  that  they  have  perfect  truth  there  in  heart  and  soul :  "  In  their 
mouth  was  found  no  guile."  "  No  lie,"  says  the  Kevised  Version.  Here,  we  do  fall 
into  error  inadvertently,  and  sometimes,  I  fear  me,  negligently.  4.  One  more 
feature  of  that  perfect  picture  is  this,  they  enjoy  perfect  sinlessness  before  God : 
"  They  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
followers  of  Jesus: — I.  The  instructive  view  of  Christians  which  the  text  presents. 
1.  To  follow  Jesus  is  to  maintain  a  visible  profession  of  His  religion.  Are  we  doing 
this,  or  are  we  halting  and  hesitating?  Is  our  character  uniform,  or  are  we 
religious  and  the  contrary  just  as  serves  our  convenience,  and  meets  the  wishes  of 
our  associates  ?  2.  To  follow  Jesus  is  to  receive  Him  as  a  Saviour.  This  implies 
the  subjection  of  the  soul  to  Him.  3.  To  follow  Jesus  is  to  listen  to  Him  as  a 
teacher.  A  scholar  follows  his  master ;  he  respects  his  authority.  4.  To  follow 
Jesus  is  to  obey  Him  as  a  Sovereign.  5.  To  follow  Jesus  is  to  imitate  Him  as  an 
example.  II.  What  there  is  in  such  persons  remarkable  ;  or  why  our  attention 
should  be  so  particularly  directed  to  them  :  "These  are  they."  1.  We  see  in  them 
the  favourites  of  heaven.  The  Lord  loves  them ;  He  honours  them  ;  He  delights  to 
bless  them,  and  to  do  them  good.  2.  We  see  in  them  the  monuments  of  Divine 
mercy.  "  These  are  they"  whom  God  hath  called  out  of  darkness  into  His  mar- 
vellous light.  3.  They  are  the  most  honourable  characters  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Honourable  in  reality,  not  in  appearance ;  in  the  sight  of  angels  and  of  God,  not 
perhaps  in  the  judgment  of  men.  4.  They  are  the  most  happy  persons  in  times  of 
difl&culty  and  trial.  These  enter  into  the  spirit  and  life  of  religion :  they  taste  its 
comfort,  they  prove  its  real  enjoyment.  5.  They  are  the  instruments  of  the 
Redeemer's  glory.  "  All  Mine  are  Thine,  and  Thine  are  Mine;  and  I  am  glorified  in 
them  " ;  glorified  in  their  faith,  their  patience,  their  hope,  but  especially  in  their 
holy  and  active  obedience.  6.  They  will  be  the  inhabitants  of  a  better  world,  the 
companions  of  Christ  in  His  kingdom.  In  that  upper  world  they  still  follow  Him, 
but  without  the  least  reluctance,  without  the  most  distant  feeling  of  languor. 
Eeflections :  1.  Are  we  the  followers  of  Jesus  ?  2.  What  cause  have  we  all  to 
lament  our  carelessness  and  cowardice  in  religious  concerns !  3.  Let  us  rise  to 
greater  vigour  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  be  unreservedly  devoted  to  Him.  (T. 
Kidd.)  Devotion  to  Christ  : — I.  In  devotion  to  Christ  we  find  the  true  guide  of 
life.  n.  In  devotion  to  Christ,  we  find  the  true  joy  op  life.  III.  In  following 
Christ  is  revealed  to  us  the  true  END  OF  LIFE.  {R.  Forgan,  B.D.)  The  followers 
of  the  Lamb : — I.  What  it  is  to  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  In 
His  commandments — teaching — providences — example.  Truly,  without  hypocrisy ; 
constantly,  without  apostasy.  Speedily,  truly,  undividedly,  zealously,  humbly, 
cheerfully,  diligently,  constantly,  faithfully,  transcendently.  II.  Why  they  follow 
the  Lamb.  Because  they  are  redeemed  by  His  blood — enlightened  by  Him — loving 
Him — possessing  His  spirit,  &c.  III.  The  excellency  of  following  the  Lamb. 
They  have  His  presence — shall  know  His  mind — may  come  boldly  to  Him — shall 
be  protected  by  Him,  &c.  IV.  How  they  may  be  known  who  follow  the  Lamb. 
By  their  character — spirit — name — graces — associates — language.  [W.  Dyer.) 
Absolute  obedience  to  the  guidance  of  Christ: — We  do  not,  of  course,  take  the 
number  here  specified  as  implying  more  than  greatness  and  completeness.  It  is 
based,  probably,  upon  the  number  of  the  twelve  apostles,  and  of  the  twelve  tribes 
largely  multiplied,  and  expresses,  as  has  been  said,  the  native  and  not  degenerate 
progeny  of  the  apostles.  They  are  the  princes  of  the  kingdom,  perfect  in  a  multi- 
form unity,  which  are  so  delineated,  equally  derived  from  every  quarter.  What  has 
won  them  their  high  pre-eminence  ?  What  has  caused  them  to  excel  their  brethren, 
so  as  to  stand  nearest  to  the  Lamb  upon  the  heavenly  mount  ?  Others  may  be 
pure,  for  the  pure  alone  shall  see  God ;  others  are  redeemed,  for  otherwise  there 
could  be  no  salvation  ;  but  that  which  builds  the  thrones  of  the  twelve  and  the  long 
line  of  saints  who  come  after  is  the  following — the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth. 
I.  It  is  probable  that  there  are  few,  if  any,  amongst  you  who  do  not  hold  what 
ARE  CALLED  THE  MAIN  TRUTHS  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  Complete  Unbelief  is  yet  a  rare  thing 
amongst  us.  But  if  we  go  a  little  further  and  inquire  to  what  the  acceptance  of  the 
Christian  Faith  on  the  part  of  the  multitude  amounts,  it  will  be  found  that  their 
beUef  is  but  vague  and  general,  that  a  vast  element  of  scepticism  mingles  with  their 
faith.  To  a  certain  extent,  and  to  a  certain  extent  only,  do  they  follow  the  leading 
of  Christ.  Whilst  He  speaks  of  that  which  is  easy  of  apprehension,  which  accords 
with  the  natural  instinct,  or  is  of  palpable  utility,  they  attend  Him  closely.    Lo  I 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

He  tells  of  meekness,  and  purity,  and  uprightness,  and  charity ;  they  go  heartily 
along  with  Him.  He  warns  of  a  judgment  to  come,  by  which  the  inequalities  of 
this  earthly  life  shall  be  adjusted  ;  this  squares  with  the  conclusion  of  human 
intellect  and  is  cordially  received.  But  when  He  would  lead  them  further,  to  the 
acceptance  of  truths  which  cannot  be  demonstrated,  which  to  some  extent,  at  any 
rate,  must  be  believed  on  the  witness  of  others,  they  recoil.  Thus  the  duty  and 
expediency  of  public  worship  is  admitted.  It  is  a  national  acknowledgment  of 
duty,  an  instrument  of  Christian  instruction ;  but  to  partake  of  the  Blessed  Sacra- 
ment involves  the  admission  of  certain  supernatural  powers  still  operating  among 
us,  and  forthwith  the  great  congregation  dwindles  to  a  scanty  company.  Nay,  is 
not  this  sort  of  feeling  on  the  increase  ?  Just  as  there  have  been  those  who  would 
not  neglect  prayer,  though  abstaining  from  Holy  Communion  ;  so,  because  prayer 
involves  the  present  action  of  God,  we  are  now  hearing  of  men  refusing  to  pray, 
and  reducing  religion  yet  further  to  the  hearing  and  acting  out  moral  lessons. 
Thus,  while  the  guidance  of  the  Lamb  conducts  to  the  knowledge  of  what  is 
within  the  grasp  of  human  reason,  men  are  well  pleased  to  wait  upon  His  steps ; 
but  no  sooner  does  He  move,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  open  country,  and  pass  onward 
into  the  narrower  defiles  of  a  land  on  which  rest  clouds  and  darkness,  and  there 
is  nothing  to  guide  save  His  footfall,  than  their  steps  halt.  They  follow  Him  not 
whithersoever  He  goeth.  H.  But  we  would  not  confine  the  application  of  the  text 
to  the  case  of  doctrine ;  it  may  well  be  extended  to  that  of  practice  also. 
There  is  no  more  sad  spectacle  than  that  of  a  man  whose  conduct  falls  short  of  his 
convictions.  He  can  admire  the  nobility  of  character,  the  self-devotion,  the 
unworldliness  of  the  saints  of  God ;  he  is  acute  enough  to  perceive  that  the  doc- 
trines which  theoretically  he  has  accepted  do,  if  fairly  worked  out,  lead  to  a  higher 
line  of  life  ;  but,  withal,  he  shrinks  from  pursuing  it.  He  foresees  how  much  must 
be  surrendered,  how  many  difficulties  must  be  encountered,  how  few,  perhaps,  will 
appreciate  him  when  all  is  done ;  and  so  he  continues  to  live  on  a  commonplace 
life  of  coldness  and  self-indulgence,  with  high  principles  and  low  practice — a 
splendid  ideal,  but  no  personal  approach  to  it.  "  These  are  they  which  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth  !  "  How  do  they  stand  out,  those  saintly  ones,  in 
sharpest  contrast  with  the  half-obedience  of  ordinary  Christians  !  Once  having 
embraced  the  faith,  theirs  was  the  firm,  unflinching  tread  of  men  prepared  to  resign 
all,  to  lose  all.  Through  evil  report  and  good  report,  through  honour  and  dis- 
honour, they  followed  their  Lord  whithersoever  He  led.  Whithersoever — to  the 
snapping  asunder  of  closest  ties,  to  the  abandonment  of  our  cherished  hopes. 
Whithersoever — to  the  restraint  of  the  reasoning  faculty,  to  the  submission  of 
private  opinion,  to  the  subjection  of  the  will,  to  the  quenching  of  the  passions. 
Would  to  God  we  might  only  drink  in  a  little  of  their  temper  !  There  is,  it  has 
been  well  said,  a  first  superficial  will  in  man  which  resents  opposition,  refuses 
chastisement,  as  the  child  puts  from  it  the  medicine  draught.  So  even  Jesus 
Christ  prayed  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  Him.  There  is  a  second,  deliberative 
will  in  man,  which  is  formed  upon  reflection,  and  which  is,  in  fact,  the  real 
act  of  volition.  By  this  Jesus  Christ  took  the  cup  and  drank  it  to  the  dregs. 
That,  whatever  our  first  impulse,  this  second  truest  will  shall  in  all  things 
acquiesce  in  what  God  speaks  and  does  about  us  and  for  us,  must  be  our  effort ; 
so  only  can  we  train  ourselves  here  for  following  the  Lamb  whithersoever 
He  goeth  along  the  infinite  windings  of  the  Everlasting  Hills.  (Bp.  Woodford.) 
The  firstfruits  unto  (Jod  and  to  the  Lamb. — The  greater  salvation : — There  is  a 
salvation  greater  and  less.  For  here  it  is  said  that  these  hundred  and  forty-four 
thousand  are  *•  firstfruits."  Therefore  we  learn — I.  What  these  are  not.  1.  They 
are  not  all  the  saved.  The  very  word  indicates  that  there  is  much  more  to 
follow.  They  are  but  the  beginning.  Nor — 2.  Are  these  firstfruits  the  mass  of 
the  saved.  True,  a  large  number  is  named ;  but  what  is  that  compared  with 
the  "  great  multitude  that  no  man  can  number,  out  of  every,"  &c.  II.  What 
they  are.  The  word  "  firstfruits  "  teaches  us  that  these  thus  named  are — 1.  The 
pledge  of  all  the  rest.  Thus  Christ  has  "  become  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that 
slept"  (1  Cor.  XV.  20).  And  so  the  natural  firstfruits  of  corn  guaranteed  the  rest 
of  the  harvest.  For  the  same  sun,  and  all  other  nurturing  forces  which  had 
ripened  the  firstfruits,  were  there  ready  to  do  the  same  kindly  office  for  all  the  rest. 
And  so  we  are  told,  •'  The  Spirit  of  Him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  shall 
also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies."  The  same  power  is  present  for  both  the  first 
and  after  fruits.  2.  The  pattern  and  representative  of  all  the  rest.  Compare  the 
first  and  after  fruits.    In  the  main  they  were  alike,  and  so  in  the  spiritual  world 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION,  479 

also.  But — 3.  The  firstfruits  were  pre-eminent  over  the  rest.  They  were  specially 
presented  to  God,  and  held  in  honour ;  so  was  it  with  the  natural  grain.  But, 
without  question,  there  is  pre-eminence  implied  in  being  the  firstfruits  of  the 
heavenly  harvest.  (1)  In  time.  Theirs  is  "the  first  resurrection,"  of  which  we 
read  in  chap.  xx.  "  The  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  until  the  thousand  years,"  &c. 
(chap.  XX.).  (2)  In  honour.  St.  Paul  called  it  "  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus."  And  our  Lord  tells  us  that  there  is  a  "  first  "  and  "  last  "  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  *'  a  least  "  and  «'  a  greatest."  "  One  star  differeth  from 
another  star  in  glory."  There  is  "  an  entrance  administered  abundantly,"  and 
there  is  a  "  being  saved  so  as  by  fire."  (3)  In  service.  That  they  were  pre-eminent 
here,  who  that  knows  their  history  on  earth,  or  reads  even  this  book,  will  question  ? 
(4)  In  character.  See  how  they  are  described  as  to  their  spiritual  purity,  their 
unreserved  consecration,  their  separateness  from  the  world,  their  guilelessness  and 
freedom  from  all  deceit.  (5)  In  the  approval  of  God.  Of  them  it  is  written, 
"  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection  "  (chap.  xx.).  4.  They 
are  the  elect  of  God.  In  another  part  of  this  book  they  are  spoken  of  as  "  the 
called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful."  All  are  not  firstfruits,  greatest,  first,  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  The  very  words  imply  order,  gradation,  rank.  But  it  is  for 
us  to  take  heed  as  to — III.  What  we  should  stkive  to  be.  {S.  Conway,  B.A.) 
The  Church  God's  firstfruits : — The  mention  of  the  hundred  and  forty  and  four 
thousand  as  "firstfruits"  suggests  the  thought  of  something  to  follow.  What 
that  is  it  is  more  difficult  to  say.  It  can  hardly  be  other  Christians  belonging 
to  a  later  age  of  the  Church's  history  upon  earth,  for  the  end  is  come.  It  can 
hardly  be  Christians  who  have  done  or  suffered  more  than  other  members  of 
the  Christian  family,  for  in  St.  John's  eyes  all  Christians  are  united  to  Christ, 
alike  in  work  and  martyrdom.  Only  one  supposition  remains.  The  hundred 
and  forty  and  four  thousand,  as  the  whole  Church  of  God,  are  spoken  of  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  same  expression  is  used  by  the  Apostle  James :  "Of  His 
own  will  He  brought  us  forth  by  the  word  of  truth,  that  we  should  be  a  kind 
of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures."  Not  as  the  first  portion  of  the  Church  on  earth, 
to  be  followed  by  another  portion,  but  as  the  first  portion  of  a  kingdom  of 
God  wider  and  larger  than  the  Church,  are  the  words  to  be  understood.  The 
whole  Church  is  God's  firstfruits,  and  when  she  is  laid  upon  His  altar  we  have 
the  promise  that  a  time  is  coming  when  creation  shall  follow  in  her  train,  when 
"  it  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty  of  the  glory 
of  the  children  of  God,"  when  "the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break  forth 
before  the  Kedeemer  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  fields  shall  clap  their 
hands."  Why  shall  nature  thus  rejoice  before  the  Lord  ?  Let  the  Psalmist  answer : 
"  For  He  cometh,  for  He  cometh  to  judge  the  earth  :  He  shall  judge  the  world  with 
righteousness,  and  the  people  with  His  truth."  {W.  Milligan,  D.D.)  In  their 
mouth  was  found  no  guile. — Truthfulness  : — It  is  related  that  when  Petrarch,  the 
Italian  poet,  a  man  of  strict  integrity,  was  summoned  as  a  witness,  and  offered  hx 
the  usual  manner  to  take  an  oath  before  a  court  of  justice,  the  judge  closed  the 
book,  saying,  "  As  to  you,  Petrarch,  your  word  is  sufficient." 

Vers.  6-8.  And  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the 
everlasting  gospel  to  preach. — The  angel  in  mid-heaven : — I.  The  revival  of  a 
MissioNABY  SPIRIT  IN  THE  Church  OF  Christ.  We  Say  a  revival,  for  that  spirit 
not  only  formed  a  necessary  element  all  through  the  new  dispensation,  but  it  had 
its  recognised  place  in  the  old.  How  many  of  the  prophets  of  Judah  and  Israel,  in 
varied  words  and  imagery,  exulted  in  the  prospect  of  times  when  the  exclusive 
privileges  of  the  covenant-land  would  cease,  when  nations  sitting  in  darkness 
would  see  the  great  Light  1  How  often  in  the  Psalms  do  we  find  the  same  aspira- 
tions 1  The  sweetest  strains  of  the  minstrel  monarch  of  Israel  are  missionary  odes. 
It  was  the  apostolic  age,  however,  which  was  the  era  for  the  grand  development  of 
missionary  zeal.  But  was  missionary  ardour  to  expire  with  the  primitive  era  in 
the  Church  of  Christ  ?  a  transient  outburst  of  enthusiasm,  when  Peter  and  John 
crossed  the  borders  of  Palestine  for  the  regions  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  distant  lands 
of  the  dispersion  ;  or  when  Paul  braved  the  surges  of  the  Adriatic  and  confronted 
the  merchant  princes  of  Corinth,  the  philosophers  of  Athens,  and  the  captains  of 
Imperial  Kome  ?  Far  away  in  the  distant  east  there  lay  a  mighty  empire.  Poetry 
had  sung  of  it  as  "the  climes  of  the  sun,"  and  British  arms  and  enterprise  had 
claimed  it  as  their  proudest  trophy.  But  the  darkness  of  spiritual  death  is  brooding 
Over  it,  and  polluted  fires  are  rising  from  unnumbered  altars.     Thither  the  Ang^ 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

of  the  vision  wings  His  way.     Altar-fire  after  altar-fire  is  quenched.     The  chime 
of  the  Sabbath  bell  and  the  hum  of  the  Christian   school  break  the  stillness  of 
moral  solitude,  and  he  comes  back  to  tell,  "  In  the  region  and  shadow  of  death 
light  has  sprung  forth."     The  evangelist  beheld  the  Angel  of  the  vision  "flying." 
It  denoted  at  once  suddenness  and  rapidity.     II.  The  instrumentality  employed, 
"  the  everlasting  gospel."     This  was  the  book  the  Mission  Angel  held  in  his  hand. 
It  may  seem  to  proud  reason  a  poor  weapon  with  which  to  effect  the  moral  conquest 
of  the  world.    And  more  especially  when  that  gospel  is  proclaimed,  not  by  angels, 
but  by  feeble  men.     "But  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men,  and  the  weak- 
ness of  God  is  stronger  than  men."    It  seems  to  be  a  law  or  distinguishing  feature 
in  His  government  of  the  world  that  the  mightiest  ends  are  effected  by  the  simplest 
and  often  unlikeliest  means ;    that  results  are  brought  about  by  agencies  and 
instrumentalities  in  themselves  apparently  inadequate  to  produce  them.     Look  at 
His  providential  dealings  as  these  are  recorded  in  the  page  of  Scripture.     It  was 
the  sling  of  a  shepherd-boy  and  a  few  pebbles  from  the  brook  which  brought  to  the  dust 
the  giant  of  Philistia.     Twelve  humble  fishermen  from  Tiberias'  shores  (1  Cor.  i.  27, 
28,  29).    And,  powerful  in  the  past,  the  same  moral  and  spiritual  forces  are  stiU 
to  be  mighty  for  the  pulling  down  of  heathen  strongholds.     Countless  Dagons  are 
to  fall  before  this  Ark  of  God.    And  who  can  fail  to  admire  the  wondrous  adap- 
tation of  that  everlasting  gospel  to  all  characters,  and  ages,  and  times !     The 
vision  of  the  text,  moreover,  tells  us  it  is  destined,  on  a  yet  vaster  scale,  to  vindicate 
its  title  to  be  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation"  unto  the  very  ends  of  the  earth — 
the  grand  fulcrum  and  lever  in  one  which  is  to  elevate  degraded  humanity.     III. 
The  extent  of  the  commission  :  "  To  preach  to  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and 
to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people."     {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 
The  flight  of  the  angel  through  heaven : — I.  The  subject  op  his   ministration  : 
"  The  everlasting  gospel."     This  blessing  God  designs  by  the  Christian  ministry 
to  confer  upon  the  whole  world.     1.  The  heathen  have  lost  the  knowledge  of  God. 
We  may  infer  the  greatness  of  this  loss  from  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  of  God  is 
the  only  foundation  of  religion.    But  how  can  this  knowledge  be  restored  ?    It  is 
only  taught  by  three  volumes — ^Nature,  Providence,  and  Revelation.    But  Nature 
and  Providence  never  taught  this  knowledge  without  the  comment  of  Revelation. 
Nothing  restores  the  lost  knowledge  of  God  but  the  gospel.     2.  They  are  without 
the  knowledge  of  their  sinful  state.     3.  They  are   without    the  knowledge  of 
acceptance  and  pardon  through  the  true  Mediator.    II.  The  characteristics  of 
this  ministry.     1.  It  is  the  ministry  of  men.    The  term  "  angel  "  is  not  a  desig- 
nation of  nature,  but  of  office  ;  ministers  are  called  angels  in  Holy  Scripture.     The 
ministry  of  the  gospel  is  exercised  by  men,  that  they  may  not  only  teach  doctrine, 
but  be  the  witnesses  of  what  they  teach.     2,  It  is  an  authorised  ministry.    An 
•'  angel "  is  a  messenger,  and  a  messenger  must  be  sent.     The  command  of  the 
Lord  is,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  &c.    3.  It  is  an  open  and  undisguised  ministry. 
St.  Paul  gloried  in  using  "  great  plainness   of   speech."     There  is  nothing  in 
Christianity  that  requires  concealment.     4.  It  is  a  zealous  and  successful  ministry. 
The  attitude  of  "  flying,"  in  which  the  angel  is  placed  before  us  in  the  text,  denotes 
zeal  and  activity;  an  eagerness  to  deliver  the  message,  and  to  carry  it  into  the 
remotest  regions.    And,  thank  God,  we  have  such  a  ministry  in  progress.     It  has 
met  with  difficulties,  and  future  difficulties  await  it,  yet  it  is  pressing  onward, 
in.  Its  extensive  commission.     It  is  sent  to  "every  nation,  and  kindred,  and 
tongue,  and  people."     1.  The  gospel  is  equally  needed  by  all  nations,  and  equally 
adapted  to  all.    2.  There  is  an  essential  difference  between  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
dispensations.     The  Jewish  dispensation  was  restricted  to  one  nation  and  period ; 
the  Christian  dispensation  is  universal,  embracing  all  the  different  tribes  of  men, 
and  extending  to  the  end  of  time.     3.  The  extensive  commission  recorded  in  the 
text  is  the  foundation  of  universal  philanthropy.     4.  It  gives  noble  and  expanded 
views   to   Christians.     Study  and   understand   your  own  religion.     It  is  not  one 
amongst  many  modifications  of  human  opinion.     It  is  from  God,  and  it  is  intended 
by  Him,  like  Aaron's  rod,  to  swallow  up  every  other.     IV.  The  specific  objects 
OF  THE  angel's  MINISTRY.     1.  The  angcl  cries  out,  "  Fear  Him."    The  fear  of  the 
Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  the  source  and  guard  of  virtue.     But  the  heathen 
are  without  it.    They  have  religious  fear,  but  not  the  fear  of  God.    The  fear  of 
God  is  a  mixture  of  awe  and  love.     2.  To  establish  His  worship.     This  is  another 
effect  of  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel.     Instead  of  idols,  to  place  the  true  God 
in  His  temples.     Instead  of  polluting  orgies,  to  teach  men  to  wash  their  hands  in 
innocency,  and  thus  to  encompass  God's  altar.    Instead  of  vain  mediators,  to  have 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  ,  481 

the  name  of  Jesus  in  which  to  trust.    3.  To  claim  for  God  His  revenue  of  praise  and 
glory.    Lessons  :  1.  Behold,  then,  a  glorious  object  of  contemplation — the  progress  of 
the  angel  in  the  midst  of  heaven.    2.  It  depends  on  you  to  speed  or  delay  the  angel. 
3.  Let  it  not  discourage  us,  that  the  world  may  be  tossed  and  troubled.    (JR.  Watson.) 
An  ideal  preacher  : — I.  His  theme  is  glorious.     1.  A   gospel-message   of    Divine 
love.     2.  An  ever-enduring  gospel.     (1)  Because  its  elementary  truths  are  absolute. 
(2)  Because  its  redemptive  provisions  are  complete.     3.  A  world-wide  gospel.     (1) 
A  necessity  to  all  mankind.     (2)  Equal  to  all  mankind.     U.  His  movements  are 
EXPEDITIOUS.     1.  The  message  is  urgent.     2.  The  time  is  short.     3.  Life  is  un- 
certain.    III.  His    sPHEiiE    IS    elevated.     It  is    the  characteristic  of    all  truly 
regenerated  men  that  they  are  not  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  Spirit ;  that  they  set 
their  affections  on  things  above ;  that  though  in  the  world,  they  are  not  of  the 
world ;    that  they  live  in  heavenly  places.     {Homilist.)         The  dissemination  of 
good  and  the  destruction  of  evil : — I.  The  dissemination  of  good.     1.  The  gospel 
in  itself  is  good.    It  is  at  once  the  mirror  and  the  medium  of  eternal  good.     2. 
The  gospel  in  its  ministry  is  good.     It  comes  from  heaven,  and  is  conveyed  by 
heavenly  messengers  to  men.     3.  The  gospel  in  its  universality  is  good.    It  over- 
leaps all  geographic  boundaries,  all  tribal,  linguistic   distinctions,  and  addresses 
man  as  man.     4.  The  gospel  in  its  purpose  is  good.     Its  supreme  aim  is  to  induce 
all  men  to  worship  Him  who  made  heaven,  earth,  and  sea.     II.  The  destruction 
OF  evil.     1.  This  aggregation  of  evil  must  fall.     Faith  is  to  overcome  the  world. 
2.  This  aggregation  of  evil  falls  as  the  good  advances.     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The 
preaching  of   the  everlasting  gospel : — I.  The    commission  to  preach  the  gospel. 
Some  persons  are  heard  falsely  to  argue  that  there  is  no  need  to  send  the  tidings  of 
redemption  to  the  heathen ;  that  they  will  be  saved  or  be  lost,  according  to  their  use 
or  abuse  of  the  light  they  have  received  ;  and  that  to  impart  to  them  the  gospel  is 
only  to  increase  their  condemnation,  if  they  die  unbelieving.     But  to  such  cavils 
we  need  not  reply.     Our  Lord's  command,  as  well  as  the  conduct  of  the  angel  in 
our  text,  is  clear  and  express.    II.  The  manner  in  which  that  commission  is  to 
BE   executed.     1.   By  calling  sinners  to  repentance.     2.    By  directing  them  to 
Christ.     3.  By  warning  them  of  a  future  judgment.     (C.  Clayton,  M.A.)         The 
undying  theme — the  originality  and  acceptability  of  the  gospel : — 1.  The  gospel,  in 
its  authorship,  is  one  with  nature.     2.  The  gospel,  in  its  comprehension  or  extent, 
includes  heaven  and  earth.     The  flying  angel  unites  the  two,  and  shows  in  clear 
and  bold  figure  the  celestial  origin  of  the  gospel.     It  is  no  growth  of  the  darkened 
earth — no  high  stage  of  a  merely  natural  development — no  offspring  of  civilisation. 
Heaven  and  earth  are  made  one  again  in  the  gospel.     3.  The  gospel,  in  its  history, 
advances  from  the  deepest  obscurity  to  the  highest  prominence.     4.  The  gospel,  in 
its  design,  unites  the  particular  and  the  universal.     5.  The  gospel,  in  its  spirit, 
unites  the  purest  mercy  with  the  most  perfect  justice.    I.    A  statement  of  the 
GOSPEL.     1.  Its  originality.     That  is  original  which  is  the  first  of  its  kind,  and 
stands  alone.    Absolute  originality  is  to  be  found  in  God  alone ;  for  the  Divine 
mind  alone  has  the  power  of  pure  creation.     The  gospel  is  original,  whether  we 
view  it  as  emanating  from  God,  as  a  series  of  facts  in  human  history,  or  as  a  new 
life  in  man — that  is,  whether  we  view  it  as  a  creation  of  God  the  Father,  of  God 
the  Son,  or  of   God  the  Holy  Ghost.     2.  Its  acceptability  lies  in  this — that  it 
satisfies  the  demands  of  an  honest  and  earnest  mind.     Is  proof  required  that  the 
Word  of  God,  as  a  historical  and  literary  production,  is  what  it  claims  to  be  ?    It 
possesses  more  evidence  on  this  point  than  any  other  book.  But  the  point  in  respect 
of  which  the  gospel  is  most  widely  and  warmly  accepted  is  that  it  satisfies  the 
heart  and  conscience.    II.  How  the  gospel  is  everlasting.     We  may  here  take 
the  two  aspects  under  which  we  have  just  considered  the  gospel,  and  show  how  the 
epithet  everlasting  applies  to  each — how  it  is  for  ever  original  or  new,  and  how  it 
is  for  ever  good  or  acceptable.     1.  The  gospel  is  everlasting  in  its  originality.     The 
word  new  has  two  meanings,  not  only  different,  but  apparently  opposed  to  each 
other,  which  yet,  taken  together,  give  all  the  more  complete  an  idea  of  the  gospel. 
We  call  that  new  which  is  the  first  of  its  kind ;  we  also  call  that  new  which  is  the 
last  or  latest  of  its  kind.     The  gospel  is  the  first  and  last  system  of  truth,  the 
oldest  and  the  newest  thought  of  God.     It  is  everlasting,  although  new.     Other 
new  things  soon  lose  their  freshness,  wither,  and  grow  old;  but  it  remains  ever 
new,  full  of  the  life  of  God,  fresh  as  the  morning  of  creation.     It  continues  new 
by  ever  growing  newer — ever  leading  us  deeper  into  its  source  in  God.     2.  The 
gospel  is  everlasting  in  its  acceptability.     We  do  not  grow  insensible  to  its  influence 
through  repeated  experience  of  its  power.     The  more  we  come  into  living  contact 

31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

with  it,  the  more  do  we  see  its  beauty  and  profundity — the  more  do  we  see  that  its 
meaning  and  charm  are  quite  inexhaustible.  {F.  Ferguson.)  The  missionary 
angel : — 1.  It  is  the  everlasting  gospel,  because  it  deals  with  everlasting  things. 
It  proclaims  the  everlasting  God.  2.  It  is  the  everlasting  gospel  because  it 
emanates  from  the  everlasting  God.  3.  The  everlasting  gospel  because  it  is  based 
upon  the  everlasting  covenant.  4.  The  everlasting  gospel  because  it  guarantees 
to  us  everlasting  life,  the  hfe  of  communion ;  the  life  of  knowledge,  of  entering 
more  and  more  into  the  mind  of  God,  and  drawing  our  whole  life's  power  from 
Him,  the  Lord  our  God.  5.  The  everlasting  gospel  because  it  is  sure  to  bring 
to  us  everlasting  joy.     {E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.)         The  everlasting  gospel: — I.  The 

ANGEL  SPOKEN  OF  IS  NOT  MERELY  AN  INDIVIDUAL,  BUT  THE  REPBESENTATIVE  OF  ALL 
FAITHFUL    MINISTERS    OF    THE    GOSPEL.        II.     ThE    TITLE    WHICH    THE    SPIRIT    OF    GoD 

HERE  GIVES  IT.  It  is  Called  in  our  text  *'  the  everlasting  gospel."  1.  It  is  called 
the  everlasting  gospel  because  the  substance  of  it  was  settled  in  eternity  by  the 
triune  Jehovah,  in  the  counsel  and  in  the  covenant  of  peace.  It  is  the  revelation 
of  the  eternal  purpose  of  God.  2.  It  is  called  the  "  everlasting  gospel "  because, 
in  spite  of  all  the  opposition  that  has  been  offered  to  it,  it  has  continued  still  to 
be  preached,  and  it  will  always  so  continue.  3.  Another  reason  is  because,  amidst 
all  the  changes  to  which  this  sublunary  state  is  subject,  the  gospel  alone  is 
unchangeable,  and  alone  affords  a  safe  and  solid  foundation,  on  which  the  people  of 
God  can  rest.  4.  Once  more,  it  is  called  "  the  everlasting  gospel,"  because  all  its 
promises  "  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus,"  and  never  can  be  revoked.    III.  The 

INSTRUMENTALITY  EMPLOYED  IN  ITS  PROMULGATION.       IV.   ThE   PREDICTED  TRIUMPHS  OF 

THE  GOSPEL.     {R.  Shutte,  M.A.)         The  everlasting  gospel : — Some  one  not  long  ago 
published  a  book  with  the  title,  •'  Gospels  of  Yesterday."    It  discussed  the  writings 
of  several  authors  who,  in  our  generation,  have  caught  the  popular  ear,  and  analysed 
their  doctrines  with  keen  incisiveness.    At  present  I  will  not  pass  a  judgment  on  its 
estimates.    But  how  striking  the  name  itself  1     "Gospels  of   Yesterday" — how 
many  there   have  been   of    them !     They  lasted  as  long  as  they  could,  but  the 
world  outgrew  them.     There  is  only  one  gospel  which  is  everlasting.    Now,  why  is 
this  ?    What  makes  the  gospel  of  Christ  everlasting  ?    I.  Its  universal  message. 
The  reason  why  so  many  gospels  have  been  doomed  to  become  gospels  of  yesterday 
has  been  because  they  have  addressed  themselves  to  what  is  transient  or  partial  in 
human  nature,  and  not  to  what  is  permanent  and  universal.     Men  have  been  hailed 
as  saviours  of  society  because  they  have  been  able  to  give  relief  from  a  need  pressing 
at  some  particular  time,  or  because  their  doctrines  have  fallen  in  with  some  passing 
phase  of  popular  sentiment.     But  the  glory  of  Christianity  is  that  its  teaching  is 
addressed  to  what  is  most  characteristic  in  human  nature  and  absolutely  the  same 
in  all  members  of  the  human  race,  whether  they  be  rich  or  poor,  whether  they 
inhabit  the  one  hemisphere  or  the  other,  and  whether  they  live  in  ancient  or  modern 
times.     You  have  only  to  glance  at  the  most  outstanding  words  of  the  gospel  to  see 
this.     Take,  for  example,  the  word  soul.     This  word  was  in  the  very  forefront  of 
the  teaching  of  Jesus.     Jesus  went  down  to  the  child,  the  beggar,  the  harlot — the 
weakest  and  most  despised  members  of  the  human  family ;  and  when  He  was  able 
to  find  even  in  them  this  infinitely  precious  thing,  it  was  manifest  that  He  had  dis- 
covered the  secret  of  a  universal  religion;    because,  if  this  existed  even  in  the 
lowest,  then  it  existed  in  all.     Or  take  another  great  word  of  the  message  of  the 
gospel :  take  the  word  sin.    This  word  also  is  borne  on  the  forefront  of  Christianity, 
and  how  universal  is  the  response  which  it  finds  in  the  heart  of  man !     Not  to 
multiply  illustrations  too  much,  take  only  one  more — the  word  eternity.     This  is 
also  a  word  which  the  gospel  carries  on  its  very  front.    It  speaks  of  it  wherever  it 
goes.     Christ  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel ;  He  spoke  of  the 
objects  of  the  world  invisible  as  one  who  had  lived  among  them  ;  and  He  spoke  to 
men  of   a  home  of   many  mansions  to  which  they  were  to  aspire.     Now,  this 
message  strikes  a  chord  in  every  human  heart.    U.  Its  particular  message.     The 
great  things  in  human  nature  are,  as  I  have  said,  common  to  all;  yet  human 
nature  is  never  precisely  the  same  in  any  two  specimens.     There  were  never  in  this 
world  even  two  faces  absolutely  alike ;  and  much  less  are  the  minds  ever  precisely 
alike  which  lie  behind  the  faces.     The  gifts  of  nature,  such  as  beauty,  strength, 
ability,  genius,  are  distributed  in  ever-varying  proportions,  and  the  various  circum- 
stances in  which  people  grow  up  emphasise  the  natural  differences.    Some  are  born 
to  wealth,  others  to  poverty ;  the  gifts  of  some  are  improved  by  education,  the  genius 
of  others  is  buried  beneath  the  hard  conditions  of  adversity.     What  a  difference  it 
makes  in  the  fate  of  a  human  being  whether  he  is  born  in  the  heart  of  Africa  or  in 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  483 

the  capital  of  England  !  But  the  gospel  has  a  message  for  this  difference  in  each 
specimen  of  human  nature,  and  for  each  quarter  of  the  globe  and  each  age  of  the 
world,  as  well  as  for  that  which  is  common  to  all.  God  has  a  special  message  for 
every  age.  His  gospel  has  a  word  in  season  for  every  condition  of  life — for  the 
little  child,  and  the  young  man  in  his  prime,  and  for  old  age — a  word  for  the 
multitude  and  a  word  for  the  few.  The  Chinese,  when  they  accept  the  gospel,  will 
find  secrets  in  it  which  the  British  have  never  discovered ;  the  twentieth  century  will 
discover  phases  of  the  Christian  life  which  are  lacking  in  the  nineteenth.  We  have  not 
exhausted  Christ,  and  we  have  not  exhausted  the  gospel  of  Christ.  {J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  in  terms  of  duration: — This  word  "  gospel,"  we  bethink  us,  gets  only  its 
modern  form  in  our  homelier  phrase  "  good  news."  The  word  here  linked  with  it, 
therefore,  is  scarcely  the  sort  of  word  we  would  naturally  link  with  it — "  an  eternal 
gospel."  Eternal  good  news?  The  combination  is  one  which  strikes  our  ear  as  if 
it  contradicted  itself.  News  flashes  and  fades.  How  little  is  there  that  we  would 
still  call  news  after  a  day's  sun  has  set  upon  it  1  Yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  news 
may  be  said  sometimes  to  last.  The  news  is  so  important  to  us  that  it  lingers  in 
the  heart,  and  in  a  manner  keeps  itself  fresh.  The  gospel  is  always  new,  because  you 
are  always  gathering  something  further  of  its  import,  or  sighting  something  hitherto 
unexplored  of  its  sublimity.    I,  The  gospel  has  in  it  every  element  of  durability. 

1.  There  are  some  enterprises,  some  houses  of  business  so  "  safe,"  as  you  call  them 
— so  set  for  enduring — that  even  prudent  men  wiU  count  upon  the  future  of  them 
as  if  it  were  present.  Such  concerns  are  always  conceived  and  conducted,  you  will 
find,  on  principles  of  wisdom — of  wisdom  that  is  calm  and  clear-sighted,  fit  to 
anticipate  dangers  and  to  provide  for  difl&culties,  so  that  surprise  or  loss  is  made  as 
unlikely  as  may  be.  Such  concerns,  moreover,  are  usually  built  up  slowly — grow 
firm  as  they  grow  great,  and  at  every  stage  are  solid  all  through  to  the  heart.  This 
element  of  durability  belongs  to  the  gospel.  It  took  existence  under  a  wisdom  which 
was  at  once  infinite  in  its  range  and  eternal  in  its  experience.  The  gospel  was 
matured  in  sight  of  every  difficulty  and  every  danger  it  could  ever  meet.  It  has 
never  shown  the  least  kinship  with  things  hasty,  immature,  unstable.  It  is  built 
into  the  systeiii  of  things,  and  is  thus  settled  upon  foundations  that  are  too  deep 
and  broad  to  come  within  the  power  of  any  law  of  destruction  or  damage  or  change. 

2.  There  is  another  important  element  of  durability  in  the  gospel.  The  Divine 
justice,  it  is  evident — the  eternal  sense  of  what  is  morally  due,  and  the  eternal 
fulfilling  of  what  is  morally  right — cannot  afford  to  brook  the  least  breath  of  con- 
travention. Now,  it  is  an  eminent  peculiarity  of  the  gospel,  that  it  stands  in  the 
most  intimate  harmony  with  justice.  It  is  such,  that  whithersoever  it  goes  supreme 
justice  goes  with  it.  3.  The  gospel  has  still  another  element  of  durability.  Purity 
is  proof  against  decay ;  impurity  is  decay  already  begun.  And  the  gospel  is  a  holy 
thing.  It  sprang  from  holiness:  it  was  framed  upon  holiness ;  it  makes  for  holiness. 
4.  I  will  name  only  one  thing  more  about  the  gospel  which  involves  its  enduring- 
ness.  We  count  upon  the  success  of  an  undertaking  which  has  abundance  of 
strength  behind  it.  What  project  would  we  not  reckon  secure  of  a  firm  place  in  history 
if  the  flag  of  every  nation  were  unfurled  around  it,  and  every  heart  was  knit  to 
every  other  in  the  resolve  that  it  should  prosper  and  last  ?  But  all  our  figures  are 
poor  when  we  bring  them  alongside  of  the  fact  concerning  the  strength  which  girds 
this  gospel.  It  is  the  gospel  of  the  Omnipotent.  But  is  His  gospel  then  omni- 
potent ?  Virtually  it  is.  II.  The  gospel  may  be  called  "  eternal "  because  duration 
hitherto  has  been  so  FULL  OF  IT.  The  material  universe,  we  have  come  to  know, 
is  stupendously  great.  Thought  wearies  itself  in  a  wilderness  of  world-systems ; 
and  when  our  glasses  have  carried  our  vision  farthest  into  the  teeming  depths  of 
space,  we  more  than  conjecture  that  we  have  only  been  gazing  around  the  horizon- 
line  of  an  ocean  of  Divine  handiwork.  Yet,  in  the  minds  of  those  to  whom  both 
are  equally  known,  the  gospel  bulks  larger  than  this  universe  that  is  so  nearly 
infinite.  We  catch  stray  echoes  of  the  converse  of  mightier  intelligences  than  time 
can  hold — of  beings  who  know  creation  with  a  knowledge  which  dwarfs  all  our 
science  into  the  knowledge  of  children ;  and  for  once  that  they  are  thinking  of  God's 
creation  they  are  ten  times  thinking  of  God's  salvation.  And  this,  we  may  assure 
ourselves,  does  no  more  than  reflect  the  thought  of  the  adorable  Creator.  The  Lord 
of  the  gospel  is  the  Lord  of  creation,  and  He  is  the  Lord  of  creation  as  the  Lord  of 
the  gospel — this  actually  now,  and  this  potentially  from  "  before  the  world  began." 
This  gospel  would  seem  to  be  the  oldest  thing  we  know.  For  it  has  the  look  of  being 
more  than  an  eternal  thought  of  the  Divine  mind,  and  more  than  an  eternal  purpose 
of  the  Divine  will ;  it  wears  an  appearance  of  completeness,  of  maturity,  of  readi- 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hv. 

ness,  of  actuality  almost ;  it  has  gotten  a  prerogative  of  making  a  place  for  itself 
among  eternal  things,  and  of  casting  its  own  influence  into  the  whole  current  of  the 
immeasurable  past.  We  listen  on  this  sea-board  of  time,  and  the  sound  which 
reaches  us  out  of  the  shoreless  eternity  is  a  gospel-sound.  We  are  hearing  the  far- 
coming  murmur  of  "  an  eternal  gospel."  III.  The  gospel  may  be  spoken  of  as 
"  eternal "  because  it  will  always  be  what  it  has  always  been.  No  change  is  to 
be  detected  in  its  character  or  its  contents  through  all  the  changes  that  have  come 
to  pass  in  its  condition  and  its  circumstances.  It  has  not  even  developed,  save  in 
manifestation  and  in  the  spread  of  its  influence  among  men.  What,  then,  of 
the  future  ?  What  of  the  coming  generations  of  the  history  of  the  gospel  in  the 
world  ?  These  may  see  more  of  change  than  even  the  past  generations  have  seen. 
Shall  the  gospel  itself  be  touched  with  change  ?  The  Scriptures,  which  hold  the 
revelation  of  it  from  the  beginning,  may  come  to  be  beheld  in  a  light  so  searching, 
that  venerable  beliefs  as  to  their  formation  may  be  universally  modified.  Meanwhile 
the  gospel  will  stand  as  it  has  never  but  stood  ;  and  the  total  result  of  all  new  light, 
of  aU  new  movement,  will  be  the  more  fuU  and  luminous  display  of  what  those 
tidings  are  which  abide  for  ever.  And  is  it  so  ?  Shall  this  gospel  which  we  so 
poorly  preach,  and  which  men  are  so  slow  to  hear — shall  it  be  to  some  of  us  our 
theme,  our  motive,  our  inspiration,  the  breath  of  our  life,  when  the  first  ages  of 
redemption  have  gone  far  into  the  past  ?  Still  new  ? — and  still  the  same  ?  Even 
so.  The  same  Saviour,  the  same  great  kinship  to  Him,  the  same  clearing  of  the 
dark  past,  the  same  upward  road  to  spiritual  health  and  power,  the  same  "  ever- 
lasting righteousness,"  the  same  mercy,  the  same  love,  the  same  peace  and  joy  made 
up  to  eternal  measure — this,  with  deepening  knowledge  of  what  it  all  means,  and 
ever-gathering  enrichment  from  what  it  all  infolds,  will  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  con- 
tinue to  be  as  long  as  eternity  continues !     IV.  The  gospel  may  be  called  "  eternal," 

IN  CONTBAST  TO  SO  MUCH  THAT  IS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  IT  IN  THE  WORLD.    Is  there  anything 

at  all  in  the  world  that  is  unshif  ting  and  sure  ?  We  think  little  about  the  uncer- 
tainty of  things,  because  we  know  so  little  else.  Yet  it  would  be  a  luxury,  we 
imagine,  to  be  able  to  fix  our  thought,  not  to  say  our  hope  or  our  love,  upon  some- 
thing which  will  not  catch  the  general  infection  of  things  as  it  gets  into  treacherous 
motion,  or  slips  our  grasp,  or  vanishes,  leaving  us  to  soothe  as  we  can  our  aching 
hearts.  It  is  this  gospel.  It  is  what  brings  us  to  the  friendly  stability  of  God  as  a 
personal  and  present  and  settled  possession.  For  the  good  tidings,  from  generation 
to  generation,  from  man  to  man,  from  experience  to  experience,  abides  the  same 
enriching,  comforting,  rectifying  thing,  unable  to  disappoint  or  deceive.  {J.  A. 
Kerr  Bain,  M.A.)  The   everlasting  gospel: — I.   The  gospel.      It  is  a   "glad 

message  "  from  God  to  man  ;  good  news  from  heaven  to  earth.  1.  Of  God's  free 
love.  2.  Of  God's  great  gift.  3.  Of  God's  propitiation  for  sin.  4.  Of  God's 
righteousness.  5.  Of  God's  kingdom.  II.  The  everlasting  gospel.  {H. 
Bonar,  D.D.)         The  survival  of  the  fittest : — I.  Because  it  gathers  up  all  the 

TEACHINGS  OF  NATURE.      II.    BECAUSE  IT   FULFILS   ALL   THE   PREDICTIONS   OF   PROPHECY. 

III.  Because  it  meets  the  universal  wants  of  man.    IV.  Because  it  possesses 

IMMORTAL  youth.       V.    BECAUSE  IT  IS  EVER  GAINING   FRESH  EMPIRE   AND   RENOWN.      VI. 

Because  its  Author  has  risen  and  reigns  for  ever.  {F.  W.  Brown.)  The  gospel 
of  retribution  : — 1.  What,  then,  is  this  gospel  ?  It  is  the  gospel  of  retribution ;  we  are 
to  fear  and  glorify  God  because  the  hour  of  His  judgment  is  come.  This  is  the 
truth  which  the  angel  flying  in  mid-heaven,  between  God  and  man,  proclaims 
and  always  will  proclaim.  This  is  the  truth  which  St.  John  calls  "  an  eternal 
gospel" — not  the  gospel,  and  still  less  the  only  gospel,  but  still  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy  to  us  and  to  all  mankind.  Are  you  disappointed?  Do  you  say,  "  That  is  true 
enough,  no  doubt.  Sooner  or  later  the  actions  of  men  do  round  upon  them  in  the 
strangest  way.  A  man  may  as  soon  jump  off  his  own  shadow  as  evade  the  con- 
sequences of  his  own  deeds.  But  we  need  no  apostle,  no  angel  out  of  heaven,  to 
teach  us  that.  Our  poets,  our  moralists,  our  philosophers,  our  very  novelists,  have 
long  sung  in  that  key.  And  our  own  hearts,  our  consciences,  our  experience  of  life, 
have  taken  up  and  swelled  the  strain.  We  need  no  future  witness  to  the  fact  of 
retribution.  But  there  is  no  gospel  in  the  fact.  It  brings  no  good  tidings  to  us,  but 
rather  tidings  of  despair.  A  gospel  of  redemption  would  be  good  news  indeed  if 
it  could  possibly  be  true ;  but  a  gospel  of  retribution  is  a  mere  contradiction  in  terms." 
Are  you  so  sure  that  every  man  must  receive  according  to  his  deeds  that  you  have 
made  your  ways  and  doings  good,  that  you  dread  and  resist  every  temptation  to  do 
evil  ?  You  respect  and  observe  the  law  of  gravity  because  you  are  quite  sure  that 
it  is  a  law.     Do  you  show  an  equal  respect  for  the  law  of  retribution  ?    Consider, 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  485 

again,  if  the  law  of  retribution  is  familiar  to  you,  is  it  nothing  to  you  to  be  assured 
that  what  you  admit  to  be  a  law  is  also  a  gospel  ?  When  we  are  told  that  God's 
judgments  on  sin  are  an  eternal  gospel,  a  gospel  for  all  beings  in  all  ages,  what  is 
implied  ?  This  is  implied — and  there  is  no  truth  more  precious  or  more  practical — 
that  the  judgments  of  God  are  corrective,  disciplinary,  redemptive ;  that  they  are 
designed  to  turn  us  away  from  the  sins  by  which  they  are  provoked.  Nothing  can 
be  more  wholesome  for  us,  and  no  truer  or  nobler  comfort  can  be  given  us  when  we 
are  suffering  the  painful  consequences  of  our  evil  deeds,  than  the  assurance  that 
these  retributions  are  intended  for  our  good  ;  not  to  injure  or  destroy  us,  but  to 
quicken  life  in  us,  or  the  godly  sorrow  which  worketh  life.  And,  surely,  up  to  a 
certain  point  at  least,  we  can  see  that  this  law  is  a  good  law,  deterring  us  from 
evil,  driving  and  inviting  us  toward  that  which  is  good.  But  if  the  law  work  good 
it  is  good  ;  i.e.,  it  is  a  gospel  as  well  as  a  law.  It  would  be  bad  news  that  the  law 
was  to  be  repealed.  That  there  is  much  in  the  operation  of  this  law  which  as  yet 
we  cannot  fathom,  or  cannot  prove  to  be  good,  must  be  admitted.  One  man's  guilt 
is  another  man's  loss  or  pain.  We  often  suffer  as  much  from  our  ignorance  as  from 
our  sins.  The  best  people  often  have  the  hardest  life.  And  here,  as  we  cannot 
walk  by  sight  we  must  walk  by  faith.  Eetribution  is  a  gospel,  an  eternal  gospel, 
because  it  is  medicinal  and  redemptive,  because  it  either  corrects  that  which  is  evil 
in  us,  or  because  it  is  a  discipline  by  which  we  are  prepared  for  larger  good.  2.  But 
this  mystery  of  unprovoked  or  disproportionate  suffering  may  grow  clearer  to  us  as 
we  consider  that,  in  his  eternal  gospel,  St.  John  includes  not  only  present,  but  also 
future  judgments.  The  angel  is  always  proclaiming  judgment,  but  he  also  proclaims 
"  hours  "  of  judgment,  crises  in  which  the  whole  story  of  a  life,  a  race,  or  an  age, 
is  summed  up,  and  finally  adjusted  by  an  unerring  standard.  Such  an  hour  was 
then  at  hand.  Such  an  hour  is  never  far  off  from  any  one  of  us.  No  fact,  no 
truth,  proclaimed  by  Christ  and  by  His  angels  or  messengers,  has  been  invested  with 
more  awful  terrors  than  this  of  the  last  judgment — the  last,  or  at  least  the  last  for 
us,  the  judgment  which  closes  this  earthly  span.  And,  to  flesh  and  blood,  it  must 
always  be  full  of  terror.  And  yet  there  are  considerations  which  may  well  abate 
our  surprise.  For,  with  all  his  fear  of  judgment,  there  is  a  deep  craving  for  justice 
in  every  man's  heart,  and  a  profound  conviction  that,  in  some  respects  at  least,  he 
has  never  had  it,  or  never  had  it  to  the  full.  His  neighbours  have  wronged  him. 
He  has  had  to  suffer  for  their  folly,  their  extravagance,  their  crimes,  their  sins. 
His  actions  have  been  misrepresented,  his  motives  misconstrued.  Or  circumstances 
have  been  against  him,  and  he  has  never  been  able  to  get  the  culture  he  longed  for 
and  prized.  Poverty,  drudgery,  grief,  and  care  have  exhausted  him,  leaving  him  no 
leisure  and  no  force  for  pursuing  the  loftier  aims  of  life.  Or  he  has  been  unfortu- 
nate in  the  relationships  he  has  formed,  and  found  them  a  burden  instead  of  a  help. 
As  you  all  know,  there  are  men  who,  in  a  thousand  different  ways,  have  been 
crippled,  hampered,  thwarted,  defeated  in  the  race  of  life,  who  have  never  had  a  fair 
chance,  whose  hearts  have  been  shaken  and  soured  by  the  accidents  and  changes  of 
time.  And  if  to  any  of  these  sufferers  from  misfortune  or  injustice,  sitting  in 
darkness  and  asking,  "  What  does  it  all  mean  ?  "  you  could  say  with  conviction  and 
authority,  "  It  means  that  the  end  is  not  yet ;  but  the  end  is  coming.  God  will  yet 
do  you  ample  justice,  redress  all  your  wrongs,  compensate  you  for  all  your  losses, 
turn  all  your  sorrows  into  joy,  make  you  what  you  would  be,  and  enable  you  to  do 
and  to  get  all  you  crave  " — would  not  such  a  message  be  a  true  gospel  to  him  ?  If 
he  could  believe  it,  would  it  not  be  to  him  as  Uf e  from  the  dead  ?  Would  he  be  slow 
to  give  glory  unto  God  ?  And  is  it  not  good  news  that  when  we  pass  from  the  hasty 
censures  of  a  busy  and  careless,  if  not  a  cruel,  world,  we  shall  be  weighed  in  finer 
scales  and  a  truer  balance  ?  that  our  most  inward  and  delicate  motives  will  be  taken 
into  account,  as  well  as  the  blundering  actions  which  so  ill  expressed  them  by  One 
who  knows  us  altogether,  and  reads  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart  ?  Fear 
God,  then,  and  give  Him  glory,  for  the  hour  of  His  judgment  is  coming  and  is  nigh. 
You  cannot  help  but  fear  Him,  indeed,  for  His  pure  eyes  must  discern  much  evil  in 
you  which  you  have  failed  to  detect ;  and  at  His  bar  you  will  have  to  answer  for 
your  injustice  to  your  neighbours,  for  the  wrongs  you  have  done  them,  for  your 
misconstructions  of  their  characters,  their  actions,  their  motives.  But,  according  to 
St.  John,  with  fear  or  reverence  we  are  to  blend  thanksgiving.  According  to  him, 
retribution  is  a  gospel  as  well  as  a  law,  and  we  are  to  give  glory  to  God  even  as  we 
advance  toward  His  judgment-seat.  How  should  either  an  apostle,  or  an  angel,  bid 
us  bless  God  for  the  hour  of  judgment  as  for  a  gospel,  if  there  were  no  mercy,  no 
hope,  no  blessing  in  it?     3.  This  gospel  is  an  eternal,  or  universal,  gospel,  a  gospel 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

for  all  ages,  for  all  men.  It  is  proclaimed  unto  "every  nation,  and  tribe,  and 
tongue  and  people."  And  here,  surely,  we  may  find  a  theme  for  praise.  The  world 
is  full  of  injustice,  full  of  misery.  And  as  you  think  of  these  common  events, 
events  as  common  in  every  other  circle  as  in  your  own,  what  a  gospel  is  this  which 
the  angel,  flying  in  mid-heaven,  proclaims  with  a  great  voice  !  "  This  world  is  not 
all.  It  is  not  the  end,  but  only  the  beginning ;  and  the  beginnings  of  life  are  always 
obscure  and  mysterious.  The  hour  of  judgment  is  coming,  in  which  the  mystery 
will  be  explained  and  vindicated  ;  in  which  God  will  redress  every  wrong,  compen- 
sate every  loss."  Take  the  world  as  it  is,  cut  it  off  from  the  great  astronomical 
system  of  which  it  forms  part,  and  it  is  a  mystery  which  none  can  fathom.  And 
take  human  life  as  it  is,  as  a  story  without  a  sequel,  and  you  can  only  give  it  up  as 
an  insoluble  problem,  a  mighty  maze  without  a  plan.  But  listen  to  this  gospel  of 
retribution,  connect  this  world  with  the  world,  or  worlds,  in  heaven,  regard  the 
present  life  as  an  introduction  to,  a  discipline  for,  a  larger,  happier  life  to  come,  and 
your  burden  is  eased  ;  the  problem  becomes  capable  of  a  happy  solution.  If  you 
must  still  fear  God,  you  can  also  give  Him  glory  because  the  hour  of  His  judgment 
is  coming,  the  hour  at  which  He  will  gather  the  whole  world  under  His  rule,  and 
all  nations  and  tribes,  and  tongues  and  peoples,  shall  become  His  people  and  know 
Him  for  their  God.  That  this  law  of  retribution  has  another  aspect,  that  the  justice 
of  God  must  be  full  of  terror  for  as  many  as  cleave  to  their  sins  and  will  not  let 
them  go,  none  of  us  are  likely  to  forget.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  gospel  enduring  : — 
Mineralogists  and  geologists  are  predicting  in  doleful  strains  the  exhaustion  of  coal. 
Even  such  an  eminent  Christian  philosopher  as  Dr.  Chalmers  believed  that  the 
mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal  resources  of  nature  would  fail  to  keep  pace  with  the 
wants  of  a  rapidly  increasing  population.  But  the  gospel  is  eternal.  "  Jesus  Christ, 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Amid  aU  life's  vicissitudes  He  is 
unalterable  in  love  and  power.  There  follcwed  another  angel,  saying,  Babylon  is 
fallen. — The  doom  of  the  world-power : — The  second  angel  follows  on  the  first ;  the 
doom  of  the  world-city,  the  metropolis  of  the  empire  of  the  world-power,  follows 
the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  The  principles  of  Christ's  gospel  must  undermine 
the  world-power :  the  fall  of  some  Babylon  principle  has  almost  always  succeeded 
the  age  of  spiritual  revival.  Pagan  Borne  goes  down  before  the  gospel.  {Bp.  Boyd 
Carpenter.) 

Vers.  9-12.  And  the  third  angel  followed  them,  saying  with  a  loud  voice.  If  any 
man  worship  the  beast  and  his  image. — Soul  prostitution  and  soul  loyalty: — 
I.  Soul  prostitution.  1.  The  prostitution  of  the  soul  to  wrong  is  an  alarming 
crime.  2.  The  prostitution  of  the  soul  to  wrong  always  incurs  lamentable  suffering. 
The  metaphors  here  are  borrowed  from  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hebrew  people,  and 
they  convey  the  idea  of  suffering  of  an  alarming  kind,  suggesting — (1)  A  conscious- 
ness of  Divine  antagonism.  "Wine  of  the  wrath  of  God."  In  the  sense  of 
malignant  passion  there  is  no  wrath  in  Him  who  is  love.  But  it  is  a  psychological 
fact  that  the  man  who  suffers  because  he  has  done  another  an  injury,  has  a  con- 
sciousness that  the  one  he  has  offended  is  angry  with  him,  and  this  consciousness 
is  the  chief  element  in  his  suffering.  (2)  A  sense  of  intense  agony.  "  Shall  be 
tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone."  Brimstone  adds  intensity  to  the  heat  and  fury 
to  the  flames  of  fire.  "  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear,"  said  Cain.  A 
guilty  conscience  has  its  Tartarus  or  Gehenna  within  itself.  (3)  A  state  of  constant 
restlessness.  "  They  have  no  rest  day  nor  (and)  night."  There  is  no  rest  in  sin. 
•'  The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea."  H.  Soul  loyalty.  "  Here  is  the  patience 
of  the  saints."  What  is  patience  ?  It  is  not  insensibility.  Some  people  are  lauded 
for  their  patience  who  should  be  denounced  for  their  stoicism  and  indifference. 
Patience  implies  at  least  two  things.  (1)  The  existence  of  trials.  Patience  lives  only 
in  difficulty  and  danger,  in  storms  and  tempests.  (2)  The  highest  mental  power. 
Man's  highest  power  of  mind  is  seen  not  in  unsurpassed  mechanical  inventions,  or 
the  sublimest  productions  of  art,  not  in  the  most  baffling  and  confounding  strategies 
of  bloody  war,  but  in  the  successful  effort  to  govern  all  the  impulses  and  master  all 
the  boisterous  passions  of  the  human  soul.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  smoke  of 
their  torment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever. — Hell : — I.  We  affirm  there  is  a 
HELL  ;  punishments  finite  in  degree,  but  infinite  in  duration.  1.  Scripture 
gives  no  countenance  to  this  absurd  opinion,  that  the  wicked  shall  have  no  part  in 
resurrection  and  judgment  (Eom,  iii.  4,  5 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  Eev.  xx.  12,  13,  15 ; 
John  V.  28,  29).  2.  Scripture  clearly  affirms  that  the  punishment  of  the  damned 
shall  not  consist  of  annihilation,  but  of  real  and  sensible  pain  (Matt.  xxvi.  24; 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  487 

xi.  24).  Scripture-images  of  hell,  which  are  many,  will  not  allow  us  to  confine 
future  punishment  to  annihilation.  It  is  a  worm,  a  fire,  a  darkness  ;  they  are  chains 
— weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  3.  It  appears  by  Scripture  that  future 
punishment  will  be  eternal  (Matt,  xxv,  41 ;  Mark  ix.  44 ;  Matt,  xviii.  8 ;  Kev. 
XX.  10).     II.  If  the  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment  imply  a  contbadiction,  it  must 

EITHER  REGARD  MAN,  THE  SUFFERER  OF  THE  PAIN,  OR  GOD,  WHO  THREATENS  TO  INFLICT  IT. 

1.  The  nature  of  man  hath  nothing  incongruous  with  that  degree  and  duration  of 
punishment  of  which  we  speak.  2.  Let  us  attend  now  to  objections  taken  from  the 
nature  of  God.  A  man,  who  opposeth  our  doctrine,  reasons  in  this  manner.  Which 
way  soever  I  consider  a  Being  supremely  perfect,  I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  He 
wiU  expose  His  creatures  to  eternal  torments.  All  His  perfections  secure  me  from 
such  terrors  as  this  doctrine  seems  to  inspire.  In  short,  when  I  consider  God  under 
the  idea  of  an  equitable  legislator,  I  cannot  comprehend  how  sins  committed  in  a 
finite  period  can  deserve  an  infinite  punishment.  (1)  Observe  this  general  truth. 
It  is  not  probable  God  would  threaten  mankind  with  a  punishment,  the  infiiction  of 
which  would  be  incompatible  with  His  perfections.  (2)  Take  each  part  of  the 
objection  drawn  from  the  attributes  of  God,  and  said  to  destroy  our  doctrine,  and 
consider  it  separately.  The  argument  taken  from  the  liberty  of  God  would  carry  us 
from  error  to  error,  and  from  one  absurdity  to  another.  For,  if  God  be  free  to 
relax  any  part  of  the  punishment  denounced.  He  is  equally  free  to  relax  the  whole. 
The  difficulty  taken  from  the  goodness  of  God  vanisheth  when  we  rectify  popular 
notions  of  this  excellence  of  the  Divine  nature.  Goodness  in  men  is  a  virtue  of 
constitution  which  makes  them  suffer  when  they  see  their  fellow  creatures  in  misery, 
and  which  excites  them  to  relieve  them.  In  God  it  is  a  perfection  independent  in 
its  origin,  free  in  its  execution,  and  always  restrained  by  laws  of  inviolable  equity 
and  exact  severity.  Justice  is  not  incompatible  with  eternal  punishment.  It  is  not 
to  be  granted  that  a  sin  committed  in  a  limited  time  ought  not  to  be  punished 
through  an  infinite  duration.  It  is  not  the  length  of  time  employed  in  committing 
a  crime  that  determines  the  degree  and  the  duration  of  its  punishment,  it  is  the 
turpitude  and  atrociousness  of  it.  The  justice  of  God,  far  from  opposing  the 
punishment  of  the  impenitent,  requires  it.  Were  we  to  examine  in  this  manner 
each  part  of  the  objection  opposed  against  our  doctrine,  we  should  open  a  second 
source  of  solutions  to  answer  it.  (3)  The  doctrine  of  degrees  of  punishment 
affords  us  a  third.  There  is  an  extreme  difference  between  a  heathen  and  a  Jew ; 
there  is  an  extreme  distance  between  a  Jew  and  a  Christian ;  and  a  greater  still 
between  a  Christian  and  a  heathen.  The  gospel-rule  is,  "  Unto  whomsoever  much 
is  given,  of  him  shaU  be  much  required."  Take  this  principle  which  Scripture 
establisheth  in  the  clearest  manner  ;  press  home  all  its  consequences  ;  extend  it  as 
far  as  it  can  be  carried  ;  give  scope  even  to  your  imagination  till  the  punishments 
which  such  and  such  persons  suffer  in  hell  are  reduced  to  a  degree  that  may  serve 
to  solve  the  difficulty  of  the  doctrine  of  their  eternity ;  whatever  system  ye  adopt 
on  this  article,  I  will  even  venture  to  say  whatever  difficulty  ye  may  meet  with  in 
following  it,  it  will  be  always  more  reasonable,  I  think,  to  make  of  one  doctrine 
clearly  revealed  a  clue  to  guide  through  the  difficulties  of  another  doctrine  clearly 
revealed  too,  than  rashly  to  deny  the  formal  decisions  of  Scripture.  I  mean  to 
say,  it  would  be  more  rational  to  stretch  the  doctrine  of  degrees  too  far,  if  I  may 
venture  to  speak  so,  than  to  deny  that  of  their  eternity.  (4)  The  fourth  source  of 
solutions  is  a  maxim  from  which  a  divine  ought  never  to  depart,  and  which  we  wish 
particularly  to  inculcate  among  those  who  extend  the  operations  of  reason  too  far  in 
matters  of  religion.  Our  maxim  is  this.  We  know,  indeed,  in  general,  what  are 
the  attributes  of  God,  but  we  are  extremely  ignorant  of  their  sphere,  we  cannot 
determine  how  far  they  extend.  We  know,  in  general,  God  is  free.  He  is  just.  He 
is  merciful.  But  we  are  too  ignorant  to  determine  how  far  these  perfections  must 
go,  because  the  infinity  of  them  absorbs  the  capacity  of  our  minds.  Apply  this 
to  our  subject.  The  idea  of  hell  seems  to  you  repugnant  to  the  attributes  of 
God,  you  cannot  comprehend  how  a  just  God  can  punish  finite  sins  with  infinite 
pain;  how  a  merciful  God  can  abandon  His  creature  to  eternal  miseries.  Your 
difficulties  have  some  probability,  I  grant.  Your  reasons,  I  allow,  seem  well 
grounded.  But  dost  thou  remember  the  attributes  of  God  are  infinite  ?  Remember, 
thy  knowledge  is  finite.  You  think  future  punishment  inconsistent  with  the 
attributes  of  God,  but  your  notion  of  inconsistence  ought  to  vanish  at  the  appear- 
ance of  Scripture-light.  HI.  Observe  the  qualitt  and  the  duration  of  the 
PUNISHMENTS  OF  HELL.  1.  The  quality  of  the  punishments  of  hell  is  expressed 
n  these  terms — smoke,  torment.     These  metaphorical  terms  include  five  ideas. 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Privation  of  heavenly  happiness,  sensation  of  pain,  remorse  of  conscience,  horror 
of  society,  increase  of  crime.  2.  It  remains  only  that  we  consider  the  length  and 
duration  of  them.  But  by  what  means  shall  we  describe  these  profound  articles  of 
contemplation  ?  Can  we  number  the  innumerable  and  measure  that  which  is 
beyond  all  mensuration  ?  Can  we  make  you  comprehend  the  incomprehensible  ? 
And  shall  we  amuse  you  with  our  imaginations  ?     {J.  Saurin.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints. — Patient  waiting  upon  God : — 
The  duty,  necessity,  and  good  effects  of  patience  are  often  set  forth  in  the  Word  of 
God.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,  because,  by  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  patience, 
unless  accompanied  by  selfish  cunning,  or  a  proud  contempt  of  others,  is  regarded 
rather  as  a  weakness  than  a  virtue.  Evangelical  or  spiritual  patience  is  not  mere 
resignation  to  the  ills  of  life  and  the  dispensations  of  providence,  nOr  mere  perse- 
verance in  the  path  of  duty,  although  neither  of  these  can  really  exist  without  it. 
It  is  something  more  than  either,  or  than  both  combined,  that  is  described  in 
Scripture  as  the  characteristic  patience  of  the  saints,  or,  as  it  is  frequently 
expressed,  their  patient  waiting  upon  God.  In  those  parts  of  Scripture  where  the 
duty  of  waiting  upon  God  is  enforced,  the  idea  of  serving  Him  is  certainly  implied, 
but  the  primary  meaning  of  the  phrase  is  that  of  waiting  for,  expecting  God,  His 
presence.  His  favour,  the  fulfilment  of  His  promises,  as  well  as  the  utterance  of 
His  commands.  This  patient  waiting  upon  God  is  represented  not  only  as  accept- 
able to  Him,  and  as  a  source  of  good  in  general,  but  of  specific  benefits,  without 
which  spiritual  life  can  never  flourish,  if  it  can  exist.  For  example,  it  is  represented 
as  a  source  of  strength,  that  is,  spiritual  strength,  the  power  of  performance,  and 
endurance,  and  resistance;  of  withstanding  evil,  and  of  doing  good  (Isa.  xl.  31). 
So  far  from  warning  us  against  excess  in  the  employment  of  this  means  for  the 
recruiting  of  our  spiritual  strength,  the  Scripture  points  it  out  as  the  highway  to 
perfection  (James  i.  4).  It  is  presented,  likewise,  as  the  only  security  against  the 
disappointment  and  frustration  of  our  strongest  confidence  and  highest  trust.  Is  it 
then  a  mere  inert  quiescence,  a  stagnation  of  the  soul,  without  affection  or  activity, 
that  God's  Word  sets  before  us,  as  a  duty,  as  a  necessary  source  of  strength,  and 
as  the  highway  to  perfection  ?  Such  a  conclusion  is  well  suited  to  the  tendency  of 
human  nature  to  extremes  ;  but  if  it  were  correct  the  apostle  could  never  have  used 
such  a  combination  (Heb.  vi.  12).  The  patience  that  is  heir  to  the  promises  of 
God  is  therefore  not  a  mere  negation,  not  a  stagnant  patience,  not  a  slothful 
patience.  It  is  urged  on  to  action  by  a  potent  principle,  the  love  of  God,  without 
which  patient  waiting,  in  the  true  sense,  is  impossible  (2  Thess.  iii.  5).  But  this 
Divine  love  may  itself  be  personated  by  a  mere  inert  affection,  or  by  a  corrupt  one, 
which  refuses  to  be  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  He  has 
therefore  taught  us  that  obedience  to  His  will  is  an  essential  characteristic  of  true 
patience.  "  Wait  on  the  Lord,"  and  "  keep  His  way,"  that  is,  walk  in  the  way  of 
His  commandments,  are  inseparable  precepts,  forming,  not  severally,  but  together, 
the  condition  of  the  promise,  "  He  shall  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  land  "  (Psa. 
xxxvii.  34).  They  for  whom  glory,  and  honour,  and  immortality,  and  eternal  life 
are  reserved,  are  they  who  seek  it,  not  simply  by  patient  continuance,  but  "  by 
patient  continuance  in  well  doing  "  (Rom.  ii.  7).  "  Ye  have  need  of  patience,  that 
after  ye  have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  inherit  the  promise  "  (Heb.  x.  36).  The 
patience  of  the  saints,  then,  is  neither  an  inactive  nor  a  lawless  patience,  but  a 
loving  and  obedient  patience.  It  is  through  faith  and  patience,  a  patient  trust  and 
a  believing  patience,  that  the  saints  in  glory  have  inherited  the  promises.  From 
such  a  faith  hope  is  inseparable.  He  who  would  not  be  slothful,  but  a  follower  of 
them  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises, must  do  so  by"  showing 
diligence  "  in  every  duty  "  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end  "  (Heb.  vi.  11). 
The  faith  and  hope  which  are  thus  represented  as  essential  to  the  patience  of  the 
saints,  are  not  merely  a  vague  trust  and  expectation,  founded  upon  no  sufficient 
reason,  or  simply  on  the  attributes  of  God,  or  His  promises  in  general,  without 
regard  to  the  restrictions  and  conditions  by  which  they  are  accompanied,  but  a 
specific  trust  and  expectation,  having  a  definite  object,  reason,  and  foundation.  We 
have  seen  already  that  the  exercise  of  Christian  patience  is  described  in  Scripture 
as  a  patient  waiting,  not  for  something  unknown,  not  for  evil,  not  for  good  in  the 
general,  but  for  God.  "  Blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for  Him  "  (Isa.  xxx.  18).  It 
might  be  asked  how  or  why  should  men  wait  for  or  expect  the  Lord  ?  He  will  be 
for  ever  what  He  is.  He  will  be  for  ever,  as  He  is  now,  intimately  present  to  His 
creatures.    But  the  definite  object  of  the  true  believer's  patient  expectation  is  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION. 


manifestation  of  God's  mercy  in  His  own  salvation,  in  His  complete  and  final 
deliverance  from  suffering  and  from  sin.  "  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  He  will  save 
thee"  (Prov.  xx.  22).  "  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord."  But  even  here,  the  expectation  of  the  Christian  might  be 
too  vague  to  secure  the  exercise  of  genuine  patience.  He  might  look  to  God  for 
salvation,  but  without  understanding  how  it  was  to  be  procured,  or  how  it  could  be 
reconciled  with  the  Divine  justice.  While  this  doubt  or  ignorance  existed,  he  could 
hardly  rest  with  implicit  trust  even  on  God's  mercy,  and  could  not  therefore  be 
expected  to  possess  his  soul  in  patience.  The  only  remedy  for  this  uneasiness  and 
restlessness  of  spirit  is  a  just  apprehension,  not  only  of  God's  nature  as  a  merciful 
Being,  but  of  the  precise  way  in  which  His  mercy  can  and  will  be  exercised,  in 
which  He  can  be  just  and  yet  justify  the  ungodly.  La  other  words,  the  soul  must 
not  only  see  God  as  He  is  in  Himself,  but  see  Him  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world 
unto  Himself,  and  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them,  but  imputing  them  to 
Christ ;  making  Him  to  be  sin  for  us.  Who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  The  man  whose  hope  is  fixed,  not  on  abstrac- 
tions or  on  generalities,  not  even  on  the  attributes  of  God,  as  such,  nor  on  His 
promises  at  large,  but  on  the  positive,  distinct,  specific  promise  of  justification  and 
salvation  even  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  who  renounces  his  own  righteousness  and 
submits  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  by  a  simple  trust  in  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  that  man  may  indeed  be  said  to  "  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by 
faith  "  (Gal.  v.  5).  The  attitude  of  that  soul  is  indeed  one  of  waiting,  of  patient 
waiting,  of  patient  waiting  for  God,  of  patient  waiting  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord, 
of  "  love  to  God  and  patient  waiting  for  Christ."     {J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  The 

triumphs  of  patience : — I.  God  has  always  a  people  for  His  name;  He  owns  them 
to  be  SAINTS ;  and  they  are  often  found  where  we  should  little  expect  to  find  them. 
They  are  called  holy  for  two  reasons.  1.  The  first  is  taken  from  their  dedication 
to  God.  2.  The  second  is  derived  from  their  personal  renovation.  The  instru- 
ments under  the  law  were  only  holy  by  appropriation.  No  change  passed  upon 
them.  It  is  otherwise  with  us ;  we  must  be  "  made  meet  for  the  "  great  "  Master's 
use."  Hence  regeneration  is  necessary.  II.  On  the  connection  there  is  between 
SAINTS  AND  PATIENCE.  1.  Saiuts  ouly  havc  patience.  A  man  may  endure,  and  not 
be  patient ;  there  may  be  no  religious  principle  or  motive  to  influence  him  ;  it  may 
be  a  careless  indolence  ;  a  stupid  insensibility ;  a  kind  of  mechanical  or  constitu- 
tional fortitude ;  a  daring  stoutness  of  spirit  resulting  from  fatalism,  philosophy, 
or  pride.  Christian  patience  is  another  thing  ;  it  is  derived  from  a  Divine  agency ; 
it  is  nourished  by  heavenly  truth  ;  it  is  guided  by  Scriptural  rules.  2.  Every  saint 
possesses  patience.  They  do  not  indeed  possess  it  in  equal  degrees.  It  is  one  of 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  Divine  image  restored  in  man. 
3.  It  highly  becomes  saints  to  cultivate  patience.  "  The  ornament  of  a  meek  and 
quiet  spirit  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price."  It  ennobles  the  possessor.  It 
recommends  his  religion.  It  carries  along  with  it  a  peculiar  conviction.  HI.  Some 
CASES  in  which  the  patience  of  the  saints  is  to  be  rendered  iiiLUSTRious  and 
STRIKING.  1.  It  is  to  be  displayed  in  bearing  provocation.  "  It  must  needs  be  that 
offences  wUl  come."  Our  opinions,  reputations,  connections,  offices,  businesses, 
render  us  widely  vulnerable.  (1)  His  peace  requires  it.  People  love  to  sting  the 
passionate.  (2)  His  wisdom  requires  it.  "  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  of  great 
understanding  ;  but  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  folly.  Anger  resteth  in  the 
bosom  of  fools."  (3)  His  dignity  requires  it.  "  It  is  the  glory  of  a  man  to  pass 
by  a  transgression."  (4)  It  is  also  required  by  examples  the  most  worthy  of  our 
imitation.  2.  Patience  is  to  be  displayed  in  suffering  affliction.  3.  Patience  is  to 
be  exercised  under  delays.  {W.  Jay.)  The  faith  of  Jesus. — The  faith  of  Jesus : — 
Those  words  ought  to  describe  the  Church  of  Christ  at  all  times.  Three  character- 
istics :  patience — "  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  ;  "  keeping 
the  commandments  of  God  " — holiness  of  Living ;  "  keeping  the  faith  of  Jesus  " — 
that  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks  at  the  end  of  his  troubled  life.  Now,  what  is  meant 
by  "  the  faith,"  "  the  faith  of  Jesus  "  ?  Is  it  not  just  this  ?  The  twelve  apostles, 
whom  Jesus  gathered  round  Himself,  watched  His  life,  heard  His  words,  weighed 
His  claims,  until  at  last,  when  He  put  the  great  question  to  them,  "  Whom  say  ye 
that  I  am?  "  one  of  them,  speaking  for  the  rest,  was  able  to  say,  "  Thou  art  the 
Christ,"  Ac.  That  was  a  formulated  declaration  of  faith  in  regard  to  the  Person  of 
Jesus  Christ.  It  was  the  first  Christian  creed,  and  He  declared,  "  Flesh  and  blood 
hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  The  faith  of 
Jesus,  then,  being  a  definite  thing,  capable  of  and  necessitating  accurate  definition 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

in  terms,  it  was  obviously  essential  that  there  should  be  some  short,  comprehensive 
formula,  which  could  be  thus  used  at  the  baptism  of  converts.  Undoubtedly  some 
Buch  form  or  forms  did  exist  even  before  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  were 
written.  In  St.  Paul's  Epistles  there  are  distinct  allusions  to  these.  "  The  form  of 
sound  words "  which  he  bids  Timothy  •'  hold  fast,"  is  certainly  some  definite 
formula  in  use ;  and  the  "  deposit  "  ("  that  committed  to  thee  "it  is  rendered  in 
our  translation)  which  he  bids  Timothy  to  keep,  is  clearly  the  same  thing.  To  us 
Anglican  Churchmen  that"Eule  of  Faith"  is  the  Apostles'  Creed.  One  or  two 
things,  then,  1  may  surely  say  to  those  whose  entire  Christian  position  rests  upon 
this  faith  of  Jesus,  and  upon  this  early  form  of  confessing  it.  1.  You  wUl,  of 
course,  thoroughly  understand  it — the  Apostles'  Creed.  You  will  take  pains  to  do 
so.  (1)  You  will  know,  then,  its  history.  I  mean  the  history  of  its  actual  form. 
(2)  And,  again,  we  should  understand  the  substance  of  the  creed.  It  is,  indeed, 
little  else  than  the  gospel  narrative  thrown  into  a  short  form.  2.  And,  secondly, 
having  this  creed,  pledged  as  we  are  to  this  creed,  we  should  know  not  only  its 
history,  and  its  meaning,  but  we  should  know  its  value.  It  is,  indeed,  a  most 
precious  heritage.  I  might  remind  you  of  Mr.  Keble's  words,  "  Next  to  a  sound 
rule  of  faith,  there  is  nothing  of  so  much  consequence  as  a  sober  standard  of  feeling 
in  practical  religion,  and  it  is  the  peculiar  happiness  of  the  Church  of  England  to 
possess  in  her  authorised  formularies  an  ample  and  secure  provision  for  both." 
3.  Last  of  all,  we  must  regard  our  Christian  creed  as  final.  It  is  "  the  faith  of 
Jesus,"  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."  It  is  the  perpetual  reiteration  of 
St.  Peter's  early  creed,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,"  and  it 
must  hold  good  for  all  time,  till  He  shall  come  again  "  who  is  the  faithful  "Witness 
and  the  First -begotten  of  the  dead."  "  Here,"  around  this  creed  of  His  universal 
Church,  this  creed  which  you  and  I  profess,  — '*  here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints ; 
here  are  they  that  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and  the  faith  of  Jesus." 
[Canon  Gough.)  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord. — A  glance  into  the 
world  to  come  : — Why  are  those  happy  that  die  in  the  Lord  ?  Two  reasons  :  "  They 
rest  from  their  labours,"  and  "  their  works  follow  them."  "  They  rest."  That  is, 
doubtless,  a  happiness  which  is  something  negative,  but  which  is  none  the  less  of 
great  value.  Who  does  not  know  by  experience  what  sweetness  there  is  in  rest 
coming  after  fatigue  ?  The  present  life  is  every  moment  a  fatigue,  from  which 
death  is  an  eternal  rest ;  rest  from  labour,  rest  from  sufferings,  rest  from  sin.  But 
the  happiness  of  those  who  have  died  in  the  Lord  is  not  merely  negative.  They 
are  not  only  freed  from  the  fatigues  and  the  trials  of  life,  they  enjoy  a  boundless 
felicity.  That  is  what  the  Holy  Spirit  declares  in  our  text,  when  it  is  said  that 
"their  works  follow  them."  There  exists  a  close  connection  between  the  present 
life  and  the  life  to  come ;  the  latter  is,  as  it  were,  the  continuation  and  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  former  ;  the  character  of  the  life  to  come  is  determined  in  the 
case  of  each  one  by  that  of  his  present  life.  His  faith  bears  its  fruits  in  that  other 
life,  and  it  is  changed  into  sight ;  he  contemplates  and  he  touches  what  he  had 
believed.  Here  below,  he  saw  the  truth  confusedly,  and  as  through  an  obscure 
medium ;  but,  sustained  by  faith,  he  advanced  in  peace  in  the  midst  of  the 
perplexities  of  life ;  he  waited  with  patience  the  great  day  of  revelations ;  he 
accepted  as  good  and  full  of  love  dispensations  which  he  understood  not.  And  now, 
to  recompense  his  faith,  he  sees  face  to  face  ;  every  veil  is  removed,  all  obscurities 
dissipated.  To  his  view,  which  is  illuminated  from  on  high,  the  whole  of  the 
magnificent  plan  of  God  towards  the  world  is  all  unfolded,  and  everywhere  he 
discovers  wonders  of  wisdom  and  of  love.  The  most  unsearchable,  the  most 
painful  dispensations  of  the  present  life  appear  to  him  in  the  life  to  come  the  wisest 
and  most  paternal ;  and  who  can  tell  the  transports  of  admiration  and  of  holy  joy 
into  which  that  revelation  of  the  ways  of  God  casts  him  !  His  submission  to  the 
Divine  wUl  follows  him  equally  after  death ;  it  bears  its  fruit  in  the  life  to  come, 
and  it  is  changed  into  happiness.  It  is  very  little  to  say  that  he  is  for  ever  delivered 
from  the  trials  of  every  kind;  these  trials  give  place  not  only  to  rest,  but  to 
unspeakable  enjoyments.  We  have  said  how  the  works  of  the  people  of  God 
become  after  their  death  elements  of  their  felicity  ;  but  there  is  yet  another  sense 
in  which  it  can  be  said  that  these  works  follow  them  in  the  eternal  life.  Their 
works  still  follow  them  in  this  sense,  that  they  continue  in  heaven  that  life  of 
devotedness  to  the  Saviour,  and  of  activity  for  His  service,  which  they  commenced 
on  earth.  The  happiness  of  heaven  will  not  be  a  barren  inaction ;  it  will  be  an 
essentially  active  happiness.  They  wUl  take  part,  in  a  manner  which  we  cannot 
picture  here  below,  in  the  work  of  God  and  in  the  government  of  the  universe ; 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION,  491 

perhaps  each  of  them  will  have,  as  here  below,  special  aptitudes,  which  God  will 
make  the  most  of,  by  assigning  to  each  of  them  particular  occupations  in  harmony 
with  these  aptitudes.     In  order  to  be  able  to  apply  the  promises  of  my  text,  we 
must  therefore  die  in  the  Lord.     1.  To  die  in  the  Lord  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  die 
in  the  faith  of  the  Lord;  it  is  to  renounce  all  hope  of  salvation  founded  on 
ourselves,  on  our  works,  on  our  pretended  merits,  and  to  cause  our  hopes  to  rest 
only  on  the  merits  of  Christ,  on  the  atonement  accomplished  by  His  blood.     2.  To 
die  in  the  Lord  is  also  to  die  in  the  love  of  the  Lord ;  it  is  to  love  Him  Who  loved 
us  first,  and  that  unto  the  Cross  ;  it  is  to  feel  ourselves  drawn  to  Him  by  an  intimate 
and  powerful  affection  ;  it  is,  when  dying,  to  be  able  to  say  with  St.  Paul ;  "  I  have 
a  desire  to  depart,  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."     3.  To  die  in  the  Lord 
is  once  more  to  die  in  obedience  to  the  Lord.     It  is  to  die  after  having  lived  here 
below  in  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ ;  after  having  purified  ourselves  as  He  also  is 
pure ;  it  is  to  have  lived,  I  do  not  say  in  a  state  of  perfect  holiness,  but  at  least  in 
the  constant  desire  of  hoUness,  making  continual  efforts  to  reach  it,  and  approach- 
ing it  more  and  more.     4.  In  fine,  and  to  say  all  in  one  single  word,  to  die  in  the 
Lord  is  to  die  in  communion  with  the  Lord ;  it  is  to  die,  after  having  lived,  dead  to 
the  world  and  to  sin,  with  a  life  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God."   {H.  Monod.)        A  voice 
from  heaven : — I.  The  character.      1.  "  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints."      To 
be  blessed  when  we  die  we  must  be  saints.     By  nature  we  are  sinners,  and  by  grace 
we  must  become  saints  if  we  would  enter  heaven.     Since  death  does  not  change 
character,  we  must  be  made  saints  here  below  if  we  are  to  be  saints  above.     The 
word  "  saint "  denotes  not  merely  the  pure  in  character,  but  those  who  are  set  apart 
unto  God,  dedicated  ones,  sanctified  by  being  devoted  to  holy  uses — by  being,  in 
fact,  consecrated  to  God  alone.     Do  you  belong  to  God  ?    Do  you  live  to  glorify 
Jesus?     "  But  how  am  I  to  attain  to  holiness?"     You  cannot  rise  to  it  save  by 
Divine  strength.     The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Sanctifier.     2.  But  the  glorified  are  also 
described  in  our  text  as  patient  ones.     "  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  saints,"  or,  if 
you  choose  to  render  it  differently ,  you  may  lawfully  do  so — "  Here  is  the  endurance 
of  the  saints."     Those  who  are  to  be  crowned  in  Jaeaven  must  bear  the  cross  on 
earth.     If  we  are  to  win  the  glory  we  must  be  faithful  unto  death.     "  Here  is  the 
patience  of  the  saints  " ;  it  cometh  not  by  nature ;  it  is  the  gift  of  the  grace  of  God. 
3.  Farther  on  these  saints  are  described  as  "they  that  keep  the  commandments  of 
God."     4.  The  next  mark  of  the  blessed  dead  is  that  they  kept  "  the  faith  of  Jesus." 
Do  not  waver  in  your  belief,  but  keep  the  faith,  lest  ye  be  like  some  in  old  time, 
who  "  made  shipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience,"  and  were  utterly  cast  away. 
5.  Notice  that  these  people  continue  faithful  till  they  die.     For  it  is  said,  "  Blessed 
are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord."    Final  perseverance  is  the  crown  of  the 
Christian  hfe.     6.  Those  who  thus  entered  into  rest    exercised  themselves  in 
labours  for  Christ.    For  it  is  said,  "  They  rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works 
do  follow  them."     The  idle  Christian  can  have  little  hope  of  a  reward.     7.  To  close 
this  description  of  character,  these  people  who  die  in  the  Lord  were  in  the  Lord. 
That  is  the  great  point.     They  could  not  have  died  in  the  Lord  if  they  had  not 
lived  in  the  Lord.    But  are  we  in  the  Lord  ?    Is  the  Lord  by  faith  in  us  ?     II.  The 
BLESSEDNESS  which  is  ascribcd  to  those  who  die  in  the  Lord.     "  They  rest  from 
their  labours."     1.  By  this  is  meant  that  the  saints  in  heaven  rest  from  such 
labours  as  they  performed  here.     There  we  shall  not  teach  the  ignorant,  or  rebuke 
the  erring,  or  comfort  the  desponding,  or  help  the  needy.     There  we  cannot  oppose 
the  teacher  of  error,  or  do  battle  against  the  tempter  of  youth.     2.  They  rest  from 
their  labours  in  the  sense  that  they  are  no  longer  subject  to  the  toil  of  labour. 
Whatever  they  do  in  heaven  will  yield  them  refreshment,  and  never  cause  them 
weariness.    As  some  birds  are  said  to  rest  upon  the  wing,  so  do  the  saints  find  in 
holy  activity  their  serenest  repose.     3.  They  rest  also  from  the  woe  of  labour,  for 
I  find  the  word  has  been  read  by  some  "  they  rest  from  their  wailing."     4.  To  the 
servant  of  the  Lord  it  is  very  sweet  to  think  that  when  we  reach  our  heavenly 
home  we  shall  rest  from  the  faults  of  our  labours.     We  shall  make  no  mistakes 
there,  never  use  too  strong  language  or  mistaken  words,  nor  err  in  spirit,  nor  fail 
through  excess  or  want  of  zeal.     We  shall  rest  from  all  that  which  grieves  us  in 
the  retrospect  of  our  service.     5.  We  shall  there  rest  from  the  discouragements  of 
our  labour.     There  no  cold-hearted  brethren  will  damp  our  ardour,  or  accuse  us  of 
evil  motives ;  no  desponding  brethren  will  warn  us  that  we  are  rash  when  our  faith 
is  strong,  and  obstinate  when  our  confidence  is  firm.     6.  It  wUl  be  a  sweet  thing  to 
get  away  to  heaven,  I  am  sure,  to  rest  from  all  contentions  amongst  our  fellow 
Christians.     III.  The    reward    of   the  blessed  dead.     "They  rest  from   iheix 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them."  They  do  not  go  before  them;  they 
have  a  forerunner  infinitely  superior  to  their  works,  for  Jesus  and  His  finished 
work  have  led  the  way.  Jesus  goes  before,  works  follow  after.  Note  well,  that  the 
works  are  in  existence  and  are  mentioned ;  immortality  and  honour  belong  to 
them.  No  desire  for  another's  good  is  wasted,  God  has  heard  it.  A  word 
spoken  for  Jesus,  a  mite  cast  into  Christ's  treasury,  a  gracious  line  written 
to  a  friend — all  these  are  things  which  shall  last  when  yonder  sun  has  blackened 
into  a  coal.  Deeds  done  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  are  eternal.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  letter  from  heaven  : — It  is  a  brief  letter,  with  only  five  lines,  but  each  one  most 
sweet.  I.  The  fikst  line  :  That  the  union  between  God  and  His  people  continues 
THROUOH  DEATH — "  die  in  the  Lord."  When  a  ship  enters  the  harbour,  after  the  long 
and  stormy  voyage,  the  captain  pays  off  the  crew.  If  they  wish  to  go  on  that  ship 
again,  they  must  reship.  But  the  godly  have  signed  articles  to  die.  The  Lord  does 
not  pay  them  off  when  they  are  going  to  die^they  die  in  His  employ.  They  die  in  the 
service,  beneath  the  care  and  look  of  the  Master  ;  and  He  will  have  His  people  to 
die  aright.  II.  The  second  line  :  That  the  saints  after  death  go  to  best.  It  is 
impossible  to  rest  and  to  make  progress ;  one  of  the  two  can  alone  be  had  here. 
I  have  seen  a  tired  traveller  mounted  on  a  milestone — to  rest,  apparently.  He 
looked  weary,  and  his  parcel  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  milestone.  I  do  not  know  how 
long  he  had  been  there,  but  I  know  that  whenever  he  started  he  had  nine  miles 
to  go  to  the  next  town — it  was  that  on  the  milestone.  But  yonder  they  rest — not 
from  work,  but  from  labour.  They  grow,  and  yet  they  rest;  they  rest,  and  yet 
grow.  " They  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary;  and  they  shall  walk,  and  not  faint." 
in.  The  third  line  :  That  the  works  of  the  saints  follow  them.  Many  work  on 
materials  that  cannot  follow  them  to  eternity.  The  artist  for  months  works  on  the 
canvas :  he  dies,  and  leaves  the  portrait  behind  him.  The  sculptor  works  on  the 
marble  for  years  :  dies,  and  leaves  the  sculpture  behind.  But  the  good  man  works 
on  a  material  that  will  bear  transferring  to  the  other  world  without  receiving  any 
damage.  He  draws  beautiful  lines — draws  them  upon  his  own  soul,  upon  himself. 
He  has  sought  the  best  material  to  work  on,  that  will  last  when  the  rocks  melt. 
And  their  work  in  others  wUl  remain ;  it  is  cut  deep  enough,  so  that  it  shaU  be 
visible  in  the  judgment.  Many  work  upon  objects  which  they  will  leave  behind. 
True,  that  the  lands  must  be  tilled,  and  minerals  raised,  and  iron  wrought; 
but  it  is  not  as  a  farmer,  or  miner,  or  carpenter,  or  astronomer,  or  geologist, 
that  any  man  passed  into  eternity.  IV.  The  fourth  line:  That  the  state  of 
THE  SAINTS  AFTER  DEATH  IS  A  STATE  OF  BLISS.  What  kind  of  a  couutry  would  you 
like  to  emigrate  into  ?  1.  A  pleasant  country,  with  beautiful  landscapes  ?  Such 
is  heaven — an  "  inheritance  in  the  light."  2.  A  plentiful  country,  without  scarcity 
or  want,  never  lacking  any  good  thing  ?  Such  is  heaven — *'  They  shall  hunger  no 
more,  neither  thirst  any  more."  3.  A  healthy  country?  So  is  heaven — "The 
inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick."  "Sorrow  and  mourning  shaU  flee  away." 
V.  The  FIFTH  LINE :  That  it  is  to  continue  so.  "From  henceforth."  Parents  have 
often  received  a  letter  from  their  children  in  America  or  Australia  ;  but  they  will 
still  say  that  they  are  expecting  the  mail  every  day,  to  hear  again.  Why? 
Because  the  country  is  changeable.  Though  all  was  well  when  the  last  letter  was 
sent,  things  may  have  changed.  But  as  to  heaven,  a  single  letter  is  as  good  as  if 
you  had  one  every  day.  There  it  is  always  the  same — "from  henceforth," 
(D.  Roberts,  B.I).)  Heaven's  description  of  the  sainted  dead: — I.  Heaven's 
DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  SAINTED  DEAD.  They  "  die  in  the  Lord." 
Their  character  was  that  of  vital  union  with  Christ.  This  union  may  include  two 
things — 1.  Their  existence  in  His  affections.  Christ's  disciples  live  in  Him  ;  they 
are  in  His  heart ;  He  thinks  upon  them  ;  He  plans  for  them  ;  He  works  for  them  ; 
He  causes  all  things  to  work  together  for  their  good.  2.  Their  existence  in  His 
character.  Without  figure,  we  live  in  the  character  of  those  we  admire  and  love. 
Arnold's  most  loyal  pupils  live  in  his  character  now.  We  see  their  old  master  in 
their  books,  and  hear  him  in  their  sermons.  Christ  is  the  grand  object  of  their 
love,  and  the  chief  subject  of  their  thought,  and  to  please  Him  was  the  grand  purpose 
of  their  life.  H.  Heaven's  description  of  the  condition  of  the  sainted  dead. 
1.  Their  blessedness  is  in  rest  from  all  trying  labour.  Not  rest  from  work,  for  work 
is  the  condition  of  blessedness ;  but  from  all  trying  labour,  all  anxious  toil,  all 
wearying,  annoying,  irritating,  fruitless  toil.  (1)  Rest  from  all  trying  labour 
pertaining  to  our  physical  subsistence.  (2)  Eest  from  all  trying  labour  per- 
taining to  intellectual  culture.  How  much  trying  labour  is  there  here  to 
train   our    faculties,    and  to    get  knowledge.      (3)  Rest   from    all  trying   labour 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION. 


pertaining  to  our  spiritual  cultivation.  (4)  Rest  from  all  trying  labour  to 
benefit  our  fellow-men.  To  do  good  here  is  a  trying  work.  Not  so  yonder. 
2.  Their  blessedness  is  in  the  influence  of  their  works.  No  one  act  truly 
done  for  Christ,  and  in  His  spirit,  will  be  lost.  3.  Their  blessedness  begins 
immediately  after  death.  "From  henceforth."  Not  from  the  waking  of  the 
soul  into  consciousness  after  the  sleep  of  centuries ;  not  from  the  extinction  of 
purgatorial  fires — but  from  death.  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me."  4.  Their 
blessedness  is  vouched  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  who  knows  the  present  and  future ; 
He  who  hears  the  last  sigh  of  every  saint  on  earth,  and  his  first  note  of  triumph. 
The  Spirit  saith  it.  Let  us  believe  it  with  an  unquestioning  faith.  The  Spirit  saith 
it:  let  us  adore  Him  for  His  revelation.  (Homilist.)  The  blessedness  of  the  dead 
in  Christ : — I.  Our  first  question,  then,  is — "  How  is  this  heavenly  blessedness 
ATTESTED  ?  "  We  all  profess  to  believe  in  heaven.  How  do  we  know  that  there  is 
such  a  place  and  such  a  state?  If  we  cannot  give  a  good  answer,  the  Apostle  John 
could.  "  Write,  blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  I "  "  Mere 
enthusiasm !  "  you  say,  "  the  wish  was  father  to  the  thought.  He  only  dreamt  in 
that  lonely  isle,  and  turned  the  vision  into  a  reality  1 "  A  strange  delusion  surely 
that  could  give  visions,  so  coherent,  so  far-reaching,  so  sublime !  Could  he  have 
written  all  this,  even  had  he  wished  it,  without  inspiration  from  God  ?  And 
consider  what  had  gone  before  in  the  history  of  the  apostle.  He  had  lived  amidst 
wonders,  which  he  could  not  but  believe,  and  of  which  he  had  been  a  great  part 
himself.  He  had  kept  company  with  One  who  professed  to  come  down  from 
heaven,  and  who  had  opened  His  mouth  to  describe  it.  Had  we  lived  all  that  this 
Galilean  fisherman  lived  through,  should  we  have  doubted  ?  But  this  testimony, 
thus  of  an  outward  kind,  has  next  an  inward  voucher  to  its  own  authenticity.  It 
bears  the  stamp  of  the  heaven,  whence  it  professes  to  come.  It  is,  you  say,  only  a 
dream.  Did  ever  mortal  man,  outside  of  the  Word  of  God,  dream  thus  of  the 
heavenly  blessedness  ?  Here  is  not  the  Greek  or  Roman  heaven,  such  as  we  have  in 
its  brightest  form  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  ^neid  of  Virgil ;  for  this  is  a  heaven  of 
eating  and  drinking,  of  running  and  wrestling,  of  expatiating  in  green  fields,  and 
basking  in  the  sunshine.  This  is  not  the  old  Scandinavian  or  Teutonic  heaven  of 
eternal  battles  and  immortal  drunkenness.  Here  is  not  the  Mohammedan  heaven 
of  feasting  and  sensual  pleasure.  Now,  we  see  what  kind  of  a  heaven  is  congenial 
to  men's  natural  fancy,  and  how  different  the  heaven  of  the  Bible  would  have 
been,  had  it  been  the  creation  of  man.  Here  is  a  heaven  of  holiness  and  purity; 
of  likeness  to  God,  and  fellowship  with  Christ,  of  eternal  contemplation,  worship, 
and  praise  I  Did  this  dream,  then,  come  out  of  the  human  mind  and  heart?  Nor 
is  this  all  the  evidence  that  we  have  for  the  existence  of  heaven.  The  Spirit  says, 
"  Yea ! "  in  a  manner,  if  possible,  more  emphatic.  It  is  not  only  in  books  that  we  read 
of  heaven,  even  in  that  Book,  which  is  above  all.  There  is  a  testimony  in  living 
Epistles,  written  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.  This  is  our 
third  evidence  of  there  being  a  heavenly  world,  what  may  be  called  the  evidence 
from  Christian  character.  Had  you  been  in  company  with  the  Apostle  John,  you 
would  have  said.  Here  is  heaven  begun !  Suppose  that  this  man  stiU  somewhere 
survive,  and  that  there  are  others  of  the  like  character,  who  equally  outlast  the 
stroke  of  death,  and  meet  in  the  same  region,  where  they  can  reveal  their  character 
to  each  other,  would  there  not  be  already  many  of  the  elements  of  heaven  ?  And 
to  crown  all,  let  us  suppose  that  it  is  the  region  whither  Christ  in  soul  and  body 
is  gone  ;  and  what  would  be  wanting  to  make  heaven  essentially  complete  ?  As 
coals  when  thrown  together  and  kindled  make  a  fire,  so  must  saints  after  death, 
in  all  the  warmth  of  their  love,  when  together  with  each  other  and  with  their 
Lord,  awake  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  We  see  the  prophecy  of  this,  in  the 
renewed  character  and  happy  intercourse  of  Christians  in  the  Church  below. 
Let  these  then  be  reasons  to  us  for  the  existence  of  this  "land  of  pure  delight"; 
and  whoever  may  neglect  it,  whoever  may  discredit  it,  let  us  not  be  disobedient  to 
the  heavenly  vision,  but  labour  to  enter  into  this  rest !  U.  This  leads  now  to  our 
second  topic,  raised  by  the  second  question — "  How  is  this  heavenly  blessedness 
GAINED?"  It  clearly  lays  down  two  things  as  needful  to  the  inheritance  of  the 
skies.  The  one  is  faith ;  and  the  other  is  holy  obedience.  1.  Faith,  then,  is  needful  to 
give  a  title  to  the  heavenly  blessedness :  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the 
Lord."  Faith  is  necessary  to  secure  union  to  the  Lord.  Men  simply  as  men  are 
not  savingly  united  to  the  Lord  ;  and  therefore  cannot  die  blessed  in  Him.  This  is 
a  connection  that  needs  to  be  acquired  ;  and  to  those  to  whom  the  gospel  comes,  it  is 
acquired  by  faith  in  Christ  (John  i.  12  ;   Gal.  iii.  26 ;  Bom.  yiii.  1 ;  John  viii.  24 ; 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

John  xiv.  5;  1  Cor,  i.  80).     2.  The  second  point  as  to  the  means  by  which  the 
heavenly  blessedness  is  gained  is  the  necessity  of  holy  obedience.     Beautifully  has 
it  been  said,  that  the  good  works  of  Christians  do  not  go  before  them  to  open 
heaven,  but  they  must  follow  after,  to  make  it  a  place  of  blessedness  ;  for  the  spirit 
of  heaven  is  the  spirit  that  brings  forth  good  works  below ;  and  thus  "  without 
holiness,  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."    III.  We  now  come  to  our  third  question — 
How  IS  THIS  HEAVENLY  BLESSEDNESS  TO  BE  ENJOYED  ?     The  auswer  is,  "  They  rest 
from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them."     1.  There  is,  first,  the  rest  of 
the  worker.     It  is  not  sloth,  torpor,  or  inactivity.     God  forbid.     That  would  be  no 
heaven  to  an  Elijah,  a  Paul,  a  Luther,  a  Wesley,  and  many  more.    But  it  is  rest ; 
rest  the  most  pure,  refreshing,  and  exalted.    Who  that  knows  anything  of  Christian 
labour  in  its  highest  forms — the  labour  of  the  Christian  parent,  who  travails  as 
in  birth  till  Christ  be  formed  in  the  hearts  of  all  His  children ;  the  labour  of  the 
teacher,  who  regards  the  welfare  of  the  soul  as  inseparable  from  the  growth  of  the 
mind,  but  will  appreciate  this  delightful  and  soul-soothing  prospect  of  rest  I     No 
more  out  amidst  the  billows,  toiling  in  rowing  for  that  the  wind  is  contrary,  but 
at  last  in  smooth  water,  and  with  the  ripple  breaking  on  the  shore !     No  more  down 
in  the  mine,  with  the  hard  and  painful  routine  of  grimy  toil  amidst  darkness, 
and  fire-damp,  and  rocky  hindrances  at  every  turn,  but  aloft  in  the  pure  air,  the 
soiled  raiment  laid  aside  for  the  Sabbath  dress,  and  the  song  and  melody  of  the 
sanctuary  filling    each  weary  sense !      The    rest  spoken  of    in  this  text    is    a 
"  Sabbatism " ;    the  keeping  of  an  endless  Sabbath,  with  its  holy  calm  for  ever 
unbroken,  as  fresh  as  when,  in  its  virgin  beauty,  it  first  dawned  upon  the  emanci- 
pated spirit,  recalling  Eden  with  its  dews  and  flowers,  but  without  trail    of  the 
serpent   upon  them,   since   for   the  redeemed  all  the  sanctities   of  that  higher 
paradise  are  over- arched  and  guarded  by  the  "  rainbow  round  about  the  throne  in 
sight  like  unto  an  .emerald."     2.  But  the  second  element  of  blessedness,  and  one 
which   in  the   case  of  the   Christian  worker,  is  more  positive,  is   the  continued 
influence  of  the  work.   "  Their  works  do  follow  them."   It  is  delightful  to  think  of  the 
perpetuity  of  all  goodness.    It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  a  truly  good  action,  an 
action  done  from  true  love  to  it,  and  from  a  regard  to  the  will  and  glory  of  God 
in  it,  lasts  for  ever.    You  are  tempted  to  give   an  angry  look.     The  memory  of 
Christ  restrains  you  ;  and  you  give  a  kind  and  loving  one ;  and  that  glance — though 
sent  forth  in  a  moment  of  time,  will  be  fixed  as  in  a  picture  to  all  eternity.    Nor 
are  these  influences  for  good  that  we  have  all  received  only  to  be  traced  back  to 
persons  of  position  and  prominence  in  the  true  Church  of  God.     The  humblest 
have  wrought  with  them.     The  history  of  the  Church  in  regard  to  the  influence 
of  its  members  can  only  be  written  in  the  world  of  immortality ;  and  what  secrets 
of  domestic,  of  congregational,  and  even  of  world-wide  Christian  import  shall  then  be 
unveiled,  where  there  is  no  fear  of  jealousy  or  misunderstanding  being  aroused, 
or  of  sensitive  delicacy  being  offended.     Much  of  the  blessedness  of  heaven  will 
arise  from  these  disclosures,  and  from  the  endless  bonds  which  they  shall  seal ! 
In  the  light  of  these  undying  soul-relationships  the  labour  of  the  way  shall  be 
forgotten.     Such  is  the  perpetuity  of  moral  influence,  and  of  its  final  disclosure ; 
for  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be  revealed,  nor  hid  that  shall  not  be 
known !     And  with  all  the  other  following  of  the  good  works  of  the  righteous,  let 
us  not  forget  its  influence  upon  themselves  ;  for  what  are  we  but  what  our  works 
make  us  ?    What  on  earth  or  what  in  heaven  ?    We  live  in  the  atmosphere  of  our 
own  actions,  and  if  we  have  lived  to  God  and  to  Christ,  the  work  tells  upon  ourselves, 
more  than  upon  all  besides ;  and  the  spirit  that  prompted  it  is  in  us  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life !     If  these  things  be  so,  let  us  not  mourn  the 
dead  that  "  die  in  the  Lord."     Shall  we  mourn  rest,  freedom,  blessedness?     How 
can  any  of  us  be  satisfied  till  we  seek  and  obtain,  through  union  to  Christ,  the 
comfortable  hope  that  we  are  in  the  Lord,  and  that  through  His  grace,  our  works, 
with  all  their  failures  and  shortcomings,  are  so  wrought  in  Him  as  to  leave  a 
memorial  of  the  right  kind  behind!     {John  Cairns,  D.D.)         The  blessedness   of 
dying  in  the  Lord : — I.    Consider   what   we    may  understand  by  dying  in   the 
Lord.     1.  Dying  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ.     By  dying  in  His  righteousness, 
understand  dying  interested  in  that  atonement,  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  made 
for  all  such  as  believe  upon  Him.     2.  Dying  in  the  image  of  Christ.     We  are  also 
to  bear  a  resemblance  to  Him,  and  to  be  conformed  to  Him  as  our  holy  example. 
3.   Dying  in  union  with  Christ.     II.  The   blessedness   of    such  as  die  in  the 
Lord.     1.  They  are  blessed  in  a  freedom  from  troubles  and  sorrows.    2.  They  are 
blessed  in  their  enjoyment  of  positive  glory  and  happiness.     (T.  Gibbons,  J),D.) 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  495 

The  Christianas  death : — I.  Death  is  a  curse.  My  text,  no  doubt,  says,  "  Blessed 
are  the  dead,"  still  death  is  a  curse.  The  lower  creatures  die,  but  with  how  little 
pain !  in  what  happy  ignorance  !  Death  springs  on  them  with  a  tiger's  leap.  The 
coming  event  casts  no  shadow  before.  I  have  seen  a  lamb  go  gamboUing  on  its 
way  to  the  slaughter-house  cropping  the  wayside  flowers.  The  bravest  men  are 
afraid  of  death ;  and  true  bravery  lies  not  in  insensibility  to  its  terrors,  but  in 
facing  what  we  fear.  It  is  an  easy  thing  for  a  soldier,  amid  the  whirl  and  excite- 
ment of  a  battle-field,  to  dash  on  the  serried  bayonets ;  but  show  me  the  man, 
unless  a  true,  lofty,  strong-minded  Christian,  who  will,  calmly  and  undauntedly, 
meet  his  dying  hour.  Ah  1  this  fate,  from  which  nature  shrinks  with  instinctive 
horror,  tries  the  courage  of  the  bravest,  and  the  piety  of  the  best  of  men.  Separate 
and  apart  from  the  consolations  of  Christian  faith,  death  is  a  tremendous  evil. 
Nature  shrinks  from  it,  shuddering.  I  do  not  like  to  think  of  being  a  cold,  pale, 
inanimate  form  of  clay,  unconscious  of  the  love  and  grief  of  all  around  me ; 
screwed  down  into  a  narrow  coffin.  Nor  is  that  all ;  the  grave  is  the  land  of  oblivion  ; 
and  who  does  not  shrink  from  the  thought  of  being  forgotten  ?  Besides  these  sad 
imaginings,  the  sufferings  that  usually  attend  the  close  of  life  and  gather  like 
heavy  clouds  around  its  setting  sun,  make  death  a  curse.  II.  Death  is  a  blessing. 
How  true  these  words — *'  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord !  "  A  union 
that,  more  intimate  than  marriage  which  unfaithfulness  in  either  party  dissolves ; 
a  union  that,  more  intimate  than  the  connection  between  body  and  soul  which  a 
slight  accident  may  endanger,  which  an  ounce  of  lead,  an  inch  of  steel,  a  drop  of 
poison,  a  wrong  step,  the  hand  of  a  child  may  dissolve ;  a  union  that,  more 
intimate  than  binds  together  those  sections  of  the  Church  which,  though 
differing,  co-operate.  The  union  which  is  formed  between  Christ  and  His  people 
being  one  of  incorporation,  and  not  one  merely  of  co-operation,  what  the  one  is, 
the  other  is ;  and  where  the  one  is,  the  other  is  ;  and  as  the  one  feels,  the  other 
feels  ;  and  as  our  bodies  and  their  limbs  have  blood  in  common,  or  the  branches  and 
trunk  of  a  tree  have  sap  in  common,  so  Jesus  and  His  people  have  all  things  in 
common.  To  be  in  Christ,  therefore,  to  be  in  the  Lord,  implies  that  we  shall 
infallibly  enjoy  all  the  blessings,  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal,  which  He  shed 
His  blood  to  purchase ;  these  being  secured  to  us  by  the  great  oath  of  God,  and 
the  bonds  of  a  covenant  which  is  well  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure.  With  Christ 
we  shall  be  crowned,  and  throned  in  glory.  Well  then  may  the  apostle  say, 
•'  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  "  !  They  must  be  blessed.  How  can 
it  be  otherwise  ?  "  Die !  "  No  doubt  they  must  die ;  but  death  has  lost  its  sting ; 
and  it  does  not  matter  when,  or  how,  or  where  they  die.  Think  of  it,  therefore, 
not  as  death,  but  as  glory — going  to  heaven,  and  to  your  Father.  It  is  life  through 
Christ,  and  life  in  Christ ;  life  most  bhssful,  and  liie  evermore.  III.  Death  is  a 
BLESSING  AS  INTRODUCING  US  INTO  A  STATE  OF  BEST.  1.  At  death  the  beUcvcr  rests 
from  the  toils  of  life.  2.  At  death  the  believer  rests  from  the  cares  of  life.  Next 
to  sin,  these  form  life's  heaviest  burden.  There  will  be  nothing  in  the  household 
above  to  withdraw  Martha  from  sitting  with  her  sister  at  Jesus'  feet — there  Jacob 
mourns  no  Joseph,  and  David  weeps  no  Absalom ;  the  pious  widow  dreads  no 
empty  barrel;  Lazarus  fears  no  rich  man's  frown,  nor  courts  his  favour. 
3.  At  death  the  beUever  rests  from  the  griefs  of  life.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
The  blessed  dead : — I.  The  dead  that  die  in  the  lord.  JI.  Wherein  are  they 
BLESSED  who  DIE  IN  THE  LoRD  ?  1.  Death  is  birth  to  the  believer,  and  birth  is 
ever  blessed.  2.  Born  out  of  a  life  which  is  a  long  pain  to  a  life  which  is  a 
long  bliss.  3.  They  pass  out  of  relations  and  fellowships  which  are  ever  changing, 
to  those  which  abide  and  enlarge  their  ministries  through  eternity.  4.  Blessed 
are  they,  for  they  are  for  ever  beyond  the  reach  of  all  that  may  imperil  the  prize. 
{J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Blessedness  in  death  : — I.  The  impressive  mode  of  com- 
munication. 1.  Heaven  never  speaks  on  trifling  occasions,  or  upon  matters  of 
indifference.  Its  utterances  are  always  solemn  and  weighty.  They  apprise  of 
danger ;  they  caution  us  against  sin  ;  they  counsel  us  in  difficulty ;  they  point  us  to 
duty ;  they  cheer  us  in  sorrow ;  they  embolden  us  in  the  conflict.  Yet,  of  all  its 
revelations,  none  can  be  of  such  transcendent  moment  as  those  which  respect  the 
eternal  state  of  the  dead.  2.  Heaven  never  speaks  but  in  words  of  truth  and 
soberness.  No  possibility  of  error,  no  thought  of  deception.  Truth  reigns  in 
heaven.  3.  Heaven  never  speaks  but  with  authority.  Whether  God  speaks  in 
His  own  person,  or  through  the  medium  of  an  angelic  ministry,  it  is  plainly  the 
duty  of  man  to  listen  with  reverential  and  obedient  attention.  4.  These  several 
suggestions  receive  additional  force  from  the  command  given  to  the  prophet,  saying. 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiy. 

"Write";  which  further  implies  the  abiding  and  unchangeable  operation  of 
this  truth  to  the  end  of  time.  It  is  as  if  the  voice  had  said,  Write,  that  it  be  not 
forgotten.  Write,  that  generations  yet  to  come,  and  nations  yet  unborn,  may 
read,  and  derive  therefrom  incentives  to  faith  and  holiness — lessons  of  triumph 
over  mortality  and  death.  II.  The  great  subject  of  proclamation.  "  Blessed 
are  the  dead,"  How  widely  opposed  is  the  verdict  of  man  !  Blessed  rather  are  the 
living,  around  whom  life  throws  its  treasures  of  enjoyment  and  hopes — "yea,  a 
living  dog  is  better  then  a  dead  lion."  Death,  to  the  eye  of  natural  sense,  is 
ever  shrouded  with  gloom  and  sorrow.  The  gospel  of  life  and  immortality 
creates  a  difference;  and,  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  believe  and  obey  the  truth, 
arrays  even  this,  the  gloomiest  dispensation  of  Divine  providence,  in  colours  of 
light  and  loveliness.  A  vital  union  with  Him,  the  well-spring  of  life  and  happi- 
ness, secures  them  the  uninterrupted  flow  of  blessing  through  every  changeful 
vicissitude  of  mortality.  Death  itself  may  not  turn  the  stream,  or  prohibit  its 
flow.  The  very  sepulchre  feels  its  fertilising  influence,  and  they  pluck  flowers 
of  hope  and  immortality  from  the  margin  of  the  grave.  III.  The  Divine  con- 
firmation. "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit."  Why  this  solemn  and  impressive  assevera- 
tion? Does  the  voice  from  heaven  require  a  voucher,  that  the  Spirit  of  truth 
Himself  should  appear  as  witness  ?  Is  there  need  of  further  testimony  ?  Assuredly 
not.  Yet,  in  a  matter  of  such  passing  interest,  that  our  faith  may  be  stedfast  and 
settled,  God  condescends  to  supply  it.  The  Spirit  witnesses  with  the  voice  of  blood, 
and  every  doubt  must  vanish.  This  testimony  is  given  in  His  Holy  Word,  which 
everywhere  corroborates  the  doctrine  of  the  text.  This  testimony  is  further  given 
in  the  believer's  heart.  There,  with  still  small  voice,  that  Holy  One  doth  sweetly 
and  delightfully  repeat  the  echoes  of  His  written  word ;  for  "  he  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself,"  attesting  and  confirming  what- 
soever hath  been  written  aforetime  for  our  comfort  and  edification.  Divine 
arguments  are  added  for  the  fuller  confirmation  of  our  faith.  The  Spirit's  voice  is 
not  a  delusion,  but  an  appeal  to  the  understanding  and  judgment.  "  They  rest 
from  their  labours."  As  the  toilworn  labourer  retires  from  the  busy  and  fatiguing 
occupations  of  the  day,  to  seek  his  evening's  repose,  so  the  Christian  believer 
relinquishes  life  for  the  rest  of  paradise.  More  than  this.  "  Their  works  do 
follow  them."  When  the  rich  man  dieth,  he  shall  carry  nothing  away,  but  leave 
his  wealth  to  others.  The  great  must  relinquish  their  honours  and  distinctions  ; 
the  wise  and  ingenious,  the  fruit  of  their  labours.  Nothing  of  all  their  pride  and 
possessions  may  be  transported  beyond  the  grave ;  for  their  glory  shall  not  descend 
after  them.  But  these  reap  the  reward  of  their  own  doings.  No  heir  steps  in  to 
supersede  the  original  owner,  and  enjoy  his  possession.  As  a  glorious  retinue, 
their  works  of  piety  and  mercy  grace  their  progress  to  the  skies,  and  accompany 
them  even  to  the  very  throne ;  yet  not  to  plead  their  merits,  but  justify  their 
faith;  not  to  claim  acquittal  from  the  accusations  of  the  law,  but  an  interest 
in  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  They  demonstrate  a  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God,  and  must  therefore  secure  His  approbation,  as  their  author,  their  end. 
{John  Lyth.)  The  blessedness  of  them  that  die  in  Christ : — I.  What  it  is  to  die 
IN  THE  Lord,  and  who  may  be  said  to  do  so.  1.  What  is  supposed  to  be  necessary 
to  it,  as  to  their  state,  whilst  they  live.  And  here  it  is  plain,  they  that  die  in 
the  Lord  must  first  live  in  Him.  That  is,  as  to  the  principle  of  their  life,  they 
must  be  quickened  and  made  alive  by  Him :  As  to  the  work  of  their  life,  they 
must  walk  after  Him :  As  to  the  scope  of  their  life,  they  must  live  to  Him. 
2.  What  this  includes,  as  to  their  temper,  when  they  come  to  die.  "Blessed  are 
the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  "  ;  that  is,  that  die — (1)  In  submission  to  His  will ; 
He  having  the  fullest  right  to  dispose  of  them  as  He  pleases.  (2)  In  a  dependence 
upon  Him,  for  life  and  immortality  after  death,  as  what  He  hath  purchased  and 
promised,  and  will  assuredly  bring  His  people  to.  (3)  Dying  in  the  Lord  includes 
a  sincere  desire  to  be  with  Him,  as  far  better  than  to  be  here.  II.  That  henceforth 
believers  are  blessed  indeed.    III.  Consider  their  blessedness.     IV.  For  what 

REASON  IT  IS  so  SOLEMNLY  PROCLAIMED  BY  A  VOICE  FROM  HEAVEN,  AND  ORDERED  TO 
BE   RECORDED,    THAT   THE    DEAD   ARE   BLESSED   THAT   DIE    IN   THE   LoRD.        1.    To    let    it 

be  known  in  this  world  how  it  fares  with  the  friends  of  Jesus  in  another.  2,  To 
assure  believers  that  death  is  no  bar  to  their  happiness,  but  the  sure,  though 
awful  way  to  it.  3.  To  leave  it  on  record  to  the  end  of  time,  and  assure  those 
that  live  in  every  age,  that  here  is  not  their  rest.  (D.  Wilcox.)  The  blessedness 
of  dying  in  the  Lord : — I.  The  introduction.  "  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven 
saying  unto  me,  Write."     1.  We  here  see  the  truth  of  the  subsequent  announce- 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  497 

ment.  The  doctrine  to  be  taught  is  not  of  human  origin.  It  is  neither  a  dictate 
of  man's  imagination,  nor  an  effusion  of  rash  enthusiasm,  nor  a  deduction  of 
erring  reason  ;  but  it  comes  direct  from  the  region  of  unclouded  light,  the  fountain 
of  unerring  truth.  2.  We  see  also  the  importance  of  the  doctrine  announced.  (1) 
This  is  evinced  in  its  origin.  If  heaven  speaks,  it  is  not  to  proclaim  a  useless  or  in- 
significant truth,  nor  to  unveil  some  trifling  or  uninteresting  mystery.  This  would 
reflect  on  the  Divine  wisdom.  (2)  This  is  further  seen  in  the  command  given  :  "I 
heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  me" — What? — Eemember? —  or  Preach? — 
No,  but  "  Write." — The  truths  thou  art  about  to  hear  are  of  infinite  moment,  and 
deeply  interest  every  child  of  man.  II.  But  what  is  it  that  is  promulgated  by  this 
high  authority,  and  is  revealed  with  attendant  circumstances  which  so  clearly  attest 
its  great  importance  ?  "  Blessed  are  the  dead,"  &c.  1.  The  subjects  of  this  blessed- 
ness are  the  dead ;  yet  not  the  dead  indiscriminately,  but  "  the  dead  that  die  in  the 
Lord."  Such  is  the  ambiguity  of  the  phrase  "  in  the  Lord,"  as  to  render  its  precise 
meaning  in  this  passage  somewhat  uncertain.  At  times  its  obvious  import  is,  "  in 
the  cause,  or  on  account,  of  the  Lord."  And  looking  at  the  entire  connexion  in  which 
the  passage  stands,  such  an  interpretation  appears  by  no  means  inappropriate.  Every 
Christian,  truly  so  called,  is  "  in  the  Lord."  Hence  the  striking  language  of  the 
Redeemer  Himself :  "I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches:  abide  in  Me  and  I  in  you," 
This  all-important  union  is  affected,  on  the  part  of  the  Christian,  by  faith,  and  is 
consummated,  on  the  part  of  Christ,  by  the  bestowal  of  His  indwelling  Spirit.  Two 
important  parts  of  their  blessedness  are  here  brought  before  us : — They  rest  from 
their  labours — and  their  works  follow  them.  Does  the  wearied  traveller  rejoice  on 
seeing  his  loved  but  long  absent  home,  where  he  hopes  to  end  his  wanderings.  Does 
the  mariner,  long  tossed  by  the  fierce  storm,  and  endangered  by  the  rolling  waves, 
and  drifted  sands,  and  sunken  or  frowning  rocks,  rejoice  on  his  entrance  into  the 
harbour,  in  which  fear  is  exchanged  for  security,  and  turmoil  for  peace  ?  Yes,  they 
rest  from  their  labours,  and  account  themselves  blessed.  III.  Who  does  not  feel  that 
such  an  announcement  would  be  incredible  were  it  not  so  attested  as  to  place  it 
BEYOND  THE  REACH  OF  REASONABLE  DOUBT  ?  And,  thanks  to  the  condesccnsion  and 
abounding  grace  of  God,  such  an  attestation  we  have.  "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit."  The 
doctrine  of  immortality,  with  its  glorious  and  awful  results,  is  one  of  those  primeval 
truths  that  constitute  the  religious  belief  of  the  first  generations  of  men.  It  underlay 
both  the  patriarchal  and  Mosaic  dispensations.  But  it  was  reserved  for  Him  who 
came  as  the  "  light  of  the  world  "  to  present  this  doctrine  in  the  fulness  of  its  glory. 
But  while  in  the  economy  of  redemption  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Son  to  ransom  and  save, 
it  is  the  prerogative  and  glory  of  the  Spirit  to  reveal  and  attest  truth,  and  by  its 
application  to  the  understanding  and  heart,  to  enlighten,  and  sanctify,  and  make  fit 
for  heaven.  And  by  that  Spirit  the  great  doctrine  announced  in  our  text  is  attested. 
"  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit."  "  True — certainly,  infallibly  true — I,  the  Spirit  of  Truth, 
whose  prerogative  it  is  to  search  aU  things,  even  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  to  reveal 
them  to  man — I  corroborate  the  testimony  that  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  are, 
and  shall  be,  thus  blessed.  Though  one  of  the  things  which  no  mortal  eye  has  seen, 
nor  ear  heard,  nor  the  most  fruitful  imagination  conceived,  yet  do  I  thus  solemnly 
avow,  that  in  all  the  brightness  of  the  glories  it  unfolds,  and  in  all  the  richness  of  the 
blessings  it  promises,  it  is  true.  On  it,  as  an  immovable  rock,  you  may  rest.  And 
in  its  assured  prospects  you  may  trample  on  the  world  and  sin — mortify  self — multi- 
ply works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love — and  defy  the  powers  of  persecution,  how  fierce 
soever  the  forms  it  may  assume,  or  agonising  the  tortures  and  deaths  it  may  inflict. 
Labours,  sacrifices,  and  tortures  are  momentary  only,  but  recompenses  are  eternal." 
{Thomas  Allin.)  Death  in  the  Lord : — Let  us  look  at  the  individual  phrases  of 
this  remarkable  text.  In  the  first  place,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord 
from  henceforth."  That  expression  "  from  henceforth  "  is  one  of  the  most  difficult 
that  ever  the  exegists  or  expositors  of  the  Bible  have  confronted.  It  may  refer  to  a 
new  point  of  departure  with  regard  to  the  blessed  dead.  It  may  refer  to  a  new  point 
of  departure  with  respect  to  the  revelation  of  that  blessedness.  It  may  refer  to  a  new 
departure  with  regard  to  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit.  We  may  connect  it  with  the 
second  part  of  the  verse,  and  not  the  first.  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying, 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord.  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  from  henceforth 
they  rest  from  their  labours."  But  you  perceive  as  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  the 
application  of  the  phrase,  we  are  embarrassed  by  the  riches  in  this  case,  for  the 
applications  of  the  phrase  are  so  varied.  It  may  be  that  the  phrase  looks  backward 
to  the  beginning  of  the  verse,  and  forward  to  the  conclusion,  so  that  it  indicates 
somehow  in  the  redemption  of  God,  and  revelation  of  Christ,  and  testimony  of  the 

32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

Spirit,  a  new  point  of  departure  from  Him  henceforth.  Certainly  there  is  one  very 
remarkable  fact,  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  appears  to  mark  a  new  departure 
even  with  respect  to  the  terms  used  about  the  saints  of  God.  Stephen  was  the  first 
martyr,  and,  in  fact,  his  death  is  the  first  death  which  is  spread  in  record  on  the  pages 
of  Holy  Scripture.  It  was  the  first  death  of  a  believer  in  Jesus,  subsequent  to  Christ's 
resurrection,  and  I  beg  you  to  notice  that  his  death  is  manifestly  typical,  and  the 
description  of  it  is  of  typical  significance.  For  we  read  that  "  he  being  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  looked  up  steadfastly  into  Heaven,  and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus 
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  said,  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and 
the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  "  And  when  he  had  said  this  he 
fell  asleep."  There  are  three  marked  features  here  evidently  typical.  In  the  first 
place  the  vision  of  heaven  and  of  Chirst.  In  the  second  place,  perfect  peace  of  mind 
even  in  the  agonies  of  a  violent  death ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  a  new  term  applied  to 
death.  "  He  fell  asleep."  Have  you  ever  noticed  the  fact  that  from  the  time  of  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  last  verse  of  the  last  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse  you 
will  never  once  find  death,  the  death  of  a  believer,  referred  to  as  death  without  some 
qualifying  phrase  attached  to  it  ?  There  is  one  case  of  exception.  In  the  ninth  chapter 
of  Acts  we  read  of  the  death  of  Dorcas  or  Tabitha,  and  the  word  "  died"  is  used  with 
reference  to  her  though  she  was  a  believer ;  but  the  reason  of  it  is  obvious.  Peter  was 
about  to  call  her  back  from  death  to  life,  therefore  it  was  important  that  the  actual 
fact  of  her  death  should  be  unmistakably  stated  as  if  it  had  been  said  that  she  fell 
asleep ;  it  might  have  been  said  that  he  simply  roused  her  from  her  trance,  but  when 
it  is  said  that  she  died  there  was  no  doubt  of  her  resuscitation  from  the  dead.  But 
in  every  other  case  that  I  have  been  able  to  trace  in  the  New  Testament  the  death 
of  the  believer  is  never  once  referred  to  as  death,  except  with  some  such  qualifying 
phrase  as  we  find  in  this  text.  Died  in  the  Lord,  which  at  once  separates  such  death 
from  the  death  of  unbelievers.  Now,  that  phrase  "In  the  Lord"  must  have  three 
great  interpretations.  In  this  sphere  the  limitation  to  which  I  have  referred,  the 
penitent  believer  goes  from  the  world,  and  from  sin  and  Satan,  and  condemnation 
redemptively  into  this  Divine  sphere  of  safety,  and  hoUness  and  happiness.  And 
then,  in  the  second  place,  actively  and  actually,  for  your  life  is  taken  into  the  life  of 
Christ ;  your  work  taken  into  the  work  of  Christ ;  your  destiny  taken  into  the  destiny 
of  Christ;  your  life  plan  taken  into  the  life  plan  of  God  (Eom.  xiv.  7,  8).  Oh,  the 
magnificence  of  that  thought !  I  would  to  God  I  could  rise  to  it,  and  help  you  to  rise 
to  it.  While  you  live  you  are  in  this  sphere :  in  Christ  Jesus.  Each  may  enter  into 
that  sphere.  When  you  die,  when  you  fall  asleep  as  to  your  body,  you  are  at  home 
with  the  Lord.  Now  the  apostle  says  that  the  man  who  lives  unto  the  Lord  dies  unto 
the  Lord,  The  Lord  has  not  surrendered  His  control  of  him  when  death  comes  upon 
him.  Neither  has  he  lost  his  identity  and  unity  with  Jesus  when  he  falls  asleep.  So  we 
have  both  active  and  actual  redemption  in  the  Lord.  But  look  at  the  concluding  part 
of  this  great  text.  "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours,  and 
their  works  do  follow  them."  I  need  not  say  much  about  the  first  part  of  this  clause, 
•'  They  rest  from  their  labours."  There  is  absolute  rest  for  every  believer  who  is  at 
home  with  the  Lord  from  everything  that  mars  our  service  in  this  world.  But  I  must 
fasten  your  thought  for  a  moment  on  the  lines  of  this  great  expression  "  and  their 
works  do  follow  them."  This  is  another  difiicult  phrase.  There  are  three  principal 
applications.  One  is  that  the  works  done  in  Christ  Jesus  are  a  saint's  memorial  and 
monument  in  this  world.  The  second  suggestion  is  that  the  works  which  he  has 
done  here  follow  him  into  eternity  as  his  witness  before  the  throne  of  God  unto  his 
fidelity,  and  are  the  means  of  increasing  his  reward.  And  there  is  a  third  which  I 
venture  to  suggest,  and  which  will,  I  believe,  commend  itself  to  us.  The  Greek  word 
translated  follow,  really  means  and  enter,  it  is  the  following  of  the  disciple  that  treads 
in  the  heels  of  his  Master  just  before  him;  it  is  following  and  companionship  and 
fellowship.  And  there  is  another  thing  which  suggests  and  confirms  this  interpretation 
■ — namely,  the  difference  in  the  terms  of  the  original,  which  appears  in  the  English 
translation.  They  rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them.  What 
is  the  difference  between  labour  and  work?  Labour  in  the  original  is  a  Latin 
word,  and  in  the  English  word  it  suggests — as  it  does  in  the  original  Greek  word — 
the  idea  of  hindrance.  All  difficulty,  all  weariness,  the  burden-bearing  which 
suggests  the  idea  that  the  man  is  doing,  toiling,  and  taxing  his  strength ;  that 
"which  fatigues  him,  so  that  he  comes  from  his  work  worried  and  worn  out ;  it  suggests 
the  idea  that  his  strength  is  unequal  to  the  task,  and  that  he  feels  himself  circum- 
scribed with  limitations.  But  the  Master's  work  simply  means  activity,  doing,  per- 
forming.    Now  see  how  blessed  the  thought  that  the  Holy  Spirit  suggests  to  us. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  499 

The  saint  of  God,  falling  asleep  as  to  his  body,  enters  into  the  presence  of  his  Lord, 
as  to  his  spirit.  For  evermore  the  labour,  toil,  vexations,  of  this  world  is  left 
behind  him,  but  he  carries  with  him  his  service  into  immortality — he  goes  to  carry 
on  his  work  for  God.  Thus  his  immortality  has  come  at  last.  He  goes  where 
there  are  no  limitations,  where  there  are  no  vexations  or  hindrances  to  circum- 
scribe his  activity — where  they  rest,  not  because  they  are  never  tired  or  fatigued — 
where  they  wait  on  the  Lord,  but  renew  their  strength,  mount  on  wings,  walk 
and  never  faint — but  enjoy  the  tireless  and  the  unending  activity  of  redeemed 
souls,  partakers  of  the  tireless  energy  of  the  untiring  God.  {A.  T.  Pierson,  D.  D.) 
The  two  voices : — "  The  voice  said,  Write," — thatis,  the  voice  of  God  as  it  sounded  from 
above;  and  the  Spirit  said,  "  Yea," — that  is,  the  spirit  of  inspiration  and  obedience, 
as  it  answered  from  within,  ever  keen  to  discern  the  heavenly  revelations,  and 
prompt  to  perform  the  heavenly  will.  That  is  the  picture  presented  us  here — 
a  something  that  discloses  and  a  something  that  assents — the  announcement  of  an 
objective  truth  and  the  presence  and  the  sympathy  of  a  subjective  response.  It  is 
God's  truth  and  the  Spirit's  afl&rmative,  God's  communication  and  the  Spirit's 
consent.  I.  Take  the  principle,  then,  as  it  affects  the  production  of  Divinb 
Scripture.  For  not  only  in  regard  to  the  announcement  made  here,  but  the 
doctrine  and  the  narratives  of  Scripture  throughout,  it  holds  true  that  the  voice 
said,  "  Write,"  and  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  penman  said,  ••  Yea."  He  said,  "  Yea," 
as  the  Spirit  of  inspiration.  And  apart  from  the  testimony  of  the  Bible  to  itself, 
there  is  a  proof  of  its  origin  in  its  own  inner  character.  Take,  among  other 
evidences,  this  one :  the  persistency  with  which  the  facts  and  the  truths  transcribed 
run  counter  to  the  natural  prepossessions  and  prejudice  of  those  who  transcribe 
them.  II.  Note  the  same  fact  with  regard  to  the  acceptance  of  Divine  truth. 
In  regard,  then,  to  the  belief  of  the  Scripture  as  well  as  its  delivery,  the  Spirit 
returns  His  deep  inward  "  Yea";  He  returns  it  as  the  Spirit  of  conviction.  And 
this,  mark,  in  two  cases.  The  response  arises  in  the  case  of  those  whom  the  Spirit 
has  entered  to  sanctify,  and  it  arises  in  the  case  of  those  with  whom  He  is  present 
to  persuade.  Deep  in  their  heart  of  hearts  there  is  a  something  that  throbs  back 
to  them  saying,  "  These  things  are  real ;  I  must  believe  them  accordingly."  III. 
Take  the  principle  as  it  refers  to  the  performance  of  the  Divine  commands.  For 
the  voice  that  bids  us  write  and  believe  bids  us  also  do  and  endure,  and  when  it 
does  so  the  Spirit  again  answers,  "  Yea,"  He  answers  "  Yea,"  as  the  Spirit  of 
submission  and  obedience.  IV.  Take  the  thought  of  the  text  in  regard  to  thb 
enjoyment  of  Divine  privileges.  For  the  same  voice  from  heaven  has  a  message 
as  to  these,  and  while  the  message  of  assurance  and  of  comfort  is  revealed  from 
above,  the  Spirit  responds  from  within  with  His  •'  Yea  " :  He  does  so  as  the  Spirit 
of  adoption.  And  surely,  of  all  the  Divine  intimations,  the  sweetest  and  the  fullest 
is  this :  "  But  now  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  0  Jacob,  and  He  that 
formed  thee,  0  Israel,  Fear  not,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee.  I  have  called  thee  by 
thy  name :  thou  art  Mine."  There  will  be  often  a  "  Nay  "  to  assurances  such  as 
these.  There  is  the  "  Nay  "  of  Satanic  impeachment.  Scripture  clearly  prepares 
us  to  meet  and  to  deal  with  that.  V.  Observe  the  principle  of  the  text  as  it  bears 
on  the  welcome  op  Divine  hopes.  And  of  these  hopes  take  one — the  hope  of 
the  Lord's  Second  Advent.  We  close  by  considering  His  response  as  the  Spirit  of 
longing  and  of  love.  True,  again,  there  are  voices  that  are  raised  in  dissent. 
"  Nay,"  say  the  unholy,  to  whom  the  thought  of  Christ's  Advent  is  a  terror  ;  "  Nay," 
say  the  profane,  to  whom  the  prophecy  is  a  scoff,  asking,  ♦'  Where  is  the  promise 
of  His  coming  ?  for  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were 
from  the  beginning  of  the  creation."  But  from  a  multitude  whom  no  man  can 
number,  even  the  Church  upon  earth  which  a  Saviour  has  chosen,  to  be  saved 
through  atoning  blood,  preserved  by  sanctifying  grace,  and  made  meet  for  eternal 
glory,  there  rises  a  mighty  and  manifold  "  Yea."  And  well  may  the  Spirit  in  the 
Bride's  heart  say  "  Yea,"  and  speak  of  the  prospect  disclosed  as  that  "  blessed  hope, 
even  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  {W.  A.  Gray.) 
Rest  in  heaven : — Dr.  Bushnell,  when  well,  abounded  in  life  and  action.  He  once 
preached  a  sermon  on  "  The  Employments  of  Heaven."  A  weary,  hard-working 
woman  was  heard  to  say,  when  the  service  closed,  "  Well,  if  heaven  is  such  a  place 
for  work  I  don't  care  to  go  there ;  I  hoped  I  should  rest."  Dr.  B.  said,  as  his 
strength  began  to  fail,  the  thought  of  rest  grew  more  precious  to  him  also.  It 
only  illustrates  how  apt  we  are  to  see  everything  from  ourselves.  {Presbyterian.) 
No  Monday  in  heaven: — There  will  be  no  Monday  in  heaven,  and  we  shall  not  have 
to  begin  the  old  round  of  toil  afresh  as  soon  as  the  Sabbath's  peace  is  past.  There 
will  be  an  everlasting  Sabbath. 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 


Vers.  14-20.     Tlirust  in  thy  sickle,  and  reap. — The  harvest  and  the  vintage: — 
It  is  held  by  many  that  both  these  refer  to  the  same  fact  of    God's  judgment 
against  sin   and   sinners.     And   no  doubt,    at  times,    the   "harvest"   does  mean 
such  judgment  (Joel  iii.  13;  Jer.  li.  33).     In  Matt.  xiii.  both  harvests — that  of  good 
and  evil  alike — are  told  of.     "  Let  both  grow  together  until,"  &c.     Still  more  com- 
monly the  figure  stands  for  the  people  of  God  and  their   ingathering   into   His 
blessed  presence.   And  we  think  that  here,  whilst  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what 
the  vintage  means,  the  "  harvest  "  does  not  mean  the  same,  but  that  gathering  of 
"  the  wheat  into  His  garner  "  which  shall  one  day  most  surely  be  accomplished. 
For  see  the  preface  (ver.  13)  to  this  vision.     It  speaks  of  the  blessed  dead  and  their 
rest.     And  but  for  the  plain  pointing  out  that  the  vintage  did  not  refer  to  them, 
that  also  would  have  been  so  understood.    And  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — for  He  is 
meant — is  Himself  the  Reaper  (ver.  14),  Himself  thrusts  in  the  sickle  (ver.  16), 
whilst  the  vintage  of  judgment  is  assigned  to  an  angel  (ver.  17),  indicating  that  it 
is  a  different  work  from  the  other.     And  the  figure  itself,  the  harvest,  the  precious 
corn  fully  ripe,  belongs  generally  and  appropriately  to  that  which  is  also  precious 
and  an  object  of  delight,  as  is  the  company  of  His  people  to  the  Lord  whose  they 
are.     It  is  not  the  time  of  the  harvest,  but  the  corn  of  the  harvest,  which  is  spoken 
of  here,  and  this  is  ever  the  type  of  good,  and  not  evil.     Thus  understood,  let  us 
note — I.  The  harvest.     "  The  harvest  of  the  earth."     This  tells  of — 1.  The  mul- 
titude of  God's  people.     Who  can  count  the  ears  of  corn  even  in  one  harvest-field  ? 
how  much  less  in  the  harvest  of  the  whole  earth  ?     2.  The  preciousness  of  them. 
What  could  we  do  without  the  literal  harvest  of  the  earth  ?     Our  all,  humanly 
speaking,  depends  upon  it.     3.  The  joy  of  God  in  them.     "  They  shall  joy  before 
Thee  with  the  joy  of  harvest."    4.  The  care  that  has  been  needed  and  given.    5.  The 
"  long  patience  "  that  has  been  exercised.     Who  but  God  could  be  so  patient?    We 
often  cry,  "How  long,  O  Lord,  how  long?  "     But  He  waits — and  we  must  learn 
the  like  lesson — for  the  harvest  of  the  earth,  for  that  which  is  being  ripened  in  our 
own  soul.     6.  The  evidence  of  ripeness.     We  know  of  the  natural  harvest  that 
it  is  ripe  by  the  grain  assuming  its  golden  hue.     And  when  it  is  thus  with  the 
people  of  God,  when  the  golden  light  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  on  them 
and  they  are  transformed  thereby,  then  the  evidence  of  ripeness  is  seen,  and  the 
season  for  the  sickle  has  come.    7.  God  will  certainly  gather  in  His  people.    "  Har- 
vest shall  not  fail  "  ;  nor  shall  this  harvest  either.     "  Look  up,  lift  up  your  heads ; 
for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."    H.  The  vintage.     Under  the  altar  on  which 
was  "  the  fire,"  over  which  the  angel  told  of  in  ver.  18  "  had  power,"  were  the  souls 
of  them  that  had  been  slain  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  (chap.  vi.  9).  They  had  asked, 
"  How  long,  O  Lord,  .  .  .  dost  Thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that 
dwell  on  the  earth  ?  "    And  now  the  answer  is  given.     The  vintage  of  vengeance 
has  begun.     For  the  "  grapes  "  of  the  "  vine  of  the  earth  "  are  fully  ripe.     It  is  the 
judgment  of  the  whole  earth,  when  "all  nations"  shall  be  gathered  (Matt,  xxv.) 
before  the  Son  of  Man.     The  square  of  four — four  ever  the  symbol  of  the  earth — 
amplified  by  hundreds,  the  "  one  thousand  and  six  hundred  furlongs  "  of  ver.  20, 
likewise  point  to  the  universality  of  this  awful  judgment.     Minor  fulfilments — 
presages,  predictions,  and  patterns  of  the  final  judgment — of  these  there  have  been 
many  and  will  be  many ;  but  in  this  vintage  of  vengeance  upon  the  world's  sin  all 
are  summed  up  and  fulfilled.     But  will  there  be  any  such  event  at  all  ?     1.  Men 
have  ever  felt  that  there  ought  to  be  such  judgment.     2.  And  now  it  is  declared 
that  such  judgment  shall  be.     Conscience  assents  to  it.    3.  Human  law  and  justice 
strive  after  right  judgment.     4.  And  the  judgments  that  come  now  on  ungodly 
nations,  communities,  and  individuals  are  all  in  proof.     (S.  Conway,  B.A.)        A 
coronation  sermon  : — I.  The  illustrious  personage  intended.    This  we  conceive  to 
be  no  other  than  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  exalted  Messiah,  who,  for  the  suffering  of 
death,  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  is  now  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour.     1.  His  characteristic  designation — "The  Son  of  Man."     This  was  the 
form  or  similitude  He  wore.     The  manhood  of  Christ  is  exalted  to  the  throne  of 
Deity.     2.  His  high  exaltation.    He  is  said  to  be  throned  on  the  clouds  of  heaven, 
and  dignified  with  the  highest  honours.     3.  The  insignia  appropriate  to  His  office. 
He  is  advanced  to  the  dignity  and  authority  of  a  king,  and  therefore  is  invested 
with  a  crown  of  gold,  and  a  sickle — an  emblem  of  power,  answering  to  a  sceptre  or 
sword,  but  put  in  this  form,  as  having  a  relation  to  the  service  which  was  imme- 
diately to  be  performed  in  reaping  the  harvest  of  the  earth.    These  are  the  regalia 
of  His  kingly  office.     II.  The  magnificent  appearance  He  assumed.     1.  He  is 
seated  on  a  white  cloud.     On  a  cloud,  to  betoken  His  elevation  and  empire.     On  a 


CHAP.  XIV.]  REVELATION.  501 

white  cloud,  to  signify  the  immaculate  purity  of  His  nature,  as  the  Holy  One  of 
God ;  the  unimpeachable  rectitude  of  His  administrations,  transparent  as  the 
fleecy  vapour  of  which  these  visible  heavens  are  composed  ;  and  the  blessed  conse- 
quences of  His  government,  when  purity  shall  be  universally  established,  and 
'•  white-robed  Irmocence,"  returning  to  our  forsaken  world,  shall  take  place  of  fraud 
and  rapine,  violence  and  blood.  Furthermore,  on  this  luminous  cloud  He  is  said  to 
have  been  seated,  as  on  a  throne,  expressing  at  once  the  high  dignity  and  perfect 
repose  which  He  enjoys.  2.  On  His  head  was  a  golden  crown.  The  crown  is  an 
emblem  of  empire  and  dominion,  and  a  crown  of  pure  gold  fitly  represents  the 
validity  of  His  title,  and  the  honour  and  glory  by  which  He  is  encircled.  3.  In 
His  hand  there  is  a  sharp  sickle.  This  I  apprehend  to  be  an  emblem  of  His 
judicial  authority  and  retributive  vengeance.  To  Him  the  Father  hath  given 
authority  to  execute  judgment,  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man,  and  hath  put  aU 
things  into  His  hands.  What  havoc  and  slaughter  shall  be  made  by  the  sharp 
sickle,  with  which  He  is  invested,  when  His  irreclaimable  enemies  shall  be  made 
the  helpless  victims  of  His  inexorable  indignation !  When  the  great  day  of  His 
wrath  is  come,  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  HI.  The  practical  lessons  incul- 
cated BY  THE  contemplation  OF  THE  SUBJECT.  1.  We  infer  the  high  and  honour- 
able conceptions  we  should  form  and  entertain  of  the  Lord  Christ.  2.  We  infer 
that,  "  before  honour  is  humility."  3.  Let  us  learn  how  important  it  is  to  ascertain 
whether  we  are  among  the  subjects  of  this  exalted  Prince.  4.  Let  us  learn  to 
rejoice  in  the  perfection  of  His  administration.  5.  Let  us  learn  how  terrible  will 
be  the  final  doom  of  all  the  enemies  of  this  mighty  Prince.  6.  If  such  be  the 
advantages  and  pleasures  connected  with  the  sight  and  contemplation  of  a  glorified 
Saviour  in  this  world,  what  wiU  the  beatific  vision  include  ?  To  see  Him  as  He  is, 
without  the  interposition  of  any  obscuring  veil,  any  dense  medium  !  {G.  Clayton.) 
The  harvest  of  the  earth : — The  expression  is  a  singular  and,  indeed,  a  striking  one. 
I.  God  PREPARED  THE  EARTH  FOR  His  SEEDING.  Scientific  men  may  wrangle  over 
the  ages  and  order  of  creation.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that,  at  a  given 
time,  God  had  prepared  the  earth  to  be  the  scene  of  a  moral  trial  for  a  new  race  of 
beings.  The  farmer  cleans,  and  ploughs,  and  manures,  and  harrows,  and  ridges, 
his  fields,  in  precise  adaptation  to  the  crop  that  he  intends  to  grow  upon  it ;  and 
earth  is  the  prepared  field  of  God,  made  ready  for  His  sowing.  H.  God  seeds 
His  prepared  earth  with  men.  Scattering  the  seed  all  over  the  earth,  that  man's 
probation  may  be  carried  on  under  every  varying  condition  of  soil,  and  landscape, 
and  climate,  and  relationship.  God  keeps  on  seeding  the  earth  with  men ;  every 
seed  with  a  great  possibility  in  it ;  every  seed  set  where  its  possibility  may  freely 
unfold,  and  where  the  God-provided  influences  all  tend  to  the  nourishment  of  all 
its  best  possibilities.  Men,  men  everywhere  are  the  seed  of  God.  They  are  quick  with 
Divine  life,  and  sown  in  the  earth  to  grow  into  a  harvest  for  God.  IH.  The 
HARVEST  God  seeks  from  His  seeding  is  character.  God  sows  His  earth  with  moral 
beings,  in  the  hope  of  reaping  moral  character.  But  what  is  moral  character  ?  It 
is  the  proper  fruitage  of  the  earth-experience  of  moral  beings.  But  can  we  under- 
stand it  a  little  more  fully  than  that  ?  A  moral  being  is  one  that  can  recognise  a 
distinction  between  good  and  evil,  and,  when  the  distinction  is  seen,  can  choose  for 
itself  which  it  wiU  have,  the  good  or  the  evil.  But  a  moral  being  must  be  put  into 
such  circumstances  as  will  offer  it  the  choice  between  good  and  evil.  And  substan- 
tially the  test  amounts  to  this  :  good  is  doing  what  is  known  to  be  the  will  of  the 
Creator :  evil  is  doing  the  will  of  the  moral  being  himself,  when  that  is  known  to 
be  not  the  wiU  of  the  Creator.  The  story  of  a  life  is  the  story  of  that  conflict.  It 
is  the  growth,  through  the  long  months,  of  God's  seed  into  the  "  full  corn  in  the 
ear  "  of  established  moral  character.  It  is  the  unfolding  of  what  God  would  gather 
in  from  His  seeding  of  men,  the  righteousness  of  the  accepted  will  of  God.  One 
thing  only  does  man  take  through  the  great  gates — the  character  that  he  has  gained. 
It  is  the  full  ear  that  heads  the  stalk,  and  ripens  for  the  reaper.  IV.  God  has 
ANXIOUS  times  while  His  seed  of  men  is  growing  into  His  harvest  of  cha- 
racter. Every  blade  that  breaks  the  earth  in  the  farmer's  field  has  to  fight  for  its 
life  with  varied  foes :  insects,  worms,  mildew,  rust,  living  creatures,  varying  tem- 
peratures, crowding  weeds ;  the  growth  of  every  blade  to  stalk  and  ear  is  a  hard-won 
victory.  The  stalk  can  do  its  best,  and  be  its  best,  only  at  the  cost  of  unceasing 
struggle  and  watchfulness.  And  the  field  of  earth  is  but  a  type  of  the  world  of 
men.  Every  character  is  the  product  of  a  stern  experience,  the  issue  of  a  hundred 
fights  ;  a  triumph  from  an  unceasing  struggle.  The  problem  of  each  man's 
dealings  with  his  surroundings — helpful  be  they,  or  injurious — God  is  intensely 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

interested  in.  He  is  anxious  as  the  farmer  is  anxious  over  his  growing  blades. 
The  one  thing  of  profoundest  interest  to  God  is  the  making  of  characters  in  His 
great  earth-fields.  Be  it  so ;  then  a  fact  of  infinite  sadness  has  to  be  faced.  The 
issue  is  disappointing,  for  God's  harvest-hope  of  reaping  character  from  His  sowing 
of  men  is  only  partially  fulfilled.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  twin  mysteries  :  life  and 
death: — I.  The  true  theory  op  a  good  man's  lite  ripening  for  the  harvest. 
Did  you  ask,  while  you  saw  the  farmer  plodding '  his  weary  way,  what 
means  that  sowing?  Did  you  ask,  as  you  saw  the  wind  and  the  snow  ful- 
filling the  word  of  a  higher  power,  what  means  the  white  flake  and  the  rough 
blast  ?  You  have  now  the  plainest  answer  in  the  growing  of  the  corn.  And 
if  you  again  inquire.  What  is  it  growing  for?  the  harvest  will  explain  that. 
When  the  ear  has  been  well  filled,  and  the  heat  hath  ripened  and  moulded  the 
wheat,  and  the  golden  treasures  are  gathered  home  amid  the  reapers'  song 
of  joy,  and  the  bams  are  filled  with  plenty,  the  result  will  sufficiently  explain 
the  theory  of  agricultural  toil  and  of  natural  influences.  And  in  like  manner  the 
growth  of  the  soul  explains  the  moral  discipline  of  life  ;  and  the  harvest  of  souls  in 
heaven  explains  their  growth  on  earth.  The  days  we«spend  at  present  are  all  days 
of  discipline.  Now,  is  this  the  theory  of  your  life  ?  Are  you  conscious  of  such 
growth  and  ripening?  "  No,"  says  some  poor,  timid,  cast-down  Christian,  "  there 
is  no  growth,  no  ripening  in  me  ;  my  heart  is  as  hard  and  cold  as  ever  it  can  be." 
But,  are  you  not  conscious  of  resisting  temptation  ?  You  cannot  deny  that  you  are 
fighting  against  sin.  If  you  cannot  boast  of  any  good,  and  have  a  great  deal  of  evil 
to  lament,  still  you  can  conscientiously  admit  that  if  you  did  not  make  a  decided 
stand  you  would  have  a  great  deal  more  of  evil  than  you  have  at  present.  And  is 
there  not  hope  in  that  fact — that  casting  off  of  evil,  and  striving  and  praying  and 
wishing  to  get  rid  of  spiritual  death  ? — is  not  that  a  sign  of  spiritual  life,  of 
spiritual  growth,  at  least  in  its  earliest  stage  ?  Thank  God,  there  is  hope.  It  is 
God  working  in  you  ;  He  will  not  fail  to  watch  over  you  for  your  good.  II.  The 
TRUE  THEORY  OF  DEATH  as  illustrated  by  the  text.  First  of  all,  it  is  never  prema- 
ture. If  the  wicked  are  not  cut  down  until  they  are  ripe  for  judgment,  we  cannot 
believe  that  God's  people  are  cut  down  till  they  are  ripe  for  glory.  Fitness  for 
heaven,  be  it  remembered,  consists  not  in  the  particular  state  of  mind  in  which  a 
man  may  happen  to  be  when  the  death-stroke  overtakes  him.  It  does  not  depend 
upon  his  being  in  a  state  of  religious  consciousness.  No ;  it  depends  upon  the  habits 
in  previous  life,  upon  the  principle  of  his  previous  history.  Nor  shall  we  be  dis- 
missed till  we  have  had  full  opportunity  of  doing  all  that  the  Master  intends  us  to 
do.  There  are  different  degrees  of  service,  even  as  there  are  varied  kinds  of  service. 
The  terms  of  service  are  sometimes  long  and  sometimes  short.  Nor  forget  that 
there  may  be  much  living  to  good  purpose  when  the  length  of  life  has  been  very 
limited.  We  often  measure  life  by  length.  Does  not  God  measure  it  by  depth  and 
breadth  ?  We  look  at  quantity,  does  not  He  look  at  quality  ?  The  harvest  is  never 
premature,  and  is  always  carefully  gathered  in,  and  nothing  lost.  There  is  some- 
thing very  instructive  in  the  signs  of  careful  preparation  for  the  harvest,  which  are 
indicated  in  the  text.  Before  it  is  commenced,  a  voice  announces  the  arrival  of  the 
time,  and  the  purpose  is  calmly  and  deliberately  executed.  In  the  death  harvest 
there  is  no  haste  and  nothing  lost.  "  Of  all  that  the  Father  hath  given  Me,"  said 
Christ,  "  have  I  lost  nothing."  He  is  as  careful  of  what  there  is  of  value  in  the 
soul  as  of  the  soul  itself.  How  very  apt  are  we  to  fancy,  when  such  an  one  is 
suddenly  cut  off,  that  the  great  stores  of  his  mind  are  wasted,  that  his  acquirements 
by  study  and  discipline  are  now  lost  to  him.  No,  no,  we  may  rely  upon  it,  that 
there  is  not  anything  worth  carrying  into  the  eternal  world  that  that  sanctified 
soul  will  leave  behind  it ;  not  one  noble  afi'ection  but  is  nobler  than  it  ever  was  ; 
not  one  great  principle  but  it  is  stronger  in  the  soul  than  ever,  not  one  spiritual 
habit  but  it  has  grown  in  force,  not  one  true  excellence  but  it  excels  in  beauty. 
And  the  harvest  gathered  in  without  loss  is  preserved  afterwards  without  loss : 
**  Gather  the  wheat  into  My  garner."  Com  is  laid  up  to  be  preserved  ;  but  that  is 
not  aU,  it  is  also  laid  up  that  it  may  be  used.  At  the  death  harvest,  the  soul  is 
placed  for  ever  beyond  the  reach  of  harm.  The  accidents  to  which  it  was  exposed 
while  growing,  the  moral  frost,  and  blight,  and  mildew,  and  the  blast  of  the  light- 
ning, they  are  all  among  the  former  things,  and  have  passed  away.  But  the  soul  is 
preserved  where  it  wUl  be  of  greater  use  than  it  ever  was.  The  best  use  of  the  corn 
comes  when  it  is  cut.  All  before  was  subordinate  usefulness,  beautifying  the  land- 
scape and  furnishing  subjects  for  poets  and  painters ;  but  when  it  is  cut,  it  feeds 
and  sustains  the  nations.  So  the  best  use  of  the  soul  and  its  acquirements  will  be 
in  heayen,  not  here.    {J.  Stoughton.) 


CHAP.  XV.]  REVELATION.  503 


CHAPTER    XV. 

,  Vebs.  1-4.  Seven  angels  having  the  seven  last  plagues. — Divine  severity  and 
human  heroism: — I.  Divine  sevekity.  Undoubtedly  in  the  government  of  this 
world  there  is  the  stormy  as  well  as  the  mild,  the  gloomy  as  well  as  the  pleasant. 
The  government  under  which  we  live  on  this  earth  often  assumes  aspects  of  terrible 
severity.  II.  HuaiAN  hekoism.  The  heroes  here  suggested  are :  1.  Those  who 
have  conquered  the  wrong.  Sin  is  a  hideous,  ravenous,  iniquitous  "beast,"  served 
and  worshipped  by  unredeemed  men  the  world  over.  The  foe  against  which  the 
true  hero  fights  is  sin,  and  sin  only.  2.  Those  who  ascribe  their  victory  to  God. 
Observe — (1)  Their  posture  is  one  of  safety.  The  sea  does  not  surge  about  them  ;  it 
is  beneath  them.  It  is  a  position  of  splendour.  The  crystal  sea  on  which  they 
stand  is  made  brilliant  by  fire.  There  is  no  posture  of  soul  so  sublime  and  safe 
as  the  true  posture  of  worship.  The  Shekinah  beams  around  them  as  their  glory 
and  defence.  Observe — (2)  Their  anthem,  (a)  Triumphant  praise.  (6)  Philan- 
thropic devotion.  {David  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  song  of  Moses  .  .  .  and  the 
song  of  the  Lamb. — The  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  : — I.  The  triumphant  choir. 
He  calls  these  triumphant  choristers  "  conquerors  out  of  the  beast,"  which  implies 
that  victory  over  him  is  an  escape  from  a  dominion  in  which  the  conquerors  before 
their  victory  were  held.  They  have  fought  their  way,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  land  of 
bondage,  and  have  won  their  liberty.  By  Christ  we  conquer.  Through  faith, 
which  lays  hold  on  His  power  and  victory,  we  too  may  conquer.  11,  The  position 
OF  this  victorious  chorus.  As  Moses  and  the  ransomed  hosts  stood  on  the  shore 
of  the  Eed  Sea,  so  these  conquerors  are  represented  by  anticipation  as  standing  on 
the  safe  beach,  and  looking  out  upon  this  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire,  which, 
calm,  crystal,  clear,  stable,  and  yet  shot  through  and  through  with  the  red  lines  of 
retributive  judgment,  sleeps  above  the  buried  oppressors.  Observe  that  besides  its 
picturesque  appropriateness  and  its  historical  allusion,  this  sea  of  glass  has  a 
distinct  symbolical  meaning.  "  Thy  judgments  are  a  mighty  deep."  "  Oh  !  the 
depth  of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  of  the  knowledge  of  God ;  how  unsearch- 
able are  His  judgments,  and  His  ways  past  finding  out!  "  That  great  ocean  of  the 
judgment  of  God  is  crystalline — clear  though  it  be  deep.  If  we  cannot  look  to  its 
lowest  depths,  that  is  not  because  there  is  any  mud  or  foulness  there,  but  partly 
because  the  light  from  above  fails  before  it  reaches  the  abysses,  and  partly  because 
our  eyes  are  uneducated  to  search  its  depths.  If  it  be  clear  as  far  as  the  eye  can 
see,  let  us  trust  that  beyond  the  reach  of  the  eye  the  clearness  is  the  same.  And  it 
is  a  crystal  ocean  as  being  calm.  They  who  stand  there  have  gotten  the  victory, 
and  bear  the  image  of  the  Master.  By  reason  of  their  conquest,  and  by  reason  of 
their  sympathy  with  Him,  they  see  that  what  to  us,  tossing  upon  its  surface, 
appears  such  a  troubled  and  tempestuous  ocean,  is  calm  and  still ;  and  their  vision, 
not  ours,  is  the  true  one.  It  is  a  "  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire."  Divine  acts  of 
retribution,  as  it  were,  flash  through  it,  if  I  may  so  say,  like  those  streaks  of  red 
that  you  see  in  Venice  glass,  or  like  some  ocean  smitten  upon  the  one  side  of  every 
wave  by  a  fiery  sunlight,  while  the  other  side  of  each  is  dark.  So  through  that 
great  depth  of  God's  dealings  there  flashes  the  light  of  retribution.  III,  The 
OCCASION  or  the  song,  and  the  song  itself.  "  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses  and 
of  the  Lamb."  The  "  song  of  Moses "  was  a  song  of  triumph  over  destructive 
judgment ;  the  "  song  of  the  Lamb,"  says  my  text,  is  set  in  the  same  key.  The 
one  broad,  general  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  this  is  the  essential  unity,  in  spite  of  all 
superficial  diversities,  of  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  Old  Covenant  by  law  and 
miracle  and  retributive  acts,  and  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  New  Covenant  by  the 
Cross  and  Passion  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  there  is  another  principle  here,  and  that 
is  the  perfect  harmony  of  the  retributive  acts  of  God's  destructive  dealings  in  this 
world,  and  the  highest  conception  of  His  love  and  mercy  which  the  gospel  brings 
us.  "  When  the  wicked  perish,"  says  one  of  the  old  proverbs,  "  there  is  shouting." 
And  so  there  ought  to  be.  When  some  hoary  oppression  that  has  been  deceiving 
mankind  for  centuries  with  its  instruments  and  accompHces  is  swept  off  the  face 
of  the  earth,  the  more  men  have  entered  into  the  meaning  of  Jesus  Christ's  mission 
and  work,  and  the  more  they  feel  the  pitying  indignation  which  they  ought  to  feel 
at  seeing  men  led  away  by  evil,  and  made  miserable  by  oppression,  the  more  they 
will  rejoice.  And  the  last  thought  that  I  would  suggest  to  you  is,  that  according 
to  the  teaching  of  my  text,  we  may  take  that  old,  old  story  of  the  ransomed  slaves 
and  the  baffled  oppressor,  and  the  Divine  intervention,  and  the  overwhelming  ocean, 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

as  a  prophecy  full  of  radiant  hope  for  the  world.  That  is  how  it  is  used  here. 
Pharaoh  is  the  beast,  the  Ked  Sea  is  this  "  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire,"  the 
ransomed  Israelites  are  those  that  have  conquered  their  way  out  of  the  dominion  of 
the  beast.  And  the  "  song  of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb"  is  a  song  parallel  to  the 
cadences  of  the  ancient  triumphant  chorus,  and  celebrating  the  annihilation  of  that 
power  which  drew  the  world  away  from  God.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  hymn 

of  the  victors  : — I.  Who  webe  they  that  sang  ?  It  is  a  question  of  moment  for 
men  still.  Man  is  man  the  world  through,  and  no  temptation  has  touched  us  with 
its  polluting  finger  which  did  not  touch  them.  The  image  of  the  beast  and  the 
varied  semblances  of  sins  had  presented  themselves  to  their  minds.  The  stamp  of 
indulged  desire,  of  unrestrained  passion,  of  selfishness  and  mean  thoughts,  of 
untruth  and  cowardice,  of  unmanliness  and  impurity,  was  heated  ready  for  their 
brows  and  backs  as  it  is  for  ours.  The  number  of  the  beast  is  sometimes  a  swelling 
magnitude,  always  a  perfected  and  enticing  product  in  the  computation  of  earth. 
Public  opinion,  now  elevated  to  a  moral  law  as  high  in  authority  and  terrible  in 
sanction  as  that  of  Horeb,  had  to  be  counted  with  and  opposed  by  them  as  by  us. 
The  morals  of  their  age  had  to  be  avoided  as  a  test  or  guide,  and  they,  as  we,  had 
to  rise  higher  than  material  interests,  and  explode,  with  the  stout  breath  of  earnest- 
ness and  sincerity,  the  bubbles  which,  though  hollow  and  worthless,  were  radiant 
under  the  worldly  sun.  They  had  come  victorious  from  the  beast  and  from  his 
image,  and  from  his  mark  and  from  the  number  of  his  name.  The  essence  of  their 
triumph  lay  in  this — that  they  had  educated  themselves  to  look  upon  the 
permanent  relation  of  things.  The  tendency  that  always  tempos  us  is  to  see  only 
the  narrow  relations  that  are  close  about  us.  They  think  only  upon  the  daily 
occupation  of  hand  and  head,  and  their  converse  w-.h  their  friends  embraces  no 
greater  theme.  But  the  true  mind,  beyond  the  glare  of  the  present,  sees  the  bright- 
ness of  another  life,  and  the  reality  of  another  world.  He  is  continually  applying 
the  standard  of  eternal  life  to  the  fragmentary  portions  of  existence  on  earth.  II. 
See,  too,  the  subject  and  the  value  or  theib  bono.  Like  nearly  every  hymn 
in  this  Book,  it  tells  of  the  works  of  God.  It  is  not  silent  upon  the  judgments  that 
are  seen,  nor  upon  the  sorrows  and  failures  of  men  ;  but  it  looks  to  the  One  Hand 
that  is  powerful,  and  it  asserts  that  all  the  works  which  are  done  by  God  are  just 
works  and  true.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  can  clearly  see  this  ourselves,  for 
we  can  distinguish  between  the  operation  and  the  result.  There  is  a  solvent  with 
God  for  the  issues  of  human  deeds.  Man  works  while  God  overrules.  Centuries  of 
investigation  have  been  heaped  upon  centuries  ;  books  beyond  counting  have  been 
vsnritten ;  but  notwithstanding,  we  are  still  like  children  gazing  curiously  at  a  great 
machine,  and  our  conclusions  and  theories  are  like  heaps  of  shifting  sand  upon  a 
forsaken  shore.  HI.  Behold  the  pkospect  they  hold  out.  1.  It  is  a  prospect 
of  advancing  holiness  to  themselves.  Though  enwrapt  within  eternal  blessedness 
there  are  long  distances,  we  will  not  say  of  purity,  but  of  attainments,  which  they 
may  yet  tread.  Is  immortaUty,  then,  a  range  and  region  of  perpetual  progress  ? 
Are  we  not  to  lie  down  in  it  and  sleep,  and  let  the  great  worlds  of  a  renewed 
universe  wheel  round  unthought  of  and  unobserved  ?  The  whole  of  the  Book 
says,  No.  It  speaks  of  endless  activity,  of  mightier  attempts  and  more  glorious 
achievements  than  we  dared  to  conceive  on  the  earth,  of  ceaseless  efforts  towards  a 
glad  success.  2.  As  to  the  progress  of  earth.  "All  nations,"  they  say,  "shall 
come  and  worship  before  Thee."  Out  of  the  present  actual  world  there  is 
constantly  springing,  hour  by  hour,  another  world,  which  in  its  turn  begets  a  fresh 
condition  of  things ;  for  nothing  sleeps,  and  events  are  never  still.  The  prophecy 
in  this  light  is  inspired  with  force  and  fruit.  There  is  a  progress  of  the  nations, 
and  therefore  of  those  who  compose  the  nations,  distinctly  foretold.  For  worship  is 
the  condition  of  progress,  development,  and  advancement.  The  nation,  as  the  man, 
which  has  ceased  to  worship,  has  ceased  to  grow.  Ideals  then  are  lost  or  dissolved. 
The  higher  is  unattained  because  there  is  no  vision  of  the  Highest.  But  where 
worship  is  real,  unflagging,  and  unabused,  where  nations  can  see  the  Eternal  One, 
that  sits  upon  His  throne,  and  hear  the  hymns  that  swell  from  lips  of  brothers  who 
have  fought  the  good  fight  of  faith,  and  by  the  might  of  Christ  have  won,  there  is 
the  guarantee  of  national  principles  that  will  not  be  cheaply  sold,  of  national 
stability  that  challenges  and  defies  assault,  and  of  national  progress  that  expands 
and  strengthens  because  it  has  learnt  that  there  is  a  rhythm  and  sweetness  in  the 
life  which  has  shaped  itself  to  the  changeless  law,  and  an  articulate  gladness  and 
glory  which  issues  from  the  cross  of  self-denial  and  sacrifice.  (W.  M.  Johnston, 
M.A.)  The  song   of  God's  heroes: — I.   The   service  of  song  is  the  highest 


CHAP.  XV.]  REVELATION.  505 

EMPLOYMENT  OF  REDEEMED  MAN.  The  redeemed  whom  John  saw  in  vision  had  left 
behind  them  all  the  imperfections  of  life,  and  reached  its  consummation.  The  toil 
and  the  care  were  ended.  The  long  battle  had  closed.  Here  is  the  first  point  to 
be  marked,  viz.,  that  perfection  of  life  was  the  spirit  of  their  song.  All  the 
discipline  of  the  earthly  had  been  for  this  end,  that  every  conflict  of  the  heart 
should  become  the  element  of  praise ;  that  every  sorrow  should  change  into 
thanksgiving ;  that  their  souls,  by  all  the  education  of  life,  should  be  tuned  as 
harps  for  God.  We  may  observe  still  further,  that  it  is  the  noblest  ofl&ce  of  music 
to  become  the  language  of  those  emotions  that  border  on  the  infinite  and  eternal. 
There  is  nothing  in  this  world  that  can  so  completely  lift  a  man's  soul  above  the 
cares  and  doubts  of  time,  right  up  to  the  throne  of  God,  as  the  inspiring  notes  of 
a  psalm  of  praise.  Here,  then,  is  the  lesson  which  the  words  have  for  us  to-day  : 
just  as  Christian  life  approaches  the  heavenly  spirit,  that  life  becomes  one  song  of 
praise.  For  the  essential  principle  of  Christian  life  is  self-surrendering  love  to 
God,  and  that  can  bring  thanksgiving  out  of  sorrow.  You  may  have  known  men, 
old  and  grey  in  the  Christian  conflict,  over  whom  great  sorrows  have  rolled,  but 
they  are  yet  young  in  soul,  for  life  has  renewed  its  youth  in  thanksgiving.  II. 
That  song  unites  the  spiritual  heroes  of  all  the  ages.  Men  from  the  dis- 
pensation of  Moses — men  from  that  of  Christ ;  this  seems  implied  in  the  words, 
*'  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb."  1.  The  true  heroes  of  all  ages  are 
engaged  in  one  conflict.  We  are  told  in  the  13th  chapter  that  "  the  beast  had 
power  given  unto  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints."  There  were  men  in  the  past 
whose  battle  was  hard  fought  in  the  heart — they  overcame.  There  are  such  men 
now.  Life  is  full  of  heroisms.  He  who  in  the  little  things  of  daily  life  fights  on 
unnoticed  and  unknown,  is  in  spirit  a  great  warrior.  The  man  who  does  not  know 
hard  struggles  does  not  know  how  the  soul  rises  into  song.  2.  One  means  of 
victory — faith.  .  .  .  Observe  what  a  glorious  idea  this  gives  of  heaven.  Men 
from  all  ages  united  by  one  conflict ;  their  song  tuned  to  one  spirit  of  praise.  No 
age  is  barren — as  in  music,  many  voices,  but  one  harmony.  .  .  .  m.  Its 
THEME  IS  God's  connected  dispensations.  On  earth  we  praise  God  for  redemp- 
tion ;  in  heaven  they  praise  God  for  the  whole  economy  of  revelation.  {E.  L.  Hull, 
B.A.)  The  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  : — Without  pretending  to  settle  what 
events  may  be  thus  prophetically  alluded  to,  we  may  safely  consider  our  text  as 
belonging  to  a  glorious  season,  when  Christ  shall  have  mightily  interfered  on  behalf 
of  His  people,  and  swept  away  those  who  have  resisted  His  authority.  The  song  is 
a  song  of  exultation,  sung  by  the  righteous,  and  called  forth  by  judgments  which 
have  overwhelmed  the  wicked.  The  song  is  one  not  only  of  thanksgiving  to  the 
Lord,  but  of  exultation  over  the  wicked,  and  of  rejoicing  in  their  destruction.  We 
hardly  know  a  more  perplexing  truth,  nor  one  which  more  shows  how  vast  a  change 
wiU  have  passed  over  our  feelings  when  we  shall  have  put  on  immortality,  than 
that  of  our  acquiescing  in  the  punishment  of  the  wicked ;  yea,  of  our  approving 
that  punishment,  and  magnifying  God  for  the  vindication  of  His  attributes.  It  is 
not  merely  that  those  whom  wrath  overtakes  and  consigns  to  perdition  will  be  our 
feUow-men,  beings  of  the  same  race,  and  therefore  linked  with  us  by  most  intimate 
associations.  This  were  much ;  for  this  would  seem  enough  to  seal  our  lips,  or 
cause  lament  to  mingle  with  our  song.  But  it  must  come  to  pass  that,  in  variety 
of  instances,  there  wUl  be  the  division  of  families,  so  that  whilst  one  member  is 
with  the  Israelites,  another  wiU  be  with  the  Egyptians.  And  this  division  must  be 
thoroughly  known.  We  must  believe  that,  with  all  the  consciousness  that  some 
whom  they  tenderly  loved  have  earned  for  themselves  a  heritage  of  shame  and 
despair,  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  will  feel  how  the  Divine  attributes  have  been 
magnified  in  the  punishment  awarded  to  the  impenitent,  and  join  in  praising  their 
Maker  for  the  manifestation  of  His  justice.  And  this — however  we  may  shrink 
from  what  appears  so  unnatural — this  describes  to  us  what  is  loftiest  in  Christian 
attainment,  and  what,  therefore,  may  justly  be  looked  for  in  our  future  state  of 
being.  I  know  that  it  would  be  Christian  perfection  to  have  God  all  in  all ;  to 
make  Him  so  completely  the  centre  of  the  affections,  or  to  be  so  lost  in  Deity  as  to 
have  no  will  but  His  will,  and  no  end  but  His  glory.  We  proceed  to  observe  that 
the  song  of  the  triumphant  Church  is  described,  not  only  as  the  song  of  Moses,  but 
as  that  also  of  the  Lamb.  "  They  sang  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and 
of  the  Lamb."  Now  we  may  be  said  to  feel  more  at  home  with  the  song  of  the 
Lamb  than  with  that  of  Moses  ;  for  this  is  a  song  of  which,  even  now,  we  can 
strike  some  notes,  whereas  we  look  on  that  of  Moses  with  a  kind  of  awe  and  dread, 
as  though  it  were  not  suited  to  such  minstrelsy  as  ours.    It  is  the  song  of  grateful 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

confession  that  we  owe  everything  to  the   Eedeemer,  and  that   His  blood  and 
righteousness  have  been  the  alone  procuring  causes  of  deliverance  from  ruin  and  a 
title  to  immortality.     And  there  is  vast  beauty  in  the  retention  of  the  name  of  the 
Lamb  in  the  melodies  of  heaven.     Were  not  the  wounds  of  the  Redeemer  the  arms 
with  which  He  mastered  the  enemies  of  God  ?  and  what  are  they  now  but  trophies 
of  the  unmeasured  achievement?     To  appear  therefore  as  the  Lamb,  "  a  lamb  as  it 
had  been  slain,"  in  the  midst  of  all  the  magnificence  of  the  everlasting  city,  is  to 
appear  as  the  mighty  Conqueror  who  led  captivity  captive.     And  if  it  be  as  the 
Lamb  that  Christ  is  most  glorious,  what  but  the  song  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  most  on 
the  lips  of  those  for  whom  He  died  ?    We  doubt  not  there  wiU  be  many  and  various 
hymns  chanted  in  the  celestial  temple.     Archangel  to  angel,  cherubim  to  seraphim, 
and  man  to  man,  will  roll  sublime  choruses,  such  as  our  speech  cannot  now 
embody,  nor  our  thought  embrace.     But  one  hymn  there  will  be  which  shall  be 
peculiar  to  men.     One  anthem  shall  be  heard  in  which  none  but  those  who  were 
once  ready  to  perish  will  be  able  to  join,  but  which  their  voices  will  never  be  weary 
of  uttering  :  "  Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  Thy  blood,  out  of 
every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation."     "  Great  and  marvellous  are 
Thy  works.  Lord  God  Almighty  ;  just  and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Thou  King  of  saints." 
Such  is  a  portion  of  the  lofty  anthem.     To  take  this  anthem  in  its  largest  appli- 
cation, we  may  say  that  it  celebrates  the  greatness  and  the  justice  of   God  as 
displayed  in  the  occurrences  of  the  judgment  day.     And  it  is  well  worth  your 
attention,  that  these  two  characteristics  shall  be  finally,  declared  to  have  distin- 
guished the  whole  business  of  the  judgment.    It  will  be  a  great  and  marvellous 
work,  when  the  tares  shall  have  been  separated  from  the  wheat,  all  unrighteousness 
detected  and  exposed,  the  wicked  banished,  and  the  faithful  exalted.    The  spectacle 
has  never  yet  been  presented  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  earth,  so  fraught  with  the 
manifestations  of  Omnipotence  as  shall  be  that  of  the  general  judgment.    What 
display  of  power  can  equal  that  which  will  be  given  by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  ? 
And  if    the    gathering    together  of    the  buried  generations,   reconstructed  and 
reanimated,  be  the  mightiest  imaginable  display  of  God's  power  over  matter,  what 
shall  more  declare  His  power  over  mind  than  that  laying  bare  of  all  the  secrets  of 
men's  hearts,  on  which  the  last  sentences  shall  be  founded,  and  by  which  they  will 
be  justified  ?    Then  you  must  add  the  portents  and  signs  which  are  to  herald  the 
Judge :  the  storm  and  the  calm  alike  proclaim  that  Omnipotence  is  there.    But 
this  is  not  the  whole  of  the  chorus.     The  Church  affirms  God's  ways  to  be  just  and 
true,  as  well  as  His  works  to  be  great   and  marvellous.    And  this  is  a  most 
important  assertion,  when  considered  as  called  forth  by  the  transactions  of  the 
judgment.      There  is  something  overwhelming  in  the  thought  that  the   xmtold 
millions  of  the  human  population  wiU   undergo    an   individual   scrutiny ;  that 
they  will  come,  man  by  man,  to  the  bar  of  their  God,  and  each  be  tried  by  his 
own  privileges  and  powers.    We  can  hardly  put  from  us  the  feeling  that,  iu  so 
enormous  an  assize,  there  wiU  be  cases  comparatively  overlooked,  for  which  due 
allowance  is  not  made,  or  in  which  the  sentence  is  not  founded  on  a  fuU  estimate 
of  the  circumstances.    But  whatever  our  doubts  and  suspicions  beforehand,  "  Just 
and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Thou  King  of  saints,"  is  the  confession,  you  observe,  which 
wiU  follow  the  judgment.     It  is  a  confession,  we  are  bold  to  say,  in  which  the  lost 
will  join  with  the  redeemed.     The  feeling  in  every  condemned  man  shall  be  that, 
had  there  been  none  but  himself  to  be  tried,  his  case  could  not  have  received  a 
more  patient  attention,  or  a  more  equitable  decision.    And  we  rejoice  in  hearing 
the  chorus  which  is  chanted  on  the  glassy  and  fiery  sea.     It  tells  us  that  God 
will  be  justified  when  He  speaks,  and  clear  when  He  judgeth.     [H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  song  of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb : — What  has  one  to  do  with  the  other  ?  Here  are 
the  oldest  of  recorded  events  and  words  joined  with  the  farthest  and  latest  possible 
events  and  words.     Here  is  the  beginning  of  earth's  human  history  united  with 
its  Divine  consummation.    Here  are  the  words   of   earth  and  heaven  coupled 
together.     The  song  of  Moses,  and  the  song   of   the  Lord  Christ — the  song  of 
Israelitish  victory  and  of  Christian  victory,  in  one  breath  of  thanksgiving.    And  as 
we  look  more  carefully  we  see  it  is  all  very  full  of  parallels.     The  singers  in  both 
cases  stand  by  a  sea — the  Eed  Sea  of  Egypt,  and  heaven's  sea  of  fire, —  and  they 
are  each  singing  in  an  attitude  and  strain  of  deliverance  and  freedom  from 
enemies  and  of  victory.    And  the  sentiments   of   the  two  songs  are  the  same. 
God's    great  power  and   display  of   judgment,  and  the   acknowledgment  of  all 
nations.     I.  When  1  find  an  event  like  the  old  Israelitish  victory,  or  a  song  like 
that  of  Moses,  carried  forward  and  appearing  in  the  future  heavenly  history  and 


CHAF.xv.]  REVELATION.  507 

combined  with  Christ's  victory  and  song,  it  lights  up  human  lite  with  a  new 
MEANING  AND  RADIANCE.  1.  It  has,  in  the  first  place,  this  value :  it  connects  the 
end  with  the  beginning.  How  early  that  old  victory  and  song  of  Moses  were — one 
of  the  very  first  human  victories  under  God's  guidance !  How  far  away  seems 
that  first  victory  from  the  heavenly  end,  when  there  shall  be  no  more  struggle 
or  pain  I  How  since  Moses  multitudes  and  generations  and  companies  of  men 
have  all  had  their  contests  again  and  again  1  How,  with  every  day,  it  comes  to 
each  one  of  us !  How  premature  seems  the  old  song  of  victory  when  a  new 
enemy  is  to  come  immediately  1  How  ceaseless  seems  the  struggle  to  us  !  And  so 
God  puts  into  one  phrase  for  us  the  earliest  and  last  song  of  victory,  the  beginning 
and  the  end,  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  the  victory  of  Moses 
over  Pharaoh  and  one  evil,  and  Christ's  victory  over  all  evil  and  all  enemies.  No 
matter  how  early  in  the  struggle  you  may  be,  the  end  is  shown,  and  Christ's 
victory  is  coupled  with  it,  and  you  are  to  think  of  them  together.  Do  not  say, 
discouragingly,  "  The  contest  will  be  renewed  again  in  another  way  to-morrow  " ; 
but  say,  ♦'  The  contest  will  end  surely,  and  finally  victoriously  in  the  Lamb's 
triumph."  1.  But  there  is  a  better,  deeper  thought  of  encouragement  than  this, 
which  comes  out  of  that  connection — "  the  song  of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb."  2.  It 
is  that  all  righteous  issues,  and  all  struggles  of  men,  are  parts  of  Christ's  issue 
and  struggle  and  victory ;  and  so  each  man's  song  is  sung  with  and  in  the  new 
song  of  the  Lamb.  We  need  to  think  of  this.  Christ's  contest  and  death  and 
victory  were  not  all  a  history  alongside  of  ours,  to  which  we  can  look  up  from  our 
own  and  take  courage ;  but  they  contain  ours  and  all  the  struggles  and  victories 
of  the  servants  of  God  everywhere.  See  how  close  and  dear  that  makes  Christ's 
life  to  you.  Oh,  as  I  am  led  through  a  life's  discipline,  am  told  to  do  without 
this  or  that,  am  bid  to  contend  with  this  or  that  selfishness,  am  pressed  hard  by 
this  or  that  sorrow,  am  tempted  to  give  up  my  trust  in  God's  care  and  to  be  sour 
or  reckless,  how  it  helps  me  to  go  and  put  all  this  experience  into  the  gospel  story, 
to  translate  it  into  the  struggle  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  to  think  of  it  all  as  a  part  of 
His  issue.  My  struggle  and  victory  to-day  is  no  mere  disjointed,  separated  thing, 
done  alone  and  without  lasting  effect,  but  it  is  a  part  of  a  great  victory  of  the 
Lamb  already  won.  This  little  song,  which  I  sing  through  my  tears,  as  I  conquer 
a  hard  temptation  and  struggle  through  a  sea  of  evil,  is  a  part  of  Christ's  song.  It 
does  not  lose  itself  in  earth's  air  and  die,  but  it  shall  live  in  Christ's  song  to  the 
end  of  eternity,  when  tears  are  all  wiped  away.  3.  And  so  that  brings  me  to  a  third 
thing  which  the  phrase  teaches  us  about  our  life  on  earth — it  is  that  God  would 
have  it  happy.  Earth's  song  He  continues  into  heaven,  not  its  tears  :  Moses'  song 
of  victory,  not  of  his  troubles.  Are  you  singing  any  hymn  of  victory  to-day  ?  Are 
you  joyful  over  a  dead  sin,  or  are  you  merely  merry  in  slavery  or  sad  in  defeat  ? 
n.  What  we  learn  of  heaven  and  of  its  life  from  the  text.  1.  First,  it 
gives  us  this  thought  of  heaven :  as  a  place  in  which  each  one  of  us  has  a  marked 
individuality  and  history,  even  in  Christ's  presence.  Heaven  would  be  an 
unbearable  place  unless  we  lived  ourselves  individually — enjoyed  and  felt 
ourselves.  And  this  thought  is  given  us  in  the  fact  that  the  song  sung  by  Moses 
the  servant  of  God  is  remembered  and  repeated  there.  Human  names  and 
experiences  and  victories  are  mentioned  there  in  the  very  company  of  the  name 
and  experience  and  victory  of  the  Lamb.  A  city  of  kings  will  heaven  be ;  all 
natures  marked  and  distinct;  all  with  a  history  and  a  claim  to  distinct  remark 
and  notice.  2.  Then  there  is  this  further  thought — the  communion  of  saints. 
They  not  only  all  join  in  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  but  in  the  song  of  Moses 
the  servant  of  God.  They  use  the  words  which  commemorate  not  only 
Christ's  victory,  but  the  victory  of  Moses  too.  Think  of  it:  the  voices  that 
all  go  up  to  Christ,  all  also  using  Moses'  experience  and  Moses'  song  words! 
It  is  that  Christian  truth :  Your  experience  is  mine,  and  mine  is  yours. 
Every  man's  victory  I  sing,  and  every  man  sings  mine,  as  part  of  that  same 
salvation  of  the  Lamb  which  has  rescued  and  sanctified  you  or  me  or  the  man 
who  sings.  Oh,  get  some  of  this  heavenly  power  of  communion  of  saints  now ! 
Do  not  let  anything  cut  you  off  from  a  life  that  is  showing  God's  victory. 
Sing  its  song  ;  put  yourself  into  its  experience  and  place,  and  you  will  sing  your 
own  song  and  fill  your  own  place  all  the  better  and  more  fully.  3.  Then,  lastly, 
tills  text  tells  me  of  the  thoughts  which  are  the  atmosphere  of  heaven.  Often  we 
wonder — "  What  is  the  new  song  ?  What  will  be  my  state  of  mind — what  my 
sentiments  ? "  This  passage  tells  us.  The  song  of  the  Lamb  is  the  song  of 
Moses,  the  servant  of  God.    The  words  of  the  song  of  heaven.    They  are  but  the 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

nobler,  fuller  use  of  Moses'  lyric  words.  Heaven's  song  is  a  new  setting  to  God's 
harp  of  any  song  we  have  sung  on  gaining  a  spiritual  victory  over  enemies  by 
God's  power  here  and  now  and  in  this  earthly  life.  Let  a  man  triumphantly  resist  a 
temptation,  conquer  a  passion,  win  a  new  grade  of  character  by  God's  power,  and 
he  has  the  very  sentiments  exalting  and  moving  his  heart  and  life  which  the  new 
song  will  have  in  richest  and  completest  harmony.  {Fred.  Brooks.)  The  song  of 
triumph  : — The  life  of  the  redeemed  is  here  represented  as  a  service  of  song.  This 
will  not  seem  surprising  if  we  reflect  on  the  function  of  song.  There  has  never 
been  a  time  in  which  music  has  played  so  large  a  part  in  the  general  hf e  as  it  does 
to-day.  What  is  music  ?  It  is  not  the  mere  pastime  of  an  idle  hour,  or  the  mere 
sensuous  gratification  of  an  artistic  mind.  1.  It  is  a  language,  the  highest,  except 
poetry,  that  we  are  acquainted  with,  if  indeed,  in  fundamental  particulars  they  can 
be  separated  the  one  from  the  other.  It  is  often  the  only  language  that  can  give 
expression  to  the  highest  thoughts  of  the  mind  or  the  deepest  feelings  of  the  heart. 
It  is  also  to  be  noticed  that  all  life,  as  it  approaches  perfection,  becomes  melodious. 
The  life  of  heaven,  then,  is  a  service  of  song,  not  after  any  idle  or  sensuous  fashion, 
but  because  the  life  of  heaven  is  life  perfected.  Man  in  complete  accord  with  his 
surroundings,  man  moving  in  absolute  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  man 
redeemed  from  all  imperfections,  and  cleansed  from  all  sin  by  the  very  constitution 
of  his  nature,  is  man  melodious.  2.  It  is  worth  noticing,  further,  that  there  is  no 
music  like  the  music  of  triumph,  and  no  songs  like  those  which  celebrate 
deliverance.  And  I  take  it  as  beautifully  significant,  that  the  burden  of  this  song 
should  be  what  it  is,  and  that  it  should  be  called  "  the  song  of  Moses  and  of  the 
Lamb."  Moses,  the  much-tried  servant  of  God,  the  heroic  leader  of  a  stiffnecked 
people ;  and  the  Lamb,  the  eternal  symbol  of  sacrificial  suffering  and  sorrow.  For 
it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  noble  sorrow  nobly  borne  silences  the  voice  of  song. 
Shelley  says,  "  Our  sweetest  songs  are  those  that  tell  of  saddest  thoughts."  It  is 
partly  true ;  it  is  mainly  sentimental.  But  this  is  wholly  true,  that  sorrow  nobly 
borne  is  impotent  to  hang  or  keep  the  harp  upon  the  willows.  Song  breaks  from  it 
as  the  phoenix  from  the  flames.  The  most  triumphant  poem  of  this  century  is 
"In  Memoriam,"  and  we  know  the  sable  circumstances  of  its  birth.  It'is  even  so. 
Some  birds  sing  best  in  the  dark.  And  in  the  gracious  providence  of  God  beauty  is 
not  far  away  from  ashes.  The  oil  of  joy  exudes  from  mourning,  and  the  garment 
of  praise  often  covers  a  spirit  of  heaviness.  3.  It  is  further  suggested  by  this 
vision  of  the  redeemed,  that  the  conquerors  of  all  ages  take  part  in  this  song.  The 
conflict  varies  from  age  to  age.  The  beast  that  has  power  to  make  war  against  the 
saints  assumes  many  forms.  And  the  radiant  hope  here  "  set  before  us,"  is  that  all 
who  have  overcome,  will  unite  in  the  eternal  song.  For  there  is  no  power  which 
can  unite  the  hearts  of  men  like  music,  as  they  know  full  well  who  march  to  battle 
with  the  beating  of  the  drum  or  the  notes  of  the  pibroch.  Now  think  of  a  society 
gathered  from  all  ages  and  lands,  filled  with  a  life  of  which  song  is  the  only 
natural  and  adequate  expression,  and  you  have  a  picture  of  "  the  better  land  "  as 
John  saw  it  in  his  prophetic  dream.  It  is  likely  that  it  occurred  to  him  in  this 
form,  as  he  watched  from  his  lonely  rock  some  sunset  glories  blazing  far  and  wide 
across  the  blue  Mediterranean.  Out  there,  on  the  very  verge  of  the  horizon,  he 
catches  sight  of  the  faithful  ones,  no  longer  groaning  beneath  the  oppressor,  no 
longer  struggling  with  the  beast,  and  no  longer  divided  among  themselves: 
one  perfect  society,  telling  in  unending  song  of  the  wondrous  works  of  God, 
proclaiming  the  eternal  vindication  of  His  just  and  righteous  ways,  and 
reminding  us  that  the  confusions  of  time  are  only  in  appearance,  and 
that  the  essential  harmony  will  be  made  manifest  by  and  by.  Conclusion : 
1.  Let  us  expect  conflict.  "  No  cross,  no  crown."  2.  Let  us  look  for 
victory  from  the  right  source.  "  Looking  unto  Jesus,"  &c.  {James  Thew.) 
The  song  of  the  glorified : — I.  The  joyful  employment  of  glorified  sperits. — 
1.  The  song  in  which  all  the  saints  shall  join  in  heaven  is  a  song  of  triumph  over 
dangerous  and  powerful  enemies.  2.  Saints  in  glory  are  here  said  to  sing  the  song 
of  the  Lamb,  or  a  song  in  which  they  are  instructed  by  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
has  respect  to  the  glorious  deUverance  which  He  hath  wrought  out  for  them.  U. 
The  subject-matter  of  this  song.  1.  The  great  and  wondrous  nature  of  the 
works  of  God  shall  be  made  the  subject  of  devout  and  joyful  celebration  in  the 
world  of  glory.  (1)  The  vast  works  of  creation  will  then  be  seen  in  all  their 
magnitude  and  beauty.  Many  glorious  effects  of  God's  creative  power,  of  which 
we  have  now  no  knowledge,  will  then  be  disclosed.  From  an  elevated  point  will 
glorified  spirits  survey  the  works  of  creation,  and  be  pleasingly  astonished  at  their 


CHAP.  XV.]  REVELATION.  509 

almost  boundless  immensity,  their  beautiful  order  and  gradation.  (2)  Then  also 
the  great  designs  of  Providence  will  be  laid  open  in  all  their  lustre  and  glory.  As 
the  intellectual  sight  will  then  be  amazingly  strengthened  and  improved ;  so  the 
darkness  which  now  veils  many  of  God's  providential  dispensations  shall  then 
be  dispersed.  (3)  Then  also  shall  the  godlike  purposes  of  Divine  grace  to  save 
many  sinners  from  hell,  and  bring  them  to  heaven,  be  displayed  in  all  their  love- 
liness ;  their  origin  and  end  will  be  fully  disclosed,  and  furnish  the  saints  in  glory 
with  rich  occasion  for  admiration  and  joy.  These  great  and  marvellous  works  of 
God  will  be  then  perfectly  known,  and  harmoniously  celebrated.  (4)  The  infinite 
power  of  God,  which  is  a  just  object  of  terror  to  the  wicked,  and  which  will 
inevitably  plunge  them  into  perdition,  is  the  source  of  consolation  and  the  subject 
of  praise  to  all  true  believers.  Holy  pleasure  mixed  with  solemn  awe  attends  a 
contemplative  view  of  this  Divine  attribute  even  in  the  present  life.  In  heaven 
Jehovah  shall  be  praised  as  the  Lord  God  Almighty.  This  character  will  excite 
the  profoundest  reverence  as  well  as  the  highest  pleasure  in  the  breasts  of  the 
heavenly  worshippers,  for  as  it  wUl  proclaim  the  infinite  distance  there  is  between 
them  and  their  maker,  so  it  will  insure  to  them  everlasting  peace  and  safety.  For 
what  power  can  control  the  will,  or  alter  the  purposes  of  Him  who  in  might  is 
infinite  ?  The  justice  and  truth  of  God's  ways  are  celebrated  in  heaven  as  well  as 
their  great  and  marvellous  nature.  "  Just  and  true  are  Thy  ways,  Thou  King  of 
saints."  (1)  In  the  upper  world  glorified  spirits  celebrate  the  justice  of  God — His 
justice  towards  friends  and  foes,  the  perfect  righteousness  of  His  dealings  towards 
all  ranks  of  creatures  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  in  hell.  There  in  a  particular 
manner  do  they  acknowledge  the  justice  and  propriety  of  all  those  events  which 
puzzled  and  disturbed  their  minds  when  here  below.  They  have  no  accusation  to 
offer,  no  complaint  to  bring  against  the  King  of  saints;  in  the  whole  of  His 
management  they  heartily  acquiesce,  and  sing  a  lofty  song  of  praise  to  His  justice 
and  rectitude.  (2)  But  the  heavenly  choir  celebrate  the  truth  as  well  as  the 
justice  of  their  Maker.  Just  and  true  are  Thy  ways.  As  a  God  of  Truth  the 
Almighty  hath  invariably  revealed  Himself  in  all  ages,  and  this  title  very  properly 
belongs  to  Him  (Psa.  c.  5),  As  such  He  is  justly  extolled  by  His  people  now,  but  in 
a  much  nobler  manner  shaU  He  be  praised  on  this  account  hereafter.  Then  the  truth 
of  His  predictions  to  the  world  at  large ;  His  inviolable  regard  to  the  promises 
made  to  the  Church  in  every  age  and  in  every  state ;  His  fidelity  to  every  individual 
that  has  made  or  shaU  make  a  part  of  it :  His  steady  attachment  to  that  covenant 
which  through  His  Son  He  enters  into  with  every  true  believer,  and  His  immutable 
care  to  confer  the  blessings  it  contains,  shall  be  the  topics  of  joyful  acclamation  by 
glorified  spirits.  (3)  The  people  of  God  are  repeatedly  spoken  of  in  the  sacred 
oracles  under  the  title  of  saints,  "  Thou  King  of  saints."  Now  these  pure  and 
happy  souls  have  God  for  their  King.  The  great  God  indeed  is  the  Sovereign  of  all 
His  creatures.  He  exercises  universal  dominion  over  the  works  of  His  hands,  and 
His  right  thereto  is  founded  on  the  nature  of  things,  and  the  relation  He  bears  to 
them.  He  is  the  Creator  and  of  course  the  Sovereign  and  Lord  of  all.  All 
creatures  owe  Him  subjection  and  obedience,  and  over  all  He  rules  without  control. 
But  saints  are  under  His  peculiar  government.  He  is  their  King  in  a  sense  which 
can  be  applied  to  none  but  such  as  fear  and  love  Him,  and  have  His  image  drawn 
upon  their  hearts.  Application :  1.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  pleasing  descriptions 
of  the  heavenly  world  which  are  given  us  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  2.  Let  the 
consideration  of  the  state  to  which  our  deceased  believing  friends  are  advanced, 
and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  employed,  mitigate  our  sorrow  on  account  of 
their  removal  hence.  3.  Let  the  subject  of  the  songs  of  Zion  be  improved  for 
present  comfort.  Are  the  works  of  God  no  less  just  and  true  than  they  are  great 
and  marvellous  ?  Do  they  as  loudly  proclaim  his  unspotted  rectitude  and  inviolable 
faithfulness  as  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power  and  majesty?  Let  every 
fearful  thought  then  be  instantly  dismissed.  Let  every  rebellious  sigh  be  hushed 
in  the  Christian's  breast.  4.  Let  us  all  be  ambitious  to  join  hereafter  in  this 
delightful  song,  and  for  that  end  let  us  now  seek  an  interest  in  the  Divine  favour 
through   the   Redeemer.     {N.   Jennings.)         Israel    in    Egypt : — I.  Reoard    the 

POSITION    OF   THE    CHILDREN   OF   ISRAEL  AS   EMBLEMATICAL   OF  OUR  OWN.       And  here  We 

observe  that,  like  the  Church  of  God,  the  vast  host  of  Israel  had  been  delivered 
from  bondage.  With  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  our  God  has  led  us 
forth  from  the  place  of  our  captivity,  and  joyfully  we  pursue  our  way  through  the 
wilderness.  But  with  the  children  of  Israel  it  was  not  all  joy ;  they  were  free,  but 
their  master  was  at  their  heels.     Pharaoh  was  loth  to  lose  so  valuable  a  nation  of 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

servants.  Affrighted  Israel  beheld  her  infuriated  oppressor  close  at  her  rear,  and 
trembled  for  the  issue ;  even  so  it  is  with  some  of  you  ;  you  think  you  must  be 
driven  back  again  like  dumb  cattle  into  Egypt,  and  once  more  become  what  you 
were.  But  once  more  :  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  a  position  more  wonderful 
than  this.  They  came  to  the  edge  of  the  Red  Sea ;  they  feared  their  enemies 
behind ;  they  could  not  fly  on  either  hand,  for  they  were  flanked  by  mountains  and 
stupendous  rocks;  one  course  only  was  open  to  them,  and  that  course  was 
through  the  sea.  God  commands  them  to  go  forward.  The  rod  of  Moses  is  out- 
stretched, and  the  affrighted  waters  divide ;  a  channel  is  left  whilst  the  floods  stand 
upright,  and  the  waters  are  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  sea.  0  living  army  of 
the  living  God !  ye,  like  Israel,  keep  the  floods  of  Providence  still  standing  fast : 
but  when  the  last  of  you  shall  be  gone  from  this  stage  of  action,  God's  fiery  wrath 
and  tremendous  anger  shall  dash  down  upon  the  ground  whereon  you  now  are 
standing,  and  your  enemies  shall  be  overwhelmed  in  the  place  through  which  you 
now  walk  safely.  II.  The  triumph  of  Moses  was  a  picture  of  the  ultimate  triumph 
of  the  Lamb.  Yes,  the  day  is  drawing  nigh  when  God's  enemies  shall  no  longer 
make  it  necessary  for  God's  providence  to  be  apparently  disturbed  to  save  His 
people,  when  the  great  designs  of  God  shall  be  accomplished,  and  therefore  when 
the  walls  of  water  shall  roll  together,  whilst  in  their  inmost  depths  the  everlasting 
burning  fire  shall  still  consume  the  wicked.  Well,  I  now  want  to  show  you  why  it 
was  that  Moses  triumphed,  and  why  it  is  that  by  and  by  we  shall  triumph.  One 
reason  why  Moses  sung  his  song  was  because  all  Israel  were  safe.  Oh !  it  is  my 
strong  belief  that  in  heaven  there  shall  not  be  a  vacant  throne.  I  rejoice  that  all 
who  love  the  Lord  below  must  at  last  attain  to  heaven.  But,  perhaps,  the  major 
part  of  the  joy  of  Moses  lay  in  the  destruction  of  all  the  enemies  of  God.  I  see 
the  trembling  church,  fearing  to  be  overthrown :  I  mark  her  leaders  bending  their 
knees  in  solemn  prayer,  and  crying,  "Lord,  save  Thy  people,  and  bless  Thy 
heritage. "  But  mine  eye  looks  through  the  future  with  telescopic  glance,  and  I  see 
the  happy  period  of  the  latter  days  when  Christ  shall  reign  triumphant.  UI. 
Some   interesting   particulars  in   the   song   which    will    doubtless   have  a 

PLACE    IN    THE    EVERLASTING    ORCHESTRA   OF    THE    REDEEMED    whcH     they    shall    praise 

the  Most  High.  1.  The  first  thing  I  would  have  you  notice  in  it  is,  that  from 
beginning  to  end  it  is  a  praise  of  God,  and  of  nobody  else  but  God.  The  last  song 
in  this  world,  the  song  of  triumph,  shall  be  full  of  God,  and  of  no  one  else.  Here 
you  praise  the  instrument ;  to-day  you  look  on  this  man  and  on  that,  and  you  say, 
"  Thank  God  for  this  minister,  and  for  this  man."  To-day  you  say,  "  Blessed  be 
God  for  Luther,  who  shook  the  Vatican,  and  thank  God  for  Whitfield,  who  stirred 
up  a  slumbering  church  " ;  but  in  that  day  you  shall  not  sing  of  Luther,  nor  of 
Whitfield,  nor  of  any  of  the  mighty  ones  of  God's  hosts ;  forgotten  shall  their 
names  be  for  a  season,  even  as  the  stars  refuse  to  shine  when  the  sun  himself 
appeareth.  The  song  shall  be  unto  Jehovah  and  Jehovah  only.  2.  And  next  note 
that  this  song  celebrated  something  of  the  fierceness  of  the  enemy.  I  believe  the 
last  song  of  the  redeemed,  when  they  shall  ultimately  triumph,  will  celebrate  in 
heavenly  stanzas  the  wrath  of  man  overcome  by  God.  Sometimes  after  great 
battles,  monuments  are  raised  to  the  memory  of  the  fight,  and  of  what  are  they 
composed  ?  They  are  composed  of  weapons  of  death  and  of  instruments  of  war 
which  have  been  taken  from  the  enemy.  Now,  to  use  that  illustration  as  I  think  it 
may  be  properly  used,  the  day  is  coming  when  fury,  and  wrath,  and  hatred,  and 
strife  shall  all  be  woven  into  a  song :  and  the  weapons  of  our  enemies,  when  taken 
from  them,  shall  serve  to  make  monuments  to  the  praise  of  God.  3.  And  then 
note  how  they  sang  the  total  overthrow  of  the  enemy.  I  believe  that  at  the  last,  a 
part  of  our  triumph  will  be  the  fact  that  there  is  not  one  left.  We  shall  look 
abroad  throughout  the  earth,  and  see  it  all  a  level  sea,  and  not  one  f oeman  pursuing 
us — "not  one — not  one"!  Raise  thyself  never  so  high,  0  thou  deceiver,  thou 
canst  not  live,  for  not  one  shall  escape.  Lift  thy  head  never  so  proudly,  O  despot, 
thou  canst  not  live,  for  not  one  shall  escape.  0  heir  of  heaven,  not  one  sin  shall 
cross  the  Jordan  after  thee ;  not  one  shall  pass  the  Red  Sea  to  overtake  thee ; 
but  this  shall  be  the  summit  of  thy  triumph — Not  one,  not  one  !  not  one  of  them 
is  left.  4.  Furthermore,  in  this  song  of  Moses  you  will  notice  there  is  one  peculiar 
beauty.  Moses  not  only  rejoiced  for  what  had  been  done,  but  for  the  future 
consequences  of  it.  He  says — "The  people  of  Canaan,  whom  we  are  about  to 
attack,  will  now  be  seized  with  sudden  fear ;  by  the  greatness  of  thy  arm  they 
shall  be  as  still  as  a  stone."  Oh !  I  think  I  hear  them  singing  that  too,  sweetly 
and  softly — "  as  still  as  a  stone."    How  would  the  words  come  full,  like  gentle 


CHAP.  XV.]  REVELATION.  511 

thunder  heard  in  the  distance — "  as  still  as  a  stone."  And  when  we  shall  get  on 
the  other  side  the  flood,  see  the  triumph  over  our  enemies,  and  behold  our  Master 
reigning,  this  will  form  a  part  of  our  song — that  they  must  henceforth  be  "  as 
still  as  a  stone."  There  will  be  a  hell,  but  it  will  not  be  a  heU  of  roaring 
devils,  as  it  now  is.  They  shall  be  "  as  still  as  a  stone."  5.  And  last  of  all, 
the  song  concludes  by  noticing  the  eternity  of  God's  reign,  and  this  will  always 
make  a  part  of  the  triumphant  song.  They  sang — "  The  Lord  shall  reign 
for  ever  and  ever."  Then  I  can  suppose  the  whole  band  broke  out  into  their 
loudest  strains  of  music.  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  Part  of  the 
melody  of  heaven  will  be — "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  That  song 
has  cheered  us  here — *'  The  Lord  reigneth  ;  blessed  be  my  rock  !  "  And  that  song 
shall  be  our  exultation  there.  "  The  Lord  reigneth  for  ever  and  ever."  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Great  and  'marvellous  are  Thy  works. — The  works  of  God,  as  King 
of  saints,  great  and  marvellous  : — I.  The  work  of  bedemption,  which  God   has 

WBOUGHT,    AND    IN   WHICH   THE    SAINTS  ARE   PECULIARLY   INTERESTED,    IS   A   MARVELLOUS 

WORK.    11.  The  various  revelations  by  which   God  has  brought  the  saints, 

XN  THE  several  AGES  OF  THE  WORLD,  TO  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THIS  REDEMPTION,  ABE 
ALSO    MARVELLOUS.      III.    ThB     DISPENSATION     OF     God's     PROVIDENCE      TOWARD     THE 

Church,  in  correcting  and  punishing  her  for  her  declensions,  and  in  deliver- 
ing HER   OUT  OF   DANGERS   AND   AFFLICTIONS,  ARE  GREAT   AND  MARVELLOUS.      IV.    ThaT 

work,  by  WHICH  God  fits  and  prepares  the  saints  for   glory,   is   great   and 
marvellous.     1.  The  conversion  of  a  sinner  is  a  great  work,  as  it  makes  in  him 
a  mighty  change.     2.  This  is  a  marvellous  work,  as  it  is  a  work  of  marvellous 
grace.     3.  This  is  a  marvellous  work,  as  it  is  wrought  in  a  marvellous  manner. 
4.  This  is  a  great  work,  as  it  is  effected  by  Divine  power.    V.  The   dispensa- 
tions   OF    God's    providencb  toward    particular    saints,    in     bringing    them 
TO    GLORY,  ABE   GREAT   AND  WONDERFUL.      {J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)         God's   wouderful 
works : — ^It  is     said    of     Napoleon    that    when     Marshal    Duroc,    an   avowed 
infidel,  was  telling    a    very    improbable    story,  giving  his  opinion  that  it  was 
quite  true,  the  Emperor  quietly  remarked,  "  There   are  some  men   capable   of 
believing    everything  but   the  Bible."     Infidels  look  at  the  Holy  Bible  super- 
ficially,  and    find    fault    with    the  form  in  which  it    appears,  and    reject    it 
because    of    its    mysterious    contents,   thereby    maintaining    that  reUgion  ends 
where  mysteries  begin.     It  is  true  that  there  are  events  too  high,  too  wonderful 
and  too   deep,   such    things    as    pass    our    understanding,    recorded    in    God's 
most  holy  Word.    For  instance,  the  doctrine    of   the    Trinity  in   Unity,  Three 
Persons  yet  one  God,  is  most  mysterious.     This  we  cannot  possibly  understand,  but 
then  God  does  not  ask  us  to,  only  to  accept  it  with  childlike  faith.    Again,  the 
whole  scheme  of  our  Bedemption  from  beginning  to  end  is  a  profound  mystery. 
Now  look  at  some  of  God's  mysterious  and  marvellous  works  in  creation.     1.  And 
first  in  the  "  field."     Think  of  the  various  kinds  of  smaU  seeds,  such  as  wheat, 
barley,  oats,  and  rye,  which  the  sower  takes  in  his  hands,  sows,  and  leaves  in  the 
earth  to  take  care  of  themselves,  but  really  to  be  looked  after  and  to  be  taken  care 
of  by  God.     2.  Furthermore,  God  cares  for  our  pleasures  and  happiness  as  well  as 
for  our  sustenance.     This  may  be  seen  in  the  aboimding  and  universal  beauty  of 
this  magnificent  world,  where  everything  works  so  silently,  so  surely,  and   so 
harmoniously,  thereby  obeying  the  laws  ordained  by  its  Maker.     Oh,  let  us  pray 
earnestly  against  harbouring  the  spirit  which,  indeed,  observes  the  works  of  God 
and  of  Christ,  which  simply  arouses  our  curiosity,  "  makes  us  marvel,  and  leave 
Him,  and  go  our  way,"  as  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  did  when  put  to  silence. 
3.  Again,  not  only  once  a  year,  as  in  the  harvest,  are  the  marvellous  works  of  God 
visible.     "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  sheweth  His 
handy  work."    What  a  glorious  sight  by  day  to  behold  the  "  sun,  which  cometh 
forth  out  of  his  chamber,  and  rejoiceth  as  a  giant  to  run  his  course,"  and  by  night 
to  see  the  clear  moon  and  the  twinkling  stars  1     Can  we  lookup  there,  and  not  think 
of  God  the  Maker  and  Upholder  of  them  aU  ?    Alas  for  us  if  we  can  and  then 
simply  "  marvel  and  go  our  way"  without  a  thought  of  Him.     Whilst  we  accept 
mysteries  in  the  "natural  world,"   shall  we  reject  "Bible  mysteries"?     {J.  T. 
Hughes.)      Just  and  true  are  Thy  ways. — The  rectitude  of  God : — I.  The  deiiands 
OF  His  LAW  attest  THE  TRUTH  OF  THIS   TESTIMONY.     The  Heavculy  Teacher  has 
reduced  all  the  demands  which  the  Eternal  Governor  makes  upon  us  to  a  twofold 
conmiand.     1.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,"  &c.     Is  this 
demand  just  ?     This  depends  upon  three  things.     (1)  Whether  we  have  the  power 
of  loving  any  one  supremely.     (2)  Whether  God  has  attributes  adapted  to  awaken 


512  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

this  love  within  us.  (3)  Whether  these  attributes  are  revealed  with  sufficient 
clearness  to  our  minds.  The  affirmative  to  these  things  must  be  admitted  by  all. 
2.  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you."  Not  "  whatsoever  men 
do  unto  you,"  that  might  be  sinful ;  but  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do 
unto  you.  Would  you  have  them  false,  dishonest,  unkind,  tyrannic,  towards  you  ? 
Whatsoever  ye  would  that  they  should  be  to  you,  be  so  to  them.  Can  anything  be 
more  just?  II.  The  intuitions  of  His  moral  creatures  attest  the  truth  of 
THIS  testimony.  In  all  moral  intelligences  there  is — 1.  An  intuitive  sense  of  the 
right.  All  have  an  inbred  sentiment  of  right  and  wrong.  This  sentiment  implies 
a  moral  standard,  and  what  is  that  standard  but  God  ?  2.  There  is  an  intuitive 
love  of  the  right.  All  moral  souls  love  the  right  in  the  abstract ;  they  are  bound 
to  do  it.  "  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inner  man."  All  consciences  go 
with  God.  3.  There  is  an  intuitive  remorse.  Misery  springs  up  in  the  soul 
from  a  conscious  departure  from  the  right.  Cain,  David,  Belshazzar,  Judas,  are 
examples.  4.  There  is  an  intuitive  appeal  to  God  under  the  wrong  as  the  Friend 
of  the  right.  Oppressed  humanity  involuntarily  looks  to  God  as  Judge  of  all  the 
earth.  Deep  in  the  soul  of  the  moral  creation  is  the  feeling  that  God's  ways  are 
just  and  right.  No  argument  can  destroy  this  consciousness.  III.  The  mediation 
OF  His  Son  attests  the  truth  of  this  testimony.  1.  His  life  was  the  develop- 
ment of  Divine  righteousness.  He  was  incarnate  rectitude.  "  He  did  no  sin, 
neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth."  2.  His  death  was  the  highest  homage 
to  Divine  rectitude.  He  could  have  escaped  death.  It  was  the  inner  sense  of  right 
that  urged  Him  on.  3.  His  system  is  the  promoter  of  Divine  righteousness.  His 
truth  inculcates  it ;  His  Spirit  promotes  it.  His  Spirit  comes  to  "  convince  the 
world  of  sin,  righteousness,"  &c.  IV.  The  retributions  of  His  government 
ATTEST  the  TRUTH  OP  THIS  TESTIMONY.  Look  at  the  expulsiou  of  Adam,  the 
deluge,  the  burning  of  Sodom,  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites,  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  and  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews.  Look  on  to  the  retribution  of  the  last 
day,  and  see  what  rectitude  marks  the  whole  (Matt.  xxv.).  {Homilist.)  God's 
ways  just  and  true : — Take  a  straight  stick  and  put  it  into  the  water,  and  it  will 
seem  crooked.  Why?  Because  we  look  upon  it  through  two  mediums,  air,  and 
water :  there  lies  the  deceptio  visus ;  thence  it  is  that  we  cannot  discern  aright. 
Thus  the  proceedings  of  God  in  His  justice,  which  in  themselves  are  straight,  with- 
out the  least  obliquity,  seem  unto  us  crooked  ;  that  wicked  men  should  prosper,  and 
good  men  be  afflicted ;  that  servants  should  ride  on  horseback  and  princes  go  on 
foot ;  these  are  things  that  make  the  best  Christians  stagger  in  their  judgments. 
And  why  ?  but  because  they  look  upon  God's  proceedings  through  a  double  medium, 
of  flesh  and  spirit ;  that  so  all  things  seem  to  go  cross  though,  indeed,  they  are 
right  enough.  And  hence  it  is  that  God's  proceedings  in  His  justice  are  not  so  well 
discerned — the  eyes  of  man  alone  being  not  competent  judges  thereof. 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  seven  angels  came  out  of  the  temple,  haying  the  seven  plagrues. — 

Angelic  agencies  of  retribution : — Note,  1.  The  instruments  employed  by  God  for 
executing  His  wrath  upon  sinners — angels,  seven  angels :  not  that  He  needs  them, 
but  He  is  pleased  to  make  use  of  them,  and  they  are  but  instruments  in  His 
hand,  who  receive  all  their  efficacy  from  the  hand  that  uses  them.  2.  From 
whence  these  seven  angels  come,  namely,  out  of  the  temple,  more  immediately  from 
the  presence  of  God,  implying  that  they  came  forth  to  execute  vengeance  by  God's 
special  directions,  and  consequently  that  the  work  was  very  well  pleasing  unto  God 
which  they  went  about.  3.  How  they  are  furnished,  having  seven  plagues — 
namely,  to  inflict  upon  the  idolatrous  enemies  of  the  Church.  4.  In  and  after 
what  manner  these  angels  were  apparelled  and  appeared.  (1)  They  were  clothed  in 
pure  and  white  linen,  to  denote  the  holiness  of  their  persons,  as  also  the  holiness  of 
that  work  which  they  had  then  in  hand.  (2)  This  clothing  of  theirs  was  girded  to 
them,  expressing  thereby  their  great  readiness  for,  and  their  great  alacrity  in,  their 
work.  (3)  The  girdle  wherewith  they  were  girded  was  a  golden  girdle,  exactly 
answering  the  habit  of  the  high  priest,  when  he  entered  into  the  holy  of  holies,  to 
inquire  of  God,  or  came  out  with  an  answer  from  God.  5.  From  the  whole  learn, 
that  when  the  Lord  comes  to  pull  down  Babylon,  as  well  as  to  build  up  Sion,  He 
will  appear  in  glory ;  the  angels  are  God's  special  ministers  ;  when  they  go  forth  to 
pour  out  the  vials  of  His  wrath  upon  Babylon,  they  appear  gloriously  apparelled, 
glittering  Hke  the  high  priest,  and  girded  with  golden  girdles.  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.) 
Genuine  discipline  of  soul : — I.  The  source  of  genuine  soul  discipline.  "  After 
that  (these  things)  I  looked  (saw),  and,  behold,  the  temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION.  513 

testimony  in  heaven  was  opened."  The  discipline,  as  vre  have  seen,  was  of  a 
painful  character.  It  involved  "seven  angels"  with  "  seven  plagues."  Whence 
did  it  proceed  ?  Not  from  secondary  instrumentalities,  fortuitous  circumstances,  or 
a  heartless,  rigorous  fatality,  but  direct  from  the  presence  of  the  Infinite.  The 
language  here  points  to  the  inner  compartment  of  the  old  Jewish  tabernacle,  known 
as  the  "  Holy  of  Holies."  There  the  Jew  regarded  Jehovah  as  especially  revealing 
Himself  to  them,  and  as  communicating  to  them  His  ideas  and  plans.  To  a 
genuinely  disciplined  soul  all  influences  from  heaven  tending  to  purify  and  ennoble 
are  regarded  as  coming  direct  from  the  presence  of  the  Great  Father.  Its  inner 
eye,  so  to  speak,  is  so  opened  and  quickened  that  it  glances  into  the  very  shrine  of 
the  Almighty.  H.  The  ministers  of  genuine  soul  discipline.  1.  They  are 
complete  in  number  and  qualification.  "  Seven  angels  "  and  "  seven  plagues."  2. 
They  go  forth  direct  from  His  presence.  "  Came  out  of  the  temple,"  &c.  3.  They 
are  divinely  marked  and  attired  as  God's  priests.  "  Clothed  (arrayed)  in  pure  and 
white  linen."  4.  They  have  a  commission  of  severity.  True  soul-education 
involves  pain.  The  very  severity  is  a  blessing.  III.  The  indispensability  of 
genuine  soul  discipline.  "No  man  (no  one)  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple 
till  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were  fulfilled  "  (should  be  finished).  The 
idea  suggested  is  that  no  man  could  enter  into  the  shrine  or  into  the  immediate 
presence  of  God  until  the  discipline  had  been  fully  accomplished.  {David  Thomas^ 
D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Seven  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God. — The  wrath  of  God : — 
Observe — 1.  That  what  was  called  seven  plagues  in  the  foregoing  verse  is  here 
called  seven  golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God  :  in  this  verse  vials  are  full  cups. 
Vials  of  wrath  are  prepared  when  the  measures  of  a  people's  sins  are  filled  up ; 
full  cups  of  sin  are  followed  with  full  vials  of  God's  wrath.  Next,  these  vials  are 
said  to  be  of  gold,  signifying  that  these  judgments  proceed  from  a  just  God,  with 
whom  there  is  no  corruption  nor  iniquity  in  judgments.  He  being  holy  in  all  His 
ways,  and  righteous  in  all  His  works.  These  vials  are  also  said  to  be  full  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  as  an  aggravation  of  the  same,  it  not 
being  like  the  wrath  of  a  mortal  man,  of  short  continuance ;  it  is  the  wrath  of 
Him  that  ever  lives  to  maintain  His  wrath,  and  to  uphold  and  sustain  the  sinner 
under  the  execution  and  infliction  of  this  wrath,  that  the  sinner  cannot  run  from 
Him.  2.  The  executioners  of  this  wrath  are  said  to  be  seven  angels.  The  angels, 
which  are  merciful  attendants  upon  the  godly,  are  also  at  God's  command,  the 
executioners  of  His  wrath  upon  the  wicked.  These  angels  are  here  said  to 
be  seven,  to  signify  that  God's  judgments  upon  His  Church's  adversaries  shall 
be  heavy  and  great;  one  angel  plagued  all  Egypt,  and  destroyed  Sennacherib's 
mighty  host,  but  here  went  out  seven  angels  to  destroy  antichrist.  3.  The 
tremendous  dreadfulness  of  this  wrath,  intimated  by  filling  the  temple  with 
smoke,  thereby  signifying  that  the  wrath  of  God,  kindled  against  His  enemies,  shall 
be  unto  them  like  a  devouring  and  consuming  fire,  before  the  flame  of  which  burst 
forth,  a  cloud  of  smoke  appears.  Learn — That  almighty  God  is  glorified  in  the 
destruction  as  well  as  in  the  salvation  of  sinners ;  His  glory  is  as  well  seen  in  His 
smoking  wrath  against  the  wicked,  as  in  His  saving  mercy  towards  the  godly.  The 
temple  was  filled  with  smoke,  from  the  glory  of  God,  and  from  His  power ;  it 
follows,  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple ;  that  is,  to  deprecate  God's 
anger  and  supplicate  His  mercy,  or  to  avert  the  plagues  threatened  and  now  just 
ready  to  be  in&cted ;  when  mercy  has  been  long  offered  and  despised,  the  Lord  at 
last  becomes  inexorable,  and  will  suffer  none  to  intercede  or  plead  with  Him  (Jer. 
XV.  1).     {W,  Burkitt,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XVL 


Ver.  1.  Pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth. — Predestined 
tuffering  in  the  government  of  the  world : — I.  All  the  dispensations  of  this 
suffering  are  under  thb  direction  of  God.  •*  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out 
of  the  temple  saying  to  the  seven  angels.  Go  your  ways  and  pour  out  the  vials  of 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth."    From  the  very  Shrine  of  the  Almighty,  the 

33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Holy  of  Holies,  He  deals  out  and  regulates  every  item.  1.  He  orders  their  agents. 
Each  of  the  '•  seven  angels  "  or  messengers  are  sent  forth  by  Him.  "  Go  your  ways." 
The  Supreme  Governor  of  the  universe  conducts  His  affairs  through  a  vast  system 
of  secondary  instrumentalities.  There  is  not  a  pain  that  quivers  in  the  nerve  of  any 
sentient  being  that  comes  not  from  Him.  Is  not  this  a  soothing  and  a  strengthening 
thought  under  all  the  dispensations  of  sorrow  ?  2.  He  appoints  their  seasons.  The 
"  seven  angels  "  do  not  all  come  together,  each  has  its  period.  3.  He  fixes  their 
places.  Each  of  the  seven  angels  who,  under  God,  are  to  dispense  the  plagues,  has 
his  place  assigned  him.  Each  had  his  "  vial,"  or  bowl,  and  each  bowl  had  a  place 
on  which  it  was  to  be  poured.  The  first  came  upon  *'  the  earth,"  the  second  on 
"  the  sea,"  the  third  upon  "  the  rivers  and  fountains,"  the  fourth  upon  •'  the  sun," 
the  fifth  upon  "  the  seat  (throne)  of  the  beast,"  the  sixth  upon  "  the  great  river 
Euphrates,"  and  the  seventh  "  into  the  air."  Whether  there  is  a  reference  here  to 
plagues  in  Egypt,  or  sufferings  elsewhere,  I  know  not.  4.  He  determines  their 
character.  The  sufferings  that  came  forth  from  the  bowls  were  not  of  exactly  the 
same  kind  or  amount,  some  seemed  more  terrible  and  tremendous  than  others.  The 
sufferings  of  some  are  distinguished  by  physical  diseases,  some  by  social  bereave- 
ments, some  by  secular  losses  and  disappointments,  some  by  mental  perplexities, 
some  by  moral  anguish,  &c.  "Every  heart  knoweth  its  own  bitterness."  II.  All  the 
dispensations  of  this  suffering  have  a  gbeat  moral  purpose.  They  are  not 
malignant  but  merciful.  They  are  not  to  ruin  souls  but  to  save  them.  They  are 
curative  elements  in  the  painful  cup  of  life ;  they  are  storms  to  purify  the  moral 
atmosphere  of  the  world.  1.  The  righteous  punishment  of  cruel  persecution. 
"For  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets,  and  Thou  hast  given 
them  blood  to  drink;  for  they  are  worthy."  2.  The  righteous  punishment  of 
supreme  worldliness.  "And  the  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  seat 
(throne)  of  the  beast;  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  darkness;  and  they  gnawed 
their  tongues."  Worldliness  in  the  ascendant  is  indeed  like  this  beast  pourtrayed 
in  the  Apocalypse.  It  sits  supreme;  it  has  a  throne,  a  crown,  a  sceptre  that 
extends  over  all,  3.  The  overwhelming  ruin  of  organised  wrong.  Great  Babylon, 
what  is  it?  The  moral  evils  of  the  world  organised  into  its  metropolis.  False- 
hood, sensuality,  pride,  ambition,  impiety,  fraud,  tyranny,  embodied  in  a  mighty 
city.  This  is  the  Babylon,  and  all  unredeemed  men  are  citizens  in  it.  The 
Divine  purpose  is  to  destroy  it.  All  His  dispensations  are  against  it,  and  will  one 
day  shiver  it  to  pieces.  Take  courage,  be  of  good  cheer  1  III.  All  the  dispensations 
of  this  suffering  have  an  influence  co-extensive  with  the  universe.  There  was 
not  a  drop  from  the  bowl  in  either  of  the  angel's  hands  that  terminated  where  it  fell. 
The  contents  of  these  bowls  are  not  like  showers  falling  on  the  rocks  in  summer, 
which  having  touched  them  are  then  exhaled  for  ever.  No,  they  continue  to  operate. 
The  bowl  that  fell  on  the  earth  became  an  evil  and  painful  sore,  that  which  fell  on 
the  sea  became  blood  and  death,  that  which  fell  upon  the  sun  scorched  mankind, 
that  which  fell  on  the  beast  spread  darkness  and  agony  in  all  directions,  that  which 
fell  upon  the  Euphrates  produced  a  drought,  and  drew  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
dragon  wild  beasts  and  strange  dragons,  the  bowl  that  poured  out  its  contents  on 
the  air  produced  lightnings,  and  thunders,  and  earthquakes,  causing  Babylon  to  be 
riven  asunder,  and  every  mountain  and  valley  to  flee  away.  Observe — 1.  Nothing 
in  the  world  of  mind  terminates  with  itself.  "  No  man  liveth  unto  himself."  Each 
step  we  give  will  touch  chords  that  will  vibrate  through  all  the  arches  of  immensity. 
2.  Whatever  goes  forth  from  mind  exerts  an  influence  on  the  domain  of  matter. 
{David  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  first  Jive  bowls  : — I.  Ere  the  end  cometh,  God's  judg- 
ments OF  WRATH  WILL  BE  POURED  OUT  UPON  THE  WORLD.  II.  GoD  HATH  HiS  "  BOWLS  " 
IN  WHICH  ARE  THE  CONTENTS  OF  HiS  WRATH  WAITING  TO  BE  OUTPOURED.  lU.  ThB 
BRINGING  OUT  OF  THESE  HIDDEN  FORCES  IS  FORESEEN  AND  DETERMINED.  IV.  WhEN 
THE  ANGELS  OP  JUDGMENT  POUR  OUT  THE  "BOWLS,"  ALL  NATURE  MAT  BE  FULL  OF 
WHIPS  AND  STINGS  (cf.  VeiS.  1-4,  8-11).  V.  ThE  EFFECT  OF  THESE  JUDGMENTS  ON 
UNGODLY  MEN    WILL     BE   TO  EXCITE    TO    ANGER,   AND    NOT    TO     BRING   TO    REPENTANCE. 

"They  repented  not";  "they  blasphemed-"  (vers.  9,  11),  VI.  The  holy  ones  see 
IN  THE  Divine  retribution  a  manifestation  of  righteousness.  In  ver.  5  "  the 
angel  of  the  waters"  celebrates  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  in  ver.  7  "  the  altar  " 
is  said  to  do  it ;  so  the  Revised  Version  reads ;  meaning,  probably,  the  souls  of  the 
martyrs  beneath  it  (chap.  vi.  9).  Only  those  beings  who  are  in  full  sympathy  with  the 
Divine  righteousness  and  love  are  in  a  position  to  judge  rightly  of  the  Divine  pro- 
cedure. Note — 1.  Although  all  Scripture  points  to  trouble  on  a  vastly  greater  scale 
than  we  as  yet  see  it,  ere  the  end  shall  come,  yet  on  a  smaller  scale  God's  jud^;- 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION.  515 

ments  are  ever  at  work.  ♦♦  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be 
unpunished."  That  which  is  a  bulwark  to  the  good  is  a  detective  to  the  evil.  2. 
Let  us  not  forget  that  the  wondrous  way  in  which  the  balance  of  nature's  forces  is 
preserved,  so  as  to  bring  us  life  and  peace  and  comfort,  is  owing,  not  to  nature,  but 
to  God.  3.  In  our  daily  life  we  can  sing  of  both  mercy  and  judgment.  No  cup  is 
all  sweetness.  A  dash  of  bitter  mingles  with  all.  Not  all  bitter,  lest  we  should  pine 
away ;  not  all  sweet,  lest  we  should  become  insensible  to  life's  peril  and  responsi- 
bilities. 4.  We  are  indebted  to  Divine  mercy  even  for  the  sanctifying  effect  of  our 
trials.  (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  They  repented  not  to  give  Him  glory. — The 
hardened  heart: — "They  repented  not  to  give  Him  glory."  This  impenitence 
is  told  of  in  chap.  ix.  20,  and  in  this  chapter  again  at  vers.  11  and  21.  I.  A  veby 
CERTAIN  FACT.  The  latc  Mr.  Kingsley,  in  his  book,  "  The  Roman  and  the  Teuton," 
draws  out  at  length  the  evidence  both  of  the  horrible  sufferings  and  the  yet  more 
horrible  impenitence  of  the  Roman  people  in  the  days  of  their  empire's  fall. 
He  refers  to  these  very  verses  as  accurately  describing  the  condition  of  things 
in  those  awful  days,  when  the  people  of  Rome  "  gnawed  their  tongues  for 
pain,  and  blasphemed,"  <fec.  (ver.  11).  And  it  is  to  Rome  and  her  fall  that  St. 
John  is  here  alluding.  There  can  hardly  be  doubt  of  that.  But  the  sinners  at 
Rome  were  not  the  only  ones  who,  in  spite  of  the  judgments  of  God  resting 
upon  them,  have,  nevertheless,  hardened  their  hearts.  Who  has  not  known  of 
such  things  ?  U.  And  very  wonderful.  We  say  a  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire, 
but  it  is  evident  that  they  who  have  been  "  scorched  with  great  heat  "  (ver.  9)  by 
the  righteous  wrath  of  God  are  yet  not  afraid  to  incur  that  wrath  again.  No- 
thing strikes  us  more  than  the  persistent  way  in  which,  in  the  "  day  of  provocation 
in  the  wilderness,"  the  Israelites  went  on  sinning,  notwithstanding  all  that  it 
brought  upon  them  in  the  way  of  punishment.  IH.  And  very  awful.  •'  Ephraim 
is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone."  "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more  ?  "  —no 
good  comes  of  it,  punishment  does  not  make  any  difference.  IV.  But  yet  not 
inexplicable.  For — 1.  Times  of  such  distress  as  are  told  of  here  are  just  the  most 
unfavourable  times  of  all  others  for  that  serious,  earnest  thought  which  would 
lead  to  repentance.  Distress  distracts  the  mind,  drags  it  hither  and  thither,  so  that 
it  cannot  stay  itself  upon  God.  To  trust  to  the  hour  of  death  to  turn  unto  God  is, 
indeed,  to  build  upon  the  sand.  2.  Resentment  against  their  ill- treatment  holds 
their  mind  more  than  aught  else.  Where  that  fear  is  not,  God's  wrath  will  exas- 
perate, enrage,  and  harden,  but  there  will  be  no  repentance.  3.  They  attribute 
their  sufferings  to  every  cause  but  the  true  one.  4.  "  Because  sentence  against 
an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is 
fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil"  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  {S.  Conway,  B.A.)  Judgments 
and  no  repentance:  repentance  and  no  salvation : — I.  Judgments,  apart  from  Divine 
grace,  may  produce  a  kind  of  repentance.  1.  Judgment  may  produce  a  carnal 
repentance — a  repentance  that  is  of  the  flesh,  and  after  the  manner  of  the  sinful 
nature  of  men.  Though  the  man  changes,  he  is  not  savingly  changed  :  he  becomes 
another  man,  but  not  a  new  man.  The  thunders,  and  the  storms,  and  the  hail,  and 
the  noisome  sores  can  produce  in  men  nothing  more  than  a  fleshly  repentance ;  and 
flesh  repenting  is  still  flesh,  and  tends  to  corruption.  2.  And  hence,  again,  it  is  but 
a  transient  repentance.  They  repent  but  for  a  season.  While  they  see  the  immediate 
evil  of  their  sin  in  its  results,  they  cry  out  as  if  they  really  hated  sin ;  but  their 
hatred  is  only  a  little  tiff,  which  lasts  for  a  while,  and  then  they  make  friends  with 
their  sins,  as  Pilate  made  friends  with  Herod.  Their  goodness  is  as  the  morning 
cloud ;  and  as  the  early  dew  it  passes  away.  3.  Such  a  repentance  is  superficial.  It 
only  affects  the  surface  of  the  man.  It  does  not  go  to  the  heart,  it  is  hardly  more 
than  skin  deep.  Beware  of  a  superficial  repentance,  for  God  abhors  it.  God  is  not 
mocked ;  He  sees  the  loathsomeness  of  the  ulcer  through  the  film  which  seeks  to 
hide  it.  4.  The  awful  terrors  of  God  may  produce  a  despairing  repentance.  What 
an  awful  thing  it  is  when  the  law  of  God  and  the  terrors  of  God  work  upon  the 
conscience,  and  arouse  aU  a  man's  fears,  and  yet  he  will  not  fly  to  Christ !  II. 
Judgments  do  not  and  cannot  of  themselves  produce  a  repentance  such  as 
gives  God  glory.  "  They  repented  not  to  give  Him  glory."  Now,  this  not  giving 
God  glory  is  a  very  important  omission,  and  one  which  vitiates  the  whole  matter. 
True  repentance  gives  God  glory  in  many  ways.  Is  yours  true  repentance  or  not  ? 
That  is  the  question.  1.  It  reverences  and  adores  God's  omniscience.  It  is  a  con- 
fession of  the  fact  of  God's  knowledge,  and  the  truthfulness  of  His  statements,  for 
the  man  says,  "  0  Lord,  I  am  what  Thy  Word  says  I  am.  Before  Thee  have  I 
sinned.    In  Thy  sight  have  I  done  evil.    Thou  knowest  me  altogether,  and  I  adore 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvi 

Thine  omniscience."  2.  The  truly  penitent  gives  glory  to  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  His  law.  Impenitence  rails  at  the  law  as  too  severe,  speaks  of  transgression  as 
a  trifle,  and  of  future  punishment  as  cruelty ;  but  the  truly  repentant  soul  admires 
the  law,  and  champions  it  even  against  its  own  self.  Do  you  know  all  this  in  your 
own  heart  ?  3.  The  sincerely  penitent  also  adores  and  glorifies  the  justice  of  God 
in  His  punishment  of  transgression.  Is  sin  really  sinful  to  you  ?  Do  you  see  its 
desert  of  hell?  If  not,  your  repentance  needs  to  be  repented  of.  4.  True  re- 
pentance glorifies  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  His  mercy,  saying,  "  Let  Him  do  as  He 
wills,  for  His  will  is  holy  love."  5.  Further,  the  man  has  repented  to  the  glory  of 
God  when  he  spies  out  that  there  is  a  way  by  which  God  can  be  just  and  yet  the 
Justifier  of  the  ungodly — when  he  sees  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  adorable  Son  of 
God,  coming  in  our  human  nature  and  becoming  the  substitute  for  sinners,  and  the 
sacrifice  for  sin.  6.  For,  mark  you,  it  glorifies  God  in  one  other  way — by  setting 
the  sinner  ever  afterwards  craving  after  holiness.  "  The  burnt  child  dreads  the 
fire  " ;  and  the  siimer  dreads  sin  when  he  has  been  delivered  from  the  flame  of  it 
by  the  Lord  Jesus.     IH.  The  judgments  of  God,  apart  from  Divine  grace,  mat, 

THROUGH     OUR    HARDNESS     OF     HEART,    INVOLVE    US   IN     GREATER     SIN.       1.    If    God   haS 

chastened  you  very  much,  until  He  is  saying,  "  0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto 
thee  ?  "  then  all  this  chastening  which  you  have  despised  involves  you  in  deeper  sin, 
because  you  now  sin  with  a  clearer  knowledge  of  what  sin  really  is.  2.  To  many 
hves  judgments  also  introduce  the  element  of  falsehood.  The  man  vowed  that  if  he 
recovered  from  sickness  he  would  fear  God.  He  was  sick,  and  a  saint  he  would  be. 
But  when  he  got  well,  ah  !  how  much  of  a  saint  was  he?  3.  There  are  some  whose 
conduct  has  in  it  the  element  of  dehberate  hatred  of  God ;  for  these  have  had 
time  now  to  see  which  way  evil  goes,  and  yet  they  follow  it.  They  love  sin  as  sin. 
4.  This  introduces  the  element  of  presumption,  deliberation,  resolve ;  and  when 
men  sin  so,  there  is  a  talent  of  lead  in  the  measure  of  their  iniquity,  and  it  weighs 
exceedingly  heavy.  FV.  The  judgments  of  God  are  to  be  viewed  with  great 
DISCRETION.  He  who  studies  them  must  do  it  with  solemn  care.  1.  Judgments 
tend  to  good.  Do  not  forget  that.  They  ought  to  tend  to  good  to  you  who  are 
exercised  by  them.  How  many  are  aroused  to  think  of  better  things  by  sickness  in 
their  own  persons,  or  sudden  death  in  others !  National  judgments  are  frequently 
a  ministry  of  grace.  2.  Judgments  do  impress  some  men.  Many  will  come  to  hear 
a  sermon  just  after  a  dear  baby  has  died,  or  a  brother  or  father  has  been  taken 
away.  Death  whips  the  careless  into  thought.  3.  Some,  no  doubt,  are  sweetly 
subdued  by  judgments,  when  these  are  qualified  with  grace.  The  grace  of  God 
working  with  their  afflictions,  they  bow  themselves  beneath  the  chastening  hand ; 
and  when  they  do  this,  it  is  good  for  them  that  they  are  afflicted.  4.  But  then, 
next,  still  let  it  be  recollected  that  these  things  will  not  work  good  of  themselves.  I 
■want  you  to  remember  this,  because  I  have  known  people  say,  "  Well,  if  I  were 
afflicted  I  might  be  converted.  If  I  lay  sick  I  might  be  saved."  Oh,  do  not  think 
so.  Sickness  and  sorrow  of  themselves  are  no  helps  to  salvation.  Pain  and  poverty 
are  not  evangelists ;  disease  and  despair  are  not  apostles.  Look  at  the  lost  in  hell. 
Suffering  has  effected  no  good  in  them.  5.  Oh,  that  God  would  lead  you  to  repent 
now,  before  any  of  His  judgments  fall  upon  you  !  Why  should  we  not  repent  at 
once  ?  Surely  we  ought  to  repent  of  doing  wrong  when  we  perceive  that  we  are 
wronging  so  good  a  God.  Permit  me  also  to  say  to  you  how  much  nobler  and 
sweeter  a  thing  it  is  to  be  drawn  than  to  be  driven.  Must  you  be  beaten  to  Christ  ? 
And  then,  again,  recollect,  you  can  repent  now  so  much  more  clearly  than  in  the 
hour  of  sickness.  God  helping  you,  this  is  a  very  good  hour  for  repenting.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  10, 11.  The  fifth  angel  poured  out  liis  vial  upon  the  seat  of  the  beast.— 

Punishment  concentrated  upon  the  sinner  : — 1.  As  we  see  in  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  so 
we  see  here,  that  the  Lord  begins  farther  off  at  first,  to  wit,  at  the  earth,  waters,  and 
sun,  before  He  comes  nearer  to  the  throne  or  seat  of  the  beast ;  which  should  teach 
men,  before  God  come  near  them  with  His  plagues  or  punishments,  to  draw  near 
to  God  by  true  and  timely  repentance.  2.  The  wonted  glory  and  lustre  that  the 
beast's  kingdom  had  by  ignorance,  error,  and  idolatry,  is  now  turned  to  darkness  ; 
which  teaches  us,  that  all  seeming  good,  profit,  pleasure,  advancement,  which  is  got  by 
sin,  ends  at  last  in  the  contrary.  3.  As  nothing  could  hinder  the  darkness  of  Egypt, 
so  nothing  could  hinder  this  ;  which  teaches  us,  that  when  God  is  to  punish, 
none  are  able  to  impede  His  judgments.  4.  It  is  said  here,  that  they  gnawed 
their  tongues  for  pain,  where  we  see  that  as  the  Lord  makes  the  guilty  conscience 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION,  517 

of  the  wicked  to  be  their  own  accuser  and  condemner,  so  He  makes  them  likewise  to 
be  their  own  tormentor  and  burden.  5.  We  see  here  again  the  Lord's  suitable 
judgments  to  the  sin;  they  seduced  and  sinned  by  their  tongue,  therefore  here 
they  are  punished  in  their  tongue  ;  wherefore  beware  in  what  manner,  or  by  what 
member  we  sin,  lest  by  the  same  we  be  likewise  punished.     {William  Guild,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12-16.  The  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  great  river 
Euphrates  .  .  .  Three  unclean  spirits. — The  mission  of  the  three  spirits  : — The  river 
Euphrates,  the  dividing  stream  (in  old  time)  between  Israel  and  Assyria,  between 
Israel  and  Babylon — the  dividing  stream  ^in  typical  language)  between  the  Israel 
of  God  and  the  foes  of  God,  between  the  Church  and  the  world,  between  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  opposing  hosts  and  powers  of  evil — is  dried  up,  by 
the  outpouring  of  the  sixth  vial,  that  the  last  confederacy  of  infidelity  and 
ungodliness  may  be  tempted  onward  to  its  ruin.  These  vials  are  vials  of  wrath. 
The  longsuffering  of  ages  is  at  length  exhausted  :  the  measure  of  earth's  iniquity  is 
at  last  full.  The  time  is  come  for  a  decisive  battle  :  the  kings  from  the  east,  from 
the  enemy's  side  of  the  river,  shall  be  encouraged  to  cross  over,  shall  be  permitted 
to  pass  over  dryshod,  that  they  may  throw  themselves,  in  all  their  proud  superiority 
of  strength  and  numbers,  upon  "  the  camp  of  the  saints  "  and  upon  "  the  beloved 
city."  Such  is  the  parable.  Enough  of  palliatives  and  enough  of  compromises : 
enough  of  human  expedients  for  harmonising  the  irreconcilable,  for  making  truth 
speak  the  speech  of  compliment,  and  toning  down  revelation  till  human  reason 
shall  flatter  herself  that  she  invented  it :  not  thus  can  the  true  life  be  lived,  the 
reality  of  death  faced,  or  a  boundless  eternity  entered :  not  thus  shall  place  ever  be 
found  for  that  "  new  heaven  and  new  earth,"  '*  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness," 
in  which  "  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men."  There  must  first  be  a  war  and 
a  battle :  the  war  of  spiritual  combatants,  the  battle  of  the  great  day  of  God 
Almighty.  Thus  we  are  enabled  to  contemplate,  with  awe  but  not  with  dismay, 
aU  that  growing  boldness  and  insolence  of  unbelief  which  seems  likely  to  be 
characteristic  of  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  is  all  working  up  to 
a  consummation — a  consummation  foreordained  of  God — a  consummation  revealed 
by  Him  in  prophecy.  The  three  unclean  spirits  which  gather  the  invading  powers 
to  the  battle  of  the  great  day  are  said  to  issue  from  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and 
from  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and  from  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet.  The  refer- 
ence is  to  the  section  of  the  three  enemies,  occupying  the  twelfth  and  two  following 
chapters  of  this  book.  1.  The  dragon  is  described  to  us  in  the  twelfth  chapter  by 
figures  and  names,  which  leave  no  doubt  of  their  meaning.  He  is  expressly  termed 
the  devil  and  Satan — the  old  serpent,  with  evident  reference  to  the  history  of  man's 
fall — the  deceiver  of  the  whole  world — the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  He  is  described 
as  a  dragon — that  fabulous  monster  of  antiquity,  with  its  huge  coils  of  serpent-like 
scales — here  painted  with  seven  heads,  ten  horns  upon  one  of  them,  and  seven 
crowns — telling  at  once  of  manifold  versatility,  giant  strength,  and  more  than  regal 
dominion.  He  is  described  further  as  casting  down  to  the  earth  the  third  part  of 
the  stars  of  heaven — to  express  at  once  the  audacity  of  his  presumption,  and  the 
superhuman  sweep  of  his  success.  He  stands  before  the  woman  clothed  with  the 
sun  and  crowned  with  the  stars — emblem  of  the  Church  of  God  now  travailing  in 
birth  with  the  Saviour  of  prophecy  and  of  expectation — stands,  I  say,  watching  for 
the  Incarnation,  and  eager  to  devour  the  Divine  Child  at  the  moment  of  His  birth. 
Frustrated  by  the  final  rescue  which  transfers  the  imperilled  Saviour,  by  ascension, 
to  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven — and  himself  receiving  a  defeat  in  the  war  with  the 
glorified  Christ  which  hurls  him  back,  wrathful  and  revengeful,  upon  an  earth  not 
yet  regenerated — he  turns  all  his  fury  first  upon  the  Church,  which  escapes  from 
him  into  the  wilderness,  cared  for  by  God  Himself,  who  has  prepared  there  her 
temporary  home  and  her  heavenly  supplies — cared  for  by  God,  but  helped  even  by 
the  earth,  who,  in  a  sense  wonderfully  true  to  history,  has  sometimes  even  pro- 
tected and  favoured  her — first,  I  say,  upon  the  Church  herself,  and  then  (by  a  slight 
modification  of  the  metaphor)  upon  the  individual  Christian,  represented  as  not  yet 
sharing  the  full  security  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  as  having  still  to  fight  for  his  life, 
though  the  Church  is  guaranteed  from  the  once  threatened  destruction.  2.  The 
second  enemy  is  depicted  in  the  thirteenth  chapter.  A  wild  beast  of  hideous 
composite  form— lion,  bear,  and  leopard  in  one — is  seen  by  the  evangelist  rising  out 
of  the  sea.  With  one  slight — very  slight — difference  his  first  appearance  is  that  of 
the  dragon  himself.  There  are  the  seven  heads  and  the  ten  horns  upon  one  of 
them,  only  in  this  latter  case  the  horns  are  crowned,  not  the  heads,  and  therefore 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

the  crowns  are  ten,  not  seven.  The  dragon  gives  him  his  power  and  his  throne:  he 
is  to  represent  him  :  the  dragon  is  a  power  out  of  sight :  the  beast  is  his  impersona- 
tion and  his  "  express  image."  One  peculiarity  of  this  foe  is  a  portentous  vitality. 
He  receives  a  mortal  wound,  but  he  lives  again.  The  admiration  of  the  beholders 
rises  into  adoration.  They  worship  the  dragon  who  gave  him  his  authority,  and 
they  worship  the  beast  who  lives  after  dying.  The  second  enemy  is  the  world. 
There  is  no  mistaking  the  symboUsm.  In  the  interpretation  of  Daniel's  vision  the 
four  beasts  combined  into  the  beast  before  us  are  expressly  said  to  be  kings :  the 
beast  is  the  world,  as  the  dragon  is  the  devil.  The  world,  in  its  aspect  of  power — 
the  aspect  here  presented — is  a  great  reality.  In  St.  John's  time  it  was  the  formid- 
able— apart  from  revelation  the  irresistible,  invincible — foe  of  the  little  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ.  The  time  was  to  be  when  an  apparently  fatal  wound  was  to  be 
inflicted  upon  this  antagonist — a  wound,  of  which  one  illustration,  if  not  the  one 
fulfilment,  was  to  be  the  nominal  conversion  of  the  Koman  Empire  to  the  faith 
which  once  it  persecuted.  Surely  that  wound  was  a  mortal  wound  ?  Wait  a  while 
and  you  shall  see  the  world  rise  from  its  bed  of  death — you  shall  see  names  changed, 
realities  surviving — you  shall  see  kings  ruling  in  lust  and  rapine  "  by  the  grace  of 
God  " — ^you  shall  see  the  nominally  Christian  world  wax  wanton  in  turn  against  its 
imaged  and  sculptured  Lord — you  shall  see  Christian  kings  issuing  their  edicts  of 
exile  against  Christian  worshippers,  and  Papal  Kome  drawing  from  her  scabbard 
the  sword  which  Pagan  Kome  had  for  ever  sheathed.  The  power  of  the  world  is 
superhuman  in  its  vitality :  the  dragon — this  accounts  for  it — gives  the  beast  his 
throne  and  his  authority,  and  that  throne  and  that  authority,  call  themselves  what 
they  may,  are  still  adverse  and  antagonistic  to  the  cause  and  the  people  of  Jesus 
Christ.  3.  There  is  a  third  enemy,  called  in  the  text,  for  the  first  time,  "  the  false 
prophet "  ;  but  clearly  marked,  in  later  passages  of  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth 
chapters,  as  identical  with  the  "  beast  from  the  earth  "  of  the  thirteenth.  His 
characteristics  are  peculiar.  They  combine  might  and  meekness.  He  has  two 
horns  hke  a  lamb,  but  he  speaks  like  a  dragon ;  he  unites  the  seeming  innocence  of 
the  lamb  with  the  subtlety  which  beguiled  Eve  in  the  serpent.  There  is  no  doubt 
as  to  his  origin — it  is  more  patent  than  that  of  the  second — he  comes  up  out  of  the 
earth  whatever  his  apparent  influence  with  heaven  and  the  unseen.  In  some  sense 
he  is  the  viceroy  of  the  second  enemy ;  *'  he  exercises  aU  his  power  before  him  " — 
the  power  which  the  dragon  gave  he  guides  to  its  destination.  His  work  is  to 
glorify  in  every  way  the  beast  which  is  the  world.  He  makes  earth  worship  the 
world.  He  magnifies,  by  every  art  and  every  persuasion,  the  miracle  of  the  revival. 
He  props  miracle  by  miracle,  can  make  fire  come  down  from  heaven  by  his  incanta- 
tions to  deceive  mankind  into  the  idolatry  of  the  beast  which  died  and  lives.  He 
bids  them  make  an  image  of  the  god-world,  and  then  he  puts  life  into  the  image 
and  makes  it  speak.  St.  John  lived  in  days  when  the  beast  was  embodied  in  the 
empire,  and  when  the  image  of  the  emperor  was  an  object  of  worship.  The 
suspected  Christian  was  bidden  for  his  life  to  sacrifice  to  that  image.  All  this 
would  make  the  figures  of  this  part  of  the  vision  very  real  and  very  life-like  to  the 
Church  of  that  time.  Illustrative,  not  exhaustive,  of  them.  The  second  beast,  like 
the  first — the  third  enemy,  like  the  second,  lives  on  until  now.  He  is  the  wisdom, 
as  the  other  is  the  power,  of  this  world.  He  is  that  subtler,  more  penetrating 
influence  of  policy  and  diplomacy,  of  skill  and  scheming,  of  expediency  and  state- 
craft, of  knowledge  divorced  from  religion,  of  science  falsely  so  called,  of  reason  set 
against  revelation,  and  creatureship  exalted  into  rivalry  with  the  Creator,  without 
which  the  brute-force  of  wealth  and  numbers,  of  edicts  and  penalties,  of  arms  and 
armies,  would  have  no  avail  ever  against  intellect  and  enlightenment,  would  have 
lost  it  long  ago  in  the  face  of  popular  growth  and  advancing  freedom.  It  must  be 
confessed  that  it  is  not  easy  to  set  before  ourselves  in  a  sharp,  strong,  telling  way 
the  distinctions  and  contrasts  of  the  three  enemies.  They  interlace  and  intertwine 
with  each  other — their  general  drift  is  the  same — they  are  working  to  one  end,  and 
they  are  helping  one  another  to  reach  it.  Yet  we  must  endeavour  to  see  why  they 
are  distinguished,  and  to  discover  their  special  characteristics  as  influences  upon  the 
generation  occupying  the  earth  on  the  very  eve  of  the  great  day.  *'  I  saw  three 
unclean  spirits  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet."  (1)  We  might  hesitate  long  and 
anxiously  about  the  first  of  these.  We  might  think  of  many  characteristics  of  the 
evil  spirit  in  his  fall  and  in  his  ruin,  in  his  reign  and  in  his  warfare,  as  they  are 
suggested  to  us  in  the  hints  and  warnings  of  the  Bible.  But  there  is  one  quality 
which  seems  to  underlie  and  motive  all,  and  that  is  insubordination.     It  is  the 


CHAP.XVI.3  REVELATION.  519 

unwillingness  to  keep  the  rank  and  the  station — "the  first  estate,"  as  St.  Jude  calls 
it — assigned  by  the  Lord  of  all  to  the  individual  being  created.  It  is  the  inability 
to  curb  and  coerce  the  unruly  workings  of  that  pride  of  self,  that  lust  of  liberty,  that 
passion  for  independence  and  exemption  from  jurisdiction,  which  begins  by  trying 
to  escape  from  the  omnipresence,  and  ends  by  making  omnipotence  itself  its  foe. 
(2)  And  what  of  the  inspiration  from  the  "  beast  "  which  is  the  world  ?  To  it  also 
we  might  assign  many  names,  but  we  shall  choose  one  among  them  and  call  it 
materialism.  It  is  the  pressure  upon  us,  the  influence  over  us,  of  this  brute  thing, 
the  power  of  the  present,  the  power  of  the  seen,  the  power  of  sense  and  time,  the 
power  of  the  circumstance  and  the  surrounding  of  the  men  that  shall  die  and  the 
world  that  passeth  away  ;  it  is  the  inability  to  withstand  the  custom  and  the  fashion, 
the  force  of  numbers  and  the  cry  of  voices  and  the  command  of  the  society  which 
can  compel  or  outlaw  ;  it  is  the  influence,  in  one  shape,  of  clamorous  appetite  and 
eager  ambition  and  unsatisfied  getting  ;  it  is  the  influence,  in  another  shape,  of  the 
meanest  and  vilest  of  philosophies,  saying.  The  body  is  all — let  it  have  its  way ;  or, 
The  body  is  all — there  is  no  hereafter.  (3)  Insubordination — materialism — what 
shall  be  the  third  spirit  ?  Think  of  the  characteristics  of  the  lamb-like,  serpent- 
like wonder-worker — of  the  ingenious  subtle  inventor  that  can  draw  fire  from  the 
sky  and  make  images  speak — that  can  assert  itself  under  another's  name,  impose 
its  edicts  with  authority,  and  ostracise  the  poor  Christian  that  would  so  much  as 
buy  or  sell  unmolested— think  of  all  this,  and  you  will  not  count  the  third  influence 
misnamed  if  we  call  it  intellectualism — the  thing  which  struts  and  parades  itself  as 
"  thought,"  intelligence,  an  open  mind,  a  refusal  to  see  with  other's  eyes,  a  repudia- 
tion of  the  received,  a  passion  for  the  original — though  its  discoveries  are  oftentimes 
the  mere  echo  of  an  echo  from  days  of  obsolete  objection,  of  puerile,  infantine 
bewilderment.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty. 
— The  final  conjlict : — Is  it  possible,  after  all,  that  we  have  mistaken  the  character 
of  the  final  triumphs  of  humanity  and  Christianity?  Are  they  to  be  peaceful 
triumphs  ?  or  are  they  to  be  gained  in  the  bloodiest  grapple  of  the  long-opposing 
forces  which  the  pen  of  history  ever  had  or  ever  shall  have  to  record  ?  1.  In  the 
first  place  it  lies  level  to  the  most  superficial  observation  that  this,  our  earth,  was 
chosen  of  God  as  the  theatre  of  a  great  judicial  conflict.  This  world  is  not 
a  pleasure-garden  in  God's  realm,  in  which  white-footed  angels  may  walk  at  the 
cool  of  day,  fearing  no  thorns  or  flinty  roughness,  and  inhaling  only  the  fragrance 
of  roses  and  spices.  It  is  not  a  place  of  idle  sauntering  for  any  citizens  of  God's 
empire,  just  giving  grateful  shade,  and  musical  with  birds  and  fountains.  It  is 
a  rough  battlefield  on  which  Good  and  Evil  are  met  to  strive  for  the  mastery.  It 
would  not  be  strange,  then,  at  all  if  in  a  world  so  purposed  and  elected  the  conflict 
should  ever  be  keener  ;  the  progress  be  not  more  and  more  pacific,  but  more  and 
more  troubled  and  stormy  ;  the  struggle  should  ever  gather  to  itself  on  either  side 
more  masterful  forces,  and  the  final  battle  be  more  resolute  and  deadly,  as  it  is  to  be 
more  determinate  than  any  that  have  gone  before.  2.  But  let  us  descend  for  a  little 
from  the  broad  view  to  details  of  the  engagement,  and  see  how  the  strife  goes  in  the 
individual  heart — what  the  law  of  progress,  and  what  the  character  of  the  most 
decisive  victories.  Leave  out  the  more  spiritual  aspects  of  the  conflict  for  a  moment, 
and  come  in  upon  one  who  is  wrestling  with  some  evil  habit.  Here  is  a  man  trying 
to  break  away  from  the  bands  of  intemperance.  His  first  efforts  are  feeble  and 
ineffectual.  He  doesn't  understand  the  power  of  his  adversary.  All  his  measures 
are  mild,  all  his  efforts  are  languid.  He  tries  gentleness  and  moderation  long 
enough  to  see  that  they  only  play  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  It  begins  to  dawn 
upon  him  that  nothing  but  a  terrible  final  duel  can  lay  his  enemy  prostrate.  Now 
the  grim  appetite  rises  in  its  strength.  The  soul,  too,  seeks  to  put  on  power.  It 
thinks  of  whatever  may  stimulate  its  prowess — property  wasted,  health  blasted, 
name  dishonoured,  family  comfort  and  peace  desolated,  life  imperilled — and  meets 
the  dread  hour.  It  has  need  of  all  the  heroism  it  can  summon  up.  It  never  knew 
till  now  what  the  contest  must  be,  and  more  than  once  now,  doing  its  best,  it  may 
be  worsted.  It  must  yet  put  forth  a  more  desperate  strength.  The  battle  that  wins 
for  it  deliverance,  that  breaks  the  tyrant's  sceptre,  wiU  be  the  fiercest  battle  of  all 
the  war.  So  it  is  with  aU  the  vices — with  every  evil  habit.  Is  it  not  thus  with  the 
more  spiritual  struggles  for  the  new  spiritual  life  ?  The  soul  begins  perhaps  by 
entertaining  graver  thoughts.  That  is  well,  but  that  doesn't  end  it.  It  isn't  even 
the  beginning  of  the  end.  It  reasons  with  its  wild  and  lawless  propensities.  The 
headstrong  rioters  laugh  at  such  proclamations.  They  are  paper-bullets.  It  seeks 
to  realise  an  outward  reformation.     This  is  no  more  than  cutting  off  the  outposts 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

of  evil — shooting  down  a  picket  or  two.  It  tries  exercises,  Bible-reading,  praying, 
good-willing ;  but  only  to  discern  more  clearly  how  immovable  the  heart.  The 
heart  is  yet  securely  intrenched.  The  citadel  has  not  been  carried.  The  soul 
becomes  more  in  earnest,  and  the  forces  waken  and  multiply  on  either  side — the 
truth  pleads,  and  conscience  and  fear  and  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  world  pleads — 
and  the  flesh  and  the  adversary.  This  will  be  another  struggle  from  any  that  have 
gone  before.  It  will  be  a  striving  unto  blood.  It  will  be  a  grapple  for  life  or  death. 
The  soul,  if  it  wins,  comes  out  of  it  after  all  pale  and  spent,  with  scarce  strength  to 
raise  the  shout  of  victory.  Is  not  this  private  and  individual  strife  an  epitome  of 
the  larger — the  pubUc — the  universal  and  comprehensive  struggle  ?  Are  not  the 
final  conflicts  ever  the  most  desperate  ?  Is  not  the  fact  of  hopeful  progress  declared, 
not  by  increasing  pacification,  but  by  the  growing  sternness  and  fierceness  of  the 
contest  ?  3.  When  these  three  combine  against  God  and  his  people — Sadduceeism, 
with  audacious  head  ;  absolutism,  with  a  chained  fellow-man  beneath  its  heel ;  and 
false  religion,  binding  and  loosing  human  consciences  with  a  lie — then  will  that 
last  great  battle  be  joined  whose  fortunes  and  whose  fluctuations  will  issue  in  giving 
the  kingdom  to  the  saints  of  the  most  High  God.  There  will  yet  be  such  a  com- 
bination. There  is  yet  to  rock  the  perturbed  earth  the  tumult  of  that  battle-day. 
Evil  is  not  to  be  quietly  dispossessed  of  its  seat  in  this  fair  province  of  God.  It 
holds  by  immemorial  possession.  It  shall  please  God  to  show  the  full  prowess  of 
truth.  The  mightiest  rally  of  evil  in  its  united  strength  will  be  permitted.  Gog 
and  Magog  will  be  gathered  to  the  war.  The  false  prophet,  the  beast,  and  the  old 
dragon  will  consolidate  their  divisions  in  one  dread  array.  Christianity  will 
advance  her  banner  and  sound  her  charge.  Considering  what  she  is  called  to 
encounter,  considering  the  long  historic  past,  considering  all  the  prophetic  intima- 
tions, it  will  not  be  strange  if  she  is  called  to  contend  against  carnal  weaponry. 
That  "  Armageddon  "  of  the  Lord,  on  which  evil,  with  all  its  myrmidons,  is  finally 
to  fall  down  slain,  vnll  be,  we  believe,  not  figuratively,  but  in  some  part  of  it,  and 
in  the  high  places  of  the  field,  literally  an  "  aceldama."  There  will  be  •'  the  thunder 
of  the  captains,"  "with  confused  noise  and  garments  rolled  in  blood."  {A.  L. 
Stone.)  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief. — The  coming  of  Christ: — How  comes 
a  thief  ?  He  comes  secretly  and  unexpectedly ;  secretly,  lest  he  be  discerned, 
and  then  with  all  advantages  of  surprisal,  that  he  may  not  be  taken  himself 
while  he  is  taking  others.  So  Christ  is  said  to  come  to  judgment.  He 
comes  suddenly  and  unexpectedly.  When  people  will  take  no  warning  He 
watches  the  time  of  their  destruction,  so  that  here  you  have  ••  the  goodness 
and  the  severity  of  God "  (Eom.  xi.  22) :  first,  His  goodness  is  showed  in 
that  He  will  give  warning  in  all  dangers ;  but  here  is  His  severity  also  : 
when  warning  will  not  be  taken,  then  He  comes  with  judgment.  Christ  here  says 
"  He  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night,"  and  this  His  coming  is  by  reason  of  our 
unfaithfulness.  And  His  coming  is  sudden,  unless  to  some  of  His  children  that  He 
prepares  by  warning.  When  He  came  into  the  world  at  His  first  coming  there  were 
but  a  few  "  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel "  (Luke  ii.  25) :  the  rest  did  not. 
When  He  comes  to  any  man  or  nation  in  His  judgments  doth  He  find  faith  ?  No ; 
He  finds  them  blessing  themselves  that  to-morrow  shall  be  as  to-day.  All  that  have 
spiritual  life,  labour  to  be  waking  Christians  and  then  watching  Christians.  What 
is  the  difference  between  men  but  that  carnal  men  are  sleepers  and  spiritual  men 
are  waking  ?  And  what  is  the  difference  of  Christians  that  are  good  and  that  are 
not  ?  The  one  is  a  watchful  Christian  and  the  other  not  so.  Wherein  is  one  better 
than  another  ?  As  the  one  is  more  careful  to  avoid  sin  than  another.  To  come, 
therefore,  to  some  directions  how  to  carry  ourselves,  and  among  others  remember 
this  :  we  should  have  this  waking  and  watchful  consideration  that  we  have  a  soul 
immortal,  and  that  we  are  for  eternity ;  and  whatever  we  do  in  the  flesh  that  shall 
be  ever  with  us  ;  and  how  that  shortly  we  are  going  to  the  tribunal  seat.  In  all 
these  respects  we  should  labour  to  be  watchful  at  all  times,  because  that  time  in 
which  we  take  liberty  to  ourselves  may  be  the  time  of  our  surprisal.  We  should 
therefore  watch  at  all  times,  in  prosperity  and  adversity.  We  should  watch  against 
all  the  sins  of  our  persons  and  the  sins  of  the  state  we  are  in.  Besides,  if  we  use 
this  course,  we  shall  bring  our  souls  to  that  awe  as  that  they  shall  not  dare  to  offend 
God,  by  reason  they  must  come  to  be  examined.  And  how  will  our  souls  be  willing 
to  be  judged  before  Christ,  when  we  are  unwilling  to  set  ourselves  before  ourselves  ? 
If  we  use  this  it  will  bring  a  holy  awe  upon  our  souls,  because  they  know  they  must 
come  to  examination  for  every  sin.  But  mark  what  follows  :  "  Blessed  is  he  that 
watches  and  keeps  his  garments  close  lest  he  walk  naked."    1.  First,  know  we  have 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION.  621 

no  garments  of  our  own.  Now  it  is  thus  in  spiritual  things.  We  have  no  garments 
of  our  own  since  the  fall ;  but  before  we  had.  We  have  none  now  but  original 
corruption  that  spreads  over  the  soul.  Besides  that,  men  living  unto  years  have 
another  nature  worse  than  the  leprosy,  custom.  Here  is  all  the  clothing  we  have  of 
ourselves ;  but  for  any  spiritual  good  we  must  fetch  it  from  Christ  (chap.  iii.  18). 
2.  Now  the  second  thing  is  this,  we  having  none  of  ourselves,  therefore  we  must 
have  garments ;  and  when  we  have  them  we  must  keep  them  clean  and  close ; 
•'Blessed  is  he  that  keeps  his  garments  close."  For  the  first  must  be  gar- 
ments for  defence ;  so  in  spiritual  things  there  must  be  garments  to  defend  us 
from  the  wrath  of  God,  else  we  lie  as  naked  to  God's  wrath  as  a  man  in  a  storm 
being  naked  lies  open  to  the  storm.  We  must  have  garments  of  amity  and  friend- 
ship now.  Again,  we  must  have  garments  for  distinction.  Now,  garments  do  dis- 
tinguish Christians  at  the  day  of  judgment.  Garments  that  are  coverings  must  be 
all  over  of  equal  extent.  They  cover  the  whole  man.  So  head,  hands,  and  heart, 
all  must  be  sanctified  as  well  as  justified.  So  that  those  that  look  upon  a  Christian 
should  see  nothing  in  him  but  so^iewhat  of  Christ,  His  words.  His  callings.  His 
thoughts.  And  we  must  be  clothed  not  only  with  garments,  but  armour,  because 
we  live  in  the  midst  of  our  enemies,  by  which  we  may  perceive  the  necessity  of  the 
putting  on  of  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.  Now,  as  we  must  have  garments  and 
must  keep  them  close,  so  also  we  must  keep  them  from  stains.  The  persons  where 
these  graces  are  may  be  defiled,  but  the  graces  are  pure.  We  should,  therefore, 
labour  to  keep  our  actions  unspotted.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  an  excellent 
garment,  but  it  must  be  put  on ;  and  if  we  have  Christ  we  have  all.  There  is 
another  thing  intended  in  this  Scripture.  These  are  dangerous  times,  and  there  are 
spiritual  cheaters  abroad  in  the  world.  Therefore  we  should  keep  our  profession 
close,  and  keep  our  truth  and  our  judgments  close,  and  get  love  into  our  aifections ; 
for  we  shall  be  set  upon,  and  if  we  walk  at  large,  then  heretics  and  seducers  will 
come  between  us  and  salvation,  because  our  garments  are  not  close.  If  a  man  will 
have  any  good  by  religion,  he  must  cleave  to  religion.  "  Lest  they  walk  naked,  and 
men  see  their  shame."  All  shame  arises  from  this,  that  we  do  not  keep  our 
garments  close.  So  long  as  truth  and  Christ  by  truth  have  a  place  in  the  soul,  so 
long  we  are  safe.  Now  to  give  some  directions  how  to  keep  our  garments  close. 
(1)  Labour  for  convincing  knowledge,  because  all  grace  comes  into  the  soul 
by  the  light  thereof.  Grow,  therefore,  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  often  propound  queries  to  our  judgments  about  the  Word  and 
sacraments.  Am  I  able  to  maintain  this  truth  I  have  been  brought  up  in  ?  And  do 
I  find  them  true  to  my  soul,  &c.  (2)  Those  that  will  have  good  gardens  will  have 
flowers  of  every  kind,  so  a  Christian  must  have  graces  of  every  kind.  We  must  put 
on  whole  Christ  for  justification  and  sanctification,  and  we  must  add  grace  to  grace; 
and  when  we  have  put  on  every  grace  we  must  keep  them  clean,  and  not  defie  our 
profession.  {R.  Sibbes.)  The  swift  and  sudden  advent : — These  are  words  speci- 
ally for  the  last  days.  With  eighteen  hundred  years  behind  us  now,  we  may  take 
them  home  most  solemnly  to  ourselves.  1.  They  warn.  2.  They  quicken.  3. 
They  rouse.  4.  They  conifort.  I.  The  coming.  It  is  the  long-promised  advent. 
Christ  comes !  He  comes — 1.  As  Avenger.  2.  As  Judge.  3.  As  King.  4.  As 
Bridegroom.  Like  lightning ;  like  a  thief ;  like  a  snare.  Like  lightning  to  the 
world,  but  the  Sun  of  morning  to  His  Church ;  like  a  thief  to  the  world,  but  like  a 
Bridegroom  to  the  Church ;  like  a  snare  to  the  world,  but  like  the  cloud  of  glory  to 
His  own.  n.  The  watching.  Not  believing,  nor  hoping,  nor  waiting  merely ;  but 
watching — as  men  do  against  some  event,  whether  terrible  or  joyful,  of  which  they 
know  not  the  time.  Watch,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  of  His 
arrival.  Watch,  for  that  day  is  great  and  glorious.  Watch,  for  ye  are  naturally 
disposed  to  sit  down  and  take  your  ease.  Watch,  for  Satan  tries  to  lull  you  asleep. 
Watch,  for  the  world,  with  its  riches  and  vanities  and  pleasures,  is  trying  to  throw 
you  off  your  guard.  III.  The  keeping  of  the  garments.  Be  like  Nehemiah,  who, 
when  watching  against  the  Ammonites,  did  not  put  off  his  clothes  night  nor  day. 
Keep  your  garments  all  about  you,  that  when  the  Lord  comes  He  may  find  you  not 
naked,  but  robed  and  ready.  IV.  The  blessedness.  Blessed  is  the  watcher; 
blessed  is  the  keeper  of  his  garments.  Many  are  the  blessed  ones ;  here  is  one 
class  specially  for  the  last  days.  1.  It  is  blessed,  for  it  cherishes  our  love.  2.  It 
is  blessed,  for  it  is  one  of  the  ways  of  maintaining  our  intercourse.  3.  It  is 
blessed,  for  it  is  the  posture  through  which  He  has  appointed  blessing  to  come,  in 
His  absence,  to  His  waiting  Church.  V.  The  warning.  Lest  ye  walk  naked,  and 
men  see  your  shame.     "  Shame  "  has  three  meanings.     1.  The  shameful  thing  or 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

object.  2.  The  feeling  of  shame  produced  by  the  consciousness  of  the  shameful 
thing.  3.  The  exposure  to  shame  and  scorn  from  others.  The  first  of  these  is 
specially  referred  to  here.  But  all  the  three  are  connected.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
The  necessity  of  vigilance  : — I.  "  Behold  !  "  Here  is  a  business  infinitely  more 
momentous  than  any  other  that  can  engage  you.  II.  "  I  come."  Jesus  the  Son  of 
Mary — Christ  the  Son  of  God.  He  whose  hands  were  filled  with  mercies,  and 
whose  heart  overflowed  with  love.  He  comes  to  see  how  we  have  requited  His 
love — what  benefit  we  have  derived  from  His  glorious  incarnation  and  His  great 
redemption — what  use  we  have  made  of  His  Word,  of  His  Sacraments,  of  His 
Church,  of  His  ministers,  of  His  Sabbaths,  of  His  grace.  I  come,  not  I  will  come, 
but  I  come — the  present  tense,  I  am  coming,  I  am  on  My  way.  "  Behold,  I  come 
as  a  thief " :  when  all  is  repose,  quietness,  confidence,  security.  Such  will,  very 
generally,  be  the  state  of  that  generation  of  men  who  are  living  when  the  Lord 
descends  at  the  last  day.  "Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief."  Most  who  die,  die 
suddenly.  A  year  before,  a  month  before,  they  never  thought  of  dying. 
Many  never  give  a  serious  thought  to  death  a  week  before  they  die,  and 
some  not  even  a  day.  1.  Watch,  while  others  sleep.  2.  Pray,  while 
others  trifle.  3.  Labour,  while  others  are  idle.  {T.  Nunns,  M.A.)  Blessed 
is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  garments. —  Garments — a  Scriptural 
figure  : — It  was  customary  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  for  certain  of  the  Levites  to 
keep  watch  or  guard  during  stated  hours  of  the  night.  An  officer  was  appointed 
over  them,  whose  business  it  was  to  go  round,  and  see  that  these  watchers  were 
attentive  to  their  duties.  He  carried  a  lighted  torch  in  his  hand,  and,  if  he  found 
any  of  the  men  asleep  at  their  posts,  the  law  permitted  him,  if  it  did  not  require  of 
him,  to  set  fire  to  their  garments.  The  offender,  thus  marked,  was  brought  up 
before  the  magistrate  on  the  following  day,  with  his  garments  either  wholly  con- 
sumed or  partially  scorched,  and  then  received  the  punishment  due  to  his  negligence. 
Now,  see  the  force  of  the  text :  "  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  gar- 
ments." Blessed  is  the  man  who  so  takes  heed  to  his  Christian  profession  in  this 
dark  world,  where  it  is  necessary  he  should  act  as  a  watchman,  because  his  enemy 
Satan  goeth  about  to  catch  him  asleep  at  his  post.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  so 
minds  his  duties  and  his  Master's  interests  that  no  mark  of  disgrace  is  put 
upon  him,  and  that  a  charge  of  negligence  cannot  fairly  be  brought  against 
him.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  gives  such  "diligence  to  make  his  calling  and 
election  sure,"  that  the  garments  in  which  he  will  have  to  appear,  in  the 
light  of  perfect  day,  when  every  man's  work  will  be  tried  of  what  sort  it  is, 
may  not  prove  his  confusion.    I.  Pirst  let  us  take  the  word  "  gakments  "  as 

USED  LITERALLY,   AND  AS  DENOTING   ONLY  THE   CLOTHING   OR  COVERING  WHICH  WE  WEAR 

UPON  OUR  BODIES.  The  Bible  teaches  us  something  about  our  garments  in  this  plain 
and  literal  sense.  Many  seem  to  think  that  religion  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
manner  in  which  a  love  of  dress  and  outward  adornment  is  indulged ;  that  every 
one  is  at  liberty  to  choose  and  act  for  themselves  in  this  matter.  A  Christian,  how- 
ever, does  not  think  so.  He  has  learnt  that  there  is  a  sobriety  and  suitableness  of 
attire  which  become  godliness  ;  and  he  makes  it  his  aim  to  adorn,  not  himself,  but 
the  gospel  he  professes,  even  in  this  particular.    II.  But  let  us  now  take  the 

WORD  "garments  "  IN  ITS    FIGURATIVE   SENSE,  AND  SEE  WHAT   DOCTRINAL   TRUTHS  IT  IS 

EMPLOYED  TO  TEACH.  1.  The  perishable  nature  of  all  earthly  things.  2.  The  sinful- 
ness of  our  nature,  and  the  worthlessness  of  our  best  deeds.  3.  Again,  the  figure 
contained  in  the  text  is  used  also  in  the  Bible  in  a  more  cheering  and  gracious 
signification.  "  Garments  of  light,"  are  spoken  of  ;  "  garments  of  praise  "  ;  "  white 
garments  "  ;  "  holy  garments  "  ;  "  shining  garment."  These  beautifully  significant 
figures  were  not  all  of  them  applied,  in  the  first  instance,  to  sinful  creatures  like 
ourselves  ;  yet  they  truly  betoken  the  state  of  God's  redeemed  people  at  one  period 
or  other  of  their  earthly  pilgrimage.  Collectively,  they  portray  the  believer's 
sanctification.  4.  But  I  must  proceed  to  remark,  lastly,  that  there  is  a  sense  given, 
in  the  Bible,  to  the  figure  in  our  text,  which  is  especially  glorious  and  worthy  of 
remembrance.  "  Garments  of  salvation  "  are  spoken  of,  beautiful  garments,  which 
are  something  more  than  mere  garments  of  sanctification,  though  that  is  an  im- 
mense blessing ;  garments  in  which  the  believer  may  appear  before  God  "  with 
exceeding  joy."  {F.  W.  Naylor,  M.A.).  Watch  against  old  sins  : — Watch  against  old 
sins.  Sitting  on  a  flowery  bank,  a  viper  crawled  forth  and  bit  us.  Great  were  the 
pain  and  the  peril  before  the  wound  was  healed.  Shall  we  carelessly  choose  that 
very  bank  on  which  again  to  rest?  Would  it  be  wise  to  let  the  pale  primrose  and  the 
fragrant  Tiolet  tempt  us  where  deadly  reptUes  may  still  make  their  nest  ?    Let  ua 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION.  623 

watch  against  the  delusion  that  there  is  no  longer  need  to  watch.    After  a  severe 
struggle  the  victory  was  won  over  our  reigning  lusts,  and  we  fancy  that  the  peril  is 
past.    But  let  us  watch.     The  rebellion  has  been  put  down ;  but  though  its  armies 
have  been  scattered  and  its  prince  dethroned,  many  traitors  lurk  in  secret  places 
watching  for  opportunities  to  renew  the  struggle.     The  embankment  is  weak  where 
it  once  gave  way ;  and  though  the  breach  has  been  repaired  it  must  be  diligently 
watched.     The  flames  have  been  put  out,  but  the  ashes  are  still  smouldering  ;  and, 
if  the  wind  rises,  the  fire  may  burst  forth  anew.    {Newman  Hall.)    And  lie  gathered 
them  together  unto  a  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon. — The  eve  of 
Armageddon  : — The  hosts  that  have  mustered  behind  the  Euphrates  were  once  God's 
handiwork  and  God's  creatures.     They  have  broken  loose  from  that  relationship. 
They  have  chosen  them  another  leader— himself  already  emancipated  from  the  yoke 
of  the  original  blessedness.     There  is  one  power,  one  only,  which  God  does  not — 
shall  we  say  it  with  reverence  ?  perhaps  cannot — exercise :  the  compulsion  of  the 
will — that  coercion  of  the  moral  being,  which  some  talk  of  as  though  it  certainly 
would  be  applied  if  God  were  at  once  Almighty  and  all-loving,  but  which  a  deeper 
reflexion  feels  to  be  inconsistent  alike  with  the  definition  of  man  and  with  the 
definition  of  salvation.     Man  without  free  will  is  man  no  more — and  a  salvation 
imposed  by  main  force  would  be  no  salvation.     There  is  a  point  in  the  affairs  of 
nations — there  is  a  point  even  in  spiritual  history — beyond  which  war  is  the  one 
solution.    Enmity — even  between  man  and  his  Maker — may  become  hostility.    As 
the  end  draws  on,  prophets  and  evangelists  concur  in  anticipating  a  culmination, 
if  not  an  incarnation,  of  evil,  only  to  be  dealt  with  by  an  intervention  of  God  Him- 
self to  decide  the  long  controversy,  and  to  regenerate  earth,  as  a  prophet  has  written, 
"  by  the  spirit  of  judgment  and  by  the  spirit  of  burning."    The  prophetic  figure  for 
this  catastrophe  is  that  of  a  war  and  a  battle.     God  would  have  the  matter  fought 
out.    But  how  strikingly  is  the  distinction  here  drawn  between  God's  part,  and  that 
which  is  not  God's  part,  in  the  impending  conflict !    An  angel  dries  the  Euphrates, 
but  no  angel  stimulates  to  the  crossing.     That  is  the  office  of  the  unclean  spirits ; 
and  they  issue  from  the  mouth  of  the  three  enemies — the  dragon,  the  wild  beast, 
and  the  false  prophet.     "  He  gathered  them  together  into  a  place  called  in  the 
Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon."    The  "  gathering"  is  ascribed,  in  the  14th  verse,  to 
the  three  spirits.     The  word  is  the  same  here — and  the  Greek  idiom  will  bear  the 
rendering  "  they  gathered."    But  the  instinct  of  our  English  translators  has  well 
guided  them  to  the  transition :  the  parenthesis  of  ver.  15  has  broken  the  thread. 
The  unclean  spirits  go  forth  to  gather — "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief — Blessed  is  he 
that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  garments" — •'  And  he  gathered  them  tbgether  into 
the  place  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon."     The  spirits  of  evil 
do  not  choose  the  battle-field  :  they  whisper,  and  buzz,  and  irritate — they  suggest, 
and  prompt,  and  incite ;  but  there  is  a  hand  and  a  will  above  theirs,  which  leaves 
not  to  them  the  strategy  or  the  combination.    *♦  He  gathered  together,"  and  He  chose 
the  ground.     Thus  is  it  in  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  of  the  same  last  encounter. 
"  Thou  shalt  come  up  against  My  people,  as  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land :  it  shall  be 
in  the  latter  days,  and  I  will  bring  thee."    Thou  shalt  come — and  I  will  bring. 
This  is  from  Ezekiel.     "I  will  gather  all  nations     .     .     .     thither  cause  Thy 
mighty  ones  to  come  down,  0  Lord."    This  is  from  Joel.     "  The  day  of  the  Lord 
Cometh     .     .     .    For  I  will  gather  all  nations  to  battle     .     .     .     Then  shall  the 
Lord  go  forth,  and  fight  against  those  nations."     This  is  from  Zeehariah.     The 
spirits  go  forth,  but  it  is  God  who  "  gathers."    He  dries  the  Euphrates,  and  He  fixes 
the  Armageddon.    We  scarcely  recognise,  in  that  name  of  mystery,  the  familiar 
Megiddo — "  Ar-mageddon,"  "  hill  of  Megiddo  " — on  the  southern  skirt  of  that  great 
plain  of  Esdraelon  which  was  the  scene  of  so  many  conflicts,  for  defeat  or  victory, 
in  the  earlier  and  later  history  of  Israel.     But  does  any  one  imagine  that  we  are  to 
seek,  on  the  map  of  Palestine  or  of  the  world,  a  site  or  a  place  for  the  last  great 
battle?    It  is  well  to  look  into  the  imagery:  it  is  helpful  toward  the  under- 
standing of  the  thing  signified ;  it  is  in  the  comparison   of  Scripture  type  and 
Scripture  parable  that  we  learn  what  God  has  written  about  this  consummation  of 
all  things.     Even  in  that  last  suggestion,  of  the  attractiveness  to  a  later  enemy  of  a 
battle-field  fatal  to  Josiah,  we  have  something  to  learn  as  to  the  fascinations  of  that 
lying  spirit  which  alone  can  make  any  man  a  fighter  against  God.    But  we  are 
reading  of  spiritual  things :  the  field  of  that  war  is  not  local — any  more  than  its 
armour,  whether  of  defence  or  attack,  is  carnal.     Nay,  the  place  itself  is  varied  in 
various  predictions.     St.  John  points  us  to  the  valley  of  Esdraelon  and  the  hiU  of 
Megiddo;  Joel  makes  the  place  of  "decision"  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat ;  and 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Zechariah  gathers  all  nations  against  Jerusalem,  speaks  of  a  siege  and  capture  of 
Jerusalem,  and  sets  the  feet  of  the  Divine  Deliverer  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives  before 
Jerusalem  eastward.     Such  varieties  should   guard  us  against  all  temptations  to 
limit  or  localise  where  the  matter  itself  spoken  of  is  not  carnal  but  spiritual.     As 
surely  as  the  vulture  scents  its  prey  wheresoever  there   is   death,  so  surely  shall 
the  destroying  Angel  find  out  sin,  so  surely  shall  delivering  Angels  find  out  God's 
elect,  so  surely  shall  there  be  for  every  man  a  day  of  judgment,  for  every  man  away 
of  salvation :  not  here,  nor  there,  particularly,  shall  the  war  of  the  end  be  waged  or 
the  battle  of  decision  fought  out :  Armageddon  is  a  type,  not  a  locality,  and  the 
prophecy,  like  all  prophecy,  is  not  letter  but  spirit.     (1)  We  have  before  us,  then, 
the  two  camps,  distinct  and  separate,  of  the  faithful  and  the  foe.    It  is  characteristic 
of  the  scene  and  of  the  time.     A  battle  is  impending,  and  there  can  be  no  battle 
without  a  choice  of  sides.     Silently  and  half  unconsciously  the  two  camps  are 
forming :  every  sinful  thing  done,  every  unkind  word  spoken,  every  heart-murmur- 
ing, every  spirit-blasphemy,  against  the  commandment  or  against  the  revelation  or 
against  the  providence  of  God,  is  drifting  the  doer  or  the  speaker  or  the  thinker 
towards  the  camp  of  the  foe :  every  act  of  good,  every  earnest  effort,  every  struggle 
with  a  sin,  every  soul's  prayer  and  soul's  "  feeling  after  "  the  invisible,  every  thought 
of  love  to  Him  who  died  for  us,  every  longing  yearning  desire  after  a  heaven  of 
holiness  and  of  service,  is  tending  towards  that  "  camp  of  the  saints  "  of  which  a 
later  chapter  tells — safe  whatever   befalls,   because  God  Himself  is  there.     (2) 
•*  Behold  I  come  as  a  thief.    Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth."    The  absent  Lord  speaks 
— and  says,  I  come.     On  the  eve  of  the  battle — while  yet  there  may  be  a  failing 
heart  needing  to  be  encouraged,  or  a  rebel  heart  opening  itself  to  conviction — the 
voice  sounds  between  the  two  camps — I  come.     Creep  back,  rebel  heart,  to  thy 
allegiance — be  strong,  coward  heart,  be  strong — behold,  I  come — come  as  a  thief — 
and  blessed  is  he  that  watcheth !    And  what  is  "  watching  "  ?    Is  it  a  restless,  hurry- 
ing, rushing  activity,  which  counts  every  moment  a  sin  that  is  not  either  excited 
devotion  or  bustling  charity  ?    Is  it  the  refusal  of  every  comfort  and  every  enjoy- 
ment, lest  a  God  who  is  looking  out  for  our  fall  should  take  advantage  of  us  and 
come  because  we  are  resting  ?    Is  it  the  eager  calculating  of  times  and  seasons,  the 
living  much  with  what  Isaiah  calls  "  stargazers  and  prognosticators,"  men  who  can 
give  a  name  out  of  this  book  to  each  dynasty  and  each  potentate  of  modern  history, 
and  tell  precisely  at  what  point  we  stand  on  the  bank  of  the  stream  of  time  in 
reference  to  the  advent  or  the  miUeimium  ?    Is  this  the  life  to  which  Jesus  Christ 
calls  us,  when  He  sends  that  voice,  between  the  two  camps,  from  the  excellent  glory, 
"Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth"?    None  of  these  things.     To  "watch,"  in  Christ's 
sense,  is  to  have  the  heart  interested  in  truth,  and  the  spirit  alive  to  duty — to  be 
able  to  say,  in  hours  of  resting,  "I  sleep,  but  my  soul  waketh" — to  listen  for  the 
voice  of  God,  even  in  the  night  hours,  and  to  be  always  alert  to  answer,  "  Speak, 
for  Thy  servant  heareth."    To  "  watch,"  is  to  keep  the  heart  with  all  diligence,  lest 
it  pollute,  at  the  source,  the  very  stream  of  the  life — to  guard  against  the  first  rising 
of  sinful  thought,  ere  it  form  itself  into  desire  or  have  time  to  set  up  an  idol — to 
have  the  door  ever  open  between  the  soul  and  its  God,  that  it  may  breathe  the  air 
of  heaven,  and  weigh  all  things  here  with  the  very  shekel  of  the  sanctuary.     {Dean 
Vaughan.)         Battle  of  Armageddon  : — Dream  not  of  marching  battalions  and  of 
mustering  squadrons  when  you  hear  of  Armageddon,  dream  not  of  a  local  battle- 
field.   No ;  this  is  no  common  earthly  battle ;  it  is  a  spiritual  battle ;  a  war  of 
principles ;  of  righteousness  against  unrighteousness  ;  of  faith  against  unbelief ;  of 
Christ  against  Antichrist.     This  war  has  been  waging  ever  since  St.  John  received 
the  revelation.     In  the  latter  days  it  will  culminate  in  this  one  great  final  conflict — 
the  crisis  of  the  world ;  the  battle  of  the  great  day  of  God  Almighty ;  the  great 
decision  between  good  and  evil,  sin  and  God,  the  world  and  Christ.     The  future  of 
the  Church  used  to  be  described  as  a  shining  river  flowing  full  to  the  promised  end, 
silently  widening  itself  out  into  a  bright  tranquil  summer  sea.     How  different  the 
predictions  of  Scripture,  of  Christ  and  His  apostles.     Rather  is  the  future  of  the 
Church  in  their  view  that  of  a  mighty  river  sweeping  to  a  great  Niagara.    The  bright 
tranquil  summer  sea  is  beyond,  seen  afar  off,  but  fiirst  there  is  the  terrible  precipice ; 
the  tranquil  sea  is  only  reached  through  the  war  of  falling,  tossed,  and  troubled 
waters.    I  am  sure  that  this  is  the  prediction  repeated  again  and  again  of  Christ  and 
His  apostles :  "  In  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come  " ;  "  Evil  men  and  seducers 
shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  deceived."    Do  not  these  words 
most  strikingly  answer  to  those  of  the  text  ?    Are  not  these  powers,  and  signs,  and 
manifestations,  and  embodiments  of  "  the  spirits  of  devils  working  miracles,  which 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION.  525 

go  forth  "  to  gather  together  the  hosts  of  the  world  to  the  battle  of  the  great  day  of 
God  Almighty  ;  to  gather  them  together  to  the  battlefield  of  Armageddon  ?  And  by 
what  evil  influences  will  these  malignant  spirits  work  their  will  and  delude  the  world  ? 
It  would  seem  from  several  passages,  as  well  as  the  text,  that  it  may  be  allowed  to 
them  to  perform  the  appearance  of  lying  miracles,  with  what  will  look  like  super- 
natural powers.  But  in  the  main  these  evil  spirits  will  appeal,  nay,  are  appealing, 
to  that  which  is  worst  in  the  hearts  of  men — to  an  impatience  of  moral  restraint,  to 
a  dislike  of  pure  Christian  morality,  to  the  longing  after  independence,  to  the  rising 
in  the  human  heart  against  the  childlike  teachableness  and  submission  of  soul 
which  the  Christian  faith  requires  of  us,  to  the  desire  to  have  no  superior,  to  be  a 
law  unto  ourselves,  a  god  to  ourselves.  And  all  this  is  carrying  on  at  this  very  day, 
and  every  day  more  and  more  actively ;  so  actively,  so  successfully,  that  we  might 
almost  despair  of  the  good  cause  if  we  did  not  remember  that  two  hosts  are  being 
gathered  to  the  battle — the  host  of  Christ  as  well  as  the  host  of  Antichrist 
— and  that  the  influence  and  energies  which  enlist  soldiers  for  Christ  are  quite  as 
powerful  and  more  powerful  than  those  which  enlist  soldiers  against  Christ.  And 
if  the  adversaries  of  Christ  were  never  more  numerous,  so  never  were  the  devoted 
soldiers  of  Christ  more  numerous.  And  just  as  in  the  English  army  the  immediate 
prospect  of  war  leads  men  to  enlist,  so  in  this  spiritual  war  are  Christians  keen  for 
the  battle,  and  the  growing  opposition  and  the  pressing  danger  only  awaken  in  their 
hearts  an  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  of  Christ  which  they  would  not  feel  in  more 
quiet  times.  In  prospect  of  the  coming  battle  I  will  not  despair.  I  address  you 
as  soldiers  of  Christ.  I  ask  of  you  an  enthusiasm  for  the  person  of  Christ  your 
Lord,  a  devoted  faith  and  love  for  Christ.  This  is  what  the  captain  of  an 
earthly  host  desires  of  his  soldiers :  if  they  have  an  enthusiasm  for  him,  they 
will  follow  him  anywhere,  they  will  follow  him  to  the  death ;  and  this  enthu- 
siasm Christ  asks  and  is  able  to  inspire.  And  in  your  dealings  with  others, 
who  perhaps  seem  to  be  in  the  opposing  army.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  contend 
with  them,  to  argue  with  them,  still  less  to  think  evil  of  them  (some  of  them 
may  yet  be  standing  shoulder  to  shoulder  by  your  side  before  the  battle  is  over) ; 
but  I  ask  you  by  your  life,  much  more  than  by  your  words,  to  let  all  see  and 
know  that  you  have  a  true  devotion  to  Christ,  that  you  love  Him  with  your  whole 
heart.  This  will  draw  them  to  your  side — yes,  all  the  truest  souls  among  them  ; 
they  all  long  in  their  hearts,  half  unknown  to  themselves,  for  such  a  noble  love,  for 
such  an  inspiring  devotion.  Let  them  see  in  you  that  such  a  love,  such  a  devotion, 
is  possible,  is  real,  is  all-powerful.  And  in  your  dealings  with  others,  remember 
that  the  love  of  Christ  is  the  magic  influence  which  alone  controls  the  human  heart. 
{E.  J.  Rose,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17-21.    The  seventh    angel  poured  out   his  vial  into    the    air. — The 

seventh  howl : — I.  How  much  of  eakth's  sin  must  there  be  for  God  to  witness  I 
II.  Men  often  ask — why  is  God  silent  so  long?  III.  Whatever  mat  be  the 
trial  of  faith  thus  caused,  we  are  certain  that  God  forgets  nothing. 
IV.  God  has  great  purposes  to  answer  in  permitting  evil  to  go  so  long 
unpunished,  v.  At  the  appointed  hour  the  long-suffering  will  cease. 
VI.  Then  "  Babylon  the  great,"  with  all  her  sins,  shall  come  up  for  final 
beckoning  and  recompense.      VII.    The  fact  that  all  is  in  the  hands  of  God 

IS   A    GUARANTEE    OF    PERFECT    EQUITY.      VIII.    WiTH    OUR   GOD    THE   EXECUTION  IS    AS 

CERTAIN  AS  THE  PURPOSE.  The  SBBT  heard  "  a  great  voice  from  the  temple,  out  of 
the  throne,  saying.  It  is  done ! "  Note — 1.  Amid  the  perplexity  caused  by  the 
prevalence  and  power  of  evil,  let  us  stay  ourselves  on  God.  2.  Let  us  do  right, 
and  wait  God's  time.  3.  Revenge  is  never  to  be  any  part  of  our  policy.  4.  Let  us 
be  glad  and  grateful  that  believers  in  God  are  not  left  in  the  dark  as  to  the  meaning, 
aims,  and  issue  of  the  Divine  government  of  the  world.  (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  Satanic 
influence  : — The  air  which  has  received  the  last  vial  may  be  considered  as  the  home 
■  or  seat  of  the  devil  and  his  angels.  There  is  no  fancy  in  this,  for  you  may  remember 
how  St.  Paul  himself  describes  the  devU  as  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air."  It 
is,  however,  of  little  importance  that  we  determine  where  fallen  angels  have  their 
habitation ;  and  perhaps  the  associating  the  devil  with  the  air  is  not  so  much  for 
the  purpose  of  defining  the  residence  of  Satan  as  to  give  us  information  as  to  the 
nature  of  his  dominion.  We  mean  that  probably  we  are  not  hereby  taught  that  the 
devil  dwells  in  the  air — though  that  also  may  be  the  meaning — but  rather  that  he 
has  at  his  disposal  the  power  of  the  air  ;  so  that  he  can  employ  this  element  in  his 
operations  on  mankind.     And  we  know  of  no  reason  why  the  power  of  the  devil 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

should  be  regarded  as  confined  to  what  we  are  wont  to  call  spiritual  agency,  so  as 
never  to  be  employed  in  the  production  of  physical  evil — why  the  souls  and  not 
also  the  bodies  of  men  should  be  considered  as  objects  of  his  attack.  Indeed,  foras- 
much as  the  soul  is  the  nobler  part  of  man — the  more  precious  and  dignified — it 
would  be  strange  if  this  alone  were  exposed  to  his  attack,  and  the  body  were 
altogether  exempt.  We  believe,  therefore,  that  Satan  may  have  a  great  deal  to  do 
with  those  pains  and  sicknesses  which  so  abound  in  the  world.  It  is  certainly  the 
representation  of  Scripture  that  Satan  has  much  to  do  with  inflicting  diseases  of  the 
body.  The  woman  who  had  "  a  spirit  of  infirmity  eighteen  years,  and  was  bowed 
together  " — what  said  Christ  of  her,  when  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  was  indignant 
at  her  being  made  whole  on  the  Sabbath  day  ?  "  Ought  not  this  woman,  being  a 
daughter  of  Abraham,  whom  Satan  hath  bound,  lo  1  these  eighteen  years,  be  loosed 
from  this  bond  on  the  Sabbath  day  ?  "  Again,  we  know  not  exactly  what  that 
"  thorn  in  the  flesh  "  was  from  which  St.  Paul  suffered.  But  the  expression  makes 
it  seem  probable  that  it  was  some  acute  bodily  pain,  or  some  oppressive  infirmity ; 
and  the  apostle  distinctly  calls  it  "  a  messenger  of  Satan,  sent  to  buffet  him."  Do 
we  not  seem  warranted  in  inferring  from  these  intimations  that  Satan  is  greatly 
concerned  in  bringing  maladies  on  men's  bodies  ?  And  if  this  be  once  allowed,  we 
may  enter  into  the  meaning  of  the  title,  "  The  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air."  We 
are  accustomed,  and  as  it  would  seem  with  much  accuracy,  to  refer  to  certain  states 
of  the  air  as  producing  certain  diseases  of  the  body.  Without  being  able  precisely 
to  trace  the  connection,  or  investigate  the  cause,  we  consider  that  the  atmosphere 
is  frequently  impregnated  with  disease  and  sickness,  so  that  we  may  be  said  to 
inhale  death  whilst  inhaling  what  is  essential  to  life.  Thus  we  virtually  suppose 
the  "  power  of  the  air  "  to  be  a  power  over  health  and  over  life  ;  and  therefore,  that 
he  who  possesses  that  power — and  this  St.  Paul  says  is  the  devil — must  be  one  who  is 
greatly  instrumental  in  the  inflicting  disease.  If  you  add  to  this  that  many  of  the 
worst  calamities,  as  well  as  sicknesses  with  which  men  are  visited,  may  be  traced  to 
the  air,  you  have  the  materials  from  which  to  show  that  it  is  assigning  to  the  devil 
an  awful  dominion  to  give  him  the  sovereignty  of  the  air.  Again,  we  remind  you 
that  we  are  fully  aware  that  Satan  can  do  nothing  except  as  he  is  permitted  by  God. 
We  speak  only  of  the  power  which  he  can  wield  when  the  permission  has  been 
granted.  Never  can  I  hear  of  a  land  which  is  laid  waste  by  plague,  and  never  can 
I  hear  of  the  rushing  of  the  tornado,  passing  over  fertile  plains,  and  leaving  them  a 
desert,  without  the  most  startling  apprehensions  of  the  fearfulness  of  the  enemy 
who  can  use  this  element  as  his  engine,  and  without  also  feeling  how  justly  may 
the  final  triumph  of  good  over  evil  be  associated  with  some  great  deed  that  shall  be 
wrought  in  the  air,  even  according  to  the  representation  of  our  text — "  And  the 
seventh  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  air ;  and  there  came  a  great  voice  out  of 
the  temple  of  heaven,  from  the  throne,  saying.  It  is  done."  We  cannot  well  doubt 
that  this  association  of  the  air  with  the  devil  is  equally  appropriate  when  the  devil 
is  regarded  under  the  more  common  point  of  view — that  of  the  assailant  of  the  soul, 
the  instigator  to  sin  in  all  its  varieties  of  form.  It  may  not  be  so  easy  to  show  the 
appropriateness  in  this  case  ;  for  we  cannot  make  much  way  when  we  would  en- 
deavour to  explain  what  is  generally  understood  by  spiritual  agency — the  operation 
of  spirit  on  spirit,  whether  it  be  for  good,  or  whether  it  be  for  evil.  There  is 
nothing  more  mysterious  with  our  present  faculties  and  capacities  than  those  secret 
influences  to  which  we  are  undeniably  subjected — influences  which  employ  no 
visible,  tangible  instrumentality,  but  whose  sphere  is  at  once  the  inner  man,  and 
which  make  themselves  felt,  though  we  know  not  how  they  enter  into  that  hidden 
world,  which  each  bears  within  himself.  We  are  not,  however,  concerned  with 
more  than  the  fact,  that  the  spirit  of  evil,  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  good,  has  access 
to  our  minds,  and  can  bring  itself  into  such  association  and  intimacy  with  us  as  to 
act  by  and  through  our  own  thoughts  and  feelings.  Assuming  this  fact,  it  is  our 
business  to  endeavour  to  show  that  our  spiritual  adversary,  as  the  adversary  of  our 
souls,  may  fitly  be  described  as  inhabiting  the  air.  In  order  to  this  we  would 
remind  you,  that  whatever  is  visionary  and  unstable,  whatever  is  a  mere  de- 
lusion and  cheat,  this  we  are  accustomed  to  connect  with  the  air;  so  that  we 
describe  as  aerial  what  we  find  to  be  unsubstantial  or  deceptive.  It  has  un- 
doubtedly been  through  the  putting  a  cheat  on  man,  that  the  devil,  from  the  first, 
has  effected  his  destruction.  His  endeavour  has  been  too  often  successful !  has 
been  to  prevail  on  man  to  substitute  an  imaginary  good  for  a  real,  the  creature  for 
the  Creator,  and  to  mock  their  own  capacities  for  happiness  by  seeking  it  in  the 
finite  and  the  perishable.     If  it  be  by  what  we  should  call  a  series  of  optical  decep- 


CHAP.  XVI.]  REVELATION.  527 

tions  that  he  acts  on  our  race,  distorting  one  thing  and  magnifying  another,  and 
throwing  a  false  colouring  on  a  third,  how  is  he  proceeding  but  so  as  to  avail  himself 
of  those  strange  properties  of  the  air  whence  spring  such  phenomena  as  that  of  the 
Egyptian  morass,  the  weary  traveller  being  cheered  with  the  appearance  of  the  blue 
waters  of  a  lake,  on  whose  margins  green  trees  are  waving,  but  finding  as  he 
approaches  that  there  is  only  the  hot  sand  and  no  drop  of  water  wherewith 
to  cool  his  tongue  ?  If,  again,  it  be  by  crowding  the  field  of  view  with  witching 
but  unsubstantial  forms,  with  gorgeous  thrones  and  splendid  pageants,  which  sweep 
before  the  mind  and  beckon  onward  to  disappointment — if  it  be  thus  that  Satan 
retains,  undisputed,  his  dominion  over  thousands,  what  can  he  be  truly  said  to 
employ  so  much  as  the  power  of  the  air,  weaving  those  brilliant  phantoms  which 
have  seemed  to  hurry  to  and  fro,  as  though  hurrying  from  cloud  to  cloud,  and 
causing  those  strange  delusions  which  have  startled  the  peasant,  and  made  him 
think  the  glens  into  which  he  was  entering  tenanted  by  shadowy  and  mysterious 
beings — in  short,  if  it  be  that  Satan  tries  to  deceive  mankind  by  the  inconstant  and 
unsubstantial — if  the  ambitious,  and  the  voluptuous,  and  the  avaricious,  be  all  and 
each  pursuing  a  beckoning  shadow — if  the  whole  apparatus  by  which  the  world  is 
lulled  into  moral  slumber,  or  roused  to  self-destruction,  be  made  up  of  the  mere 
imagery  of  happiness,  could  any  description  be  more  apposite  than  one  which 
represents  the  devil  as  lord  of  that  element  in  which  floats  the  meteor,  and  through 
which  glides  the  spectre,  and  out  of  which  can  be  formed  nothing  that  we  can  grasp, 
though  it  may  be  the  vehicle  of  a  thousand  deceptions  arrayed  in  beautiful  array  ? 
We  take  this  subject  of  discourse  because  we  desire,  by  every  possible  means  and 
by  all  varieties  of  illustration,  to  make  you  aware  of  the  powers,  and  put  you  on 
your  guard  against  the  malice  of  the  devil.  We  are  indeed  well  aware  that  it  is 
not  the  devil  who  destroys  man.  It  must  be  man  who  destroys  himself.  The  devil 
can  do  nothing  against  us,  except  as  we  afford  him  opportunity,  yielding  ourselves 
to  his  suggestions  and  allowing  him  to  lead  us  captive  at  his  will.  But  it  may  at 
length  come  to  pass,  if  we  persist  in  walking  as  children  of  disobedience,  that  we 
quite  expel  from  our  breasts  the  Spirit  of  God,  whose  strivings  have  been  resisted 
and  whose  admonitions  have  been  despised,  and  enthrone  in  His  stead  that  spirit  of 
evil,  whose  longing  and  whose  labour  it  is  to  make  us  share  his  own  ruin.  And 
then  is  there  as  clear  a  demoniacal  possession  as  when  the  man  was  cast  into  the 
fire  or  water  through  the  fearful  energies  of  the  indweUing  fiend.  Every  sin  which 
you  wilfully  commit  helps  forward  the  great  design  of  the  devil — the  design  of 
obtaining  such  hold  on  you  that  he  may  claim  you  as  his  own  ;  and  "  as  a  strong 
man  armed,  he  keepeth  his  goods."  Let  us  look  now  once  more  with  careful  attention 
to  our  text  and  its  context.  We  read  in  the  chapter  before  us  of  seven  angels,  having 
the  seven  last  plagues,  in  seven  vials,  each  of  which  is  filled  with  the  wrath  of  God. 
These  plagues  are  manifestly  those  tremendous  judgments  which  are  to  conclude 
the  present  dispensation,  and  make  way  for  that  glorious  season  when  Christianity 
shall  have  a  home  in  every  land  and  in  every  heart.  The  first  six  vials  are 
emptied  on  the  earth,  or  on  the  waters,  or  on  the  sun,  and  are  followed  by 
fearful  catastrophes  which  are  preliminary  to  a  more  tremendous  one  which  is  to 
close  the  strange  work  of  vengeance ;  but  it  is  the  seventh  vial  with  which  seems 
associated  the  final  deliverance  of  the  creation — the  overthrow  of  the  Lord's 
enemies,  and  the  vindication  of  all  His  attributes.  For,  as  you  learn  from  our 
text,  so  soon  as  the  seventh  angel  pours  out  his  vial,  there  is  heard  a  great  voice 
out  of  the  temple  of  heaven,  from  the  throne,  saying,  '*  It  is  done  !  "  as  though  this 
were  the  completion  and  consummation  of  a  mighty  and  long-protracted  work. 
Why  this  triumphant  exclamation,  "It  is  done!  "  as  though  the  emptying  of  the 
seventh  vial  had  finished  the  extirpation  of  evil,  and  made  a  clear  scene  for  the 
erection  of  the  kingdom  of  Jesus.  Our  whole  discourse  has  turned  on  this — the  vial 
is  emptied  into  the  air.  We  identify  the  air  with  the  residence  and  dominion  of 
Satan,  and  hence  the  seventh  vial  may  be  considered  as  containing  those  judg- 
ments which  are  immediately  directed  against  the  devil.  The  destruction  of 
the  devil's  sovereignty  will  be  the  emancipation  of  the  whole  creation  which  has 
BO  long  groaned  and  travailed  in  pain,  hence  the  shout.  Not  on  the  land,  not  in 
the  sea,  not  in  the  fountains  is  the  vial  poured ;  it  is  poured  into  the  air,  and 
fallen  angels,  who  have  their  abode  in  that  element  which  they  have  long  poUuted 
and  spoiled,  are  driven  down  to  their  heritage  of  fire.  And  ^en  the  atmosphere 
has  all  the  blandness  and  freshness  of  a  new  spring,  and  the  lost  flowers  of  Paradise 
once  more  cover  the  earth.     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 


CHAPTER  xvn. 

Vebs.  1-6.  The  judgment  of  the  great  whore. — A  corrupt  Christianity: — 
The  description  here  given  of  this  harlot  suggests  and  illustrates  three  great 
evils  ever  conspicuous  in  corrupt  Christianity.  I.  Political  subserviency. 
"  With  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  committed  fornication."  Essen- 
tially Christianity  is  the  absolute  queen  of  life.  Although  her  kingdom  is  "not 
of  this  world,"  her  demand  is  that  the  world  should  bow  to  her.  In  yielding 
to  worldly  influence  she  lost  her  pristine  purity  and  primitive  power,  she  got 
corrupted,  and  became  more  and  more  the  servant  of  rulers  and  the  instrument  of 
states.  II.  Worldly  proclivity.  "  And  the  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and 
scarlet  colour,  and  decked  with  gold,"  &c.  Genuine  Christianity  is  essentially 
unworldly.  III.  Religious  intolerance.  "  And  I  saw  the  woman  drunken  with 
the   blood   of    the   saints,"   &c.      {David  Thomas,  D.D.)  Babylon  and  Anti- 

christ : — I.  The  Woman.  1.  Her  position,  which  was  indicative  of  power.  John 
saw  her  seated  upon  a  beast,  "  dreadful,  and  terrible,  and  strong  exceedingly"; 
for  so,  in  the  book  of  Daniel,  we  find  him  described.  Again,  it  was  a  position 
indicative  of  hostility  to  God.  For  the  beast  on  which  the  woman  sat  was  "  fuU 
of  names  of  blasphemy."  Then  it  was  a  position  indicative  of  the  unsightliness 
of  vice.  What  a  hideous  monster  was  this  beast,  "having  seven  heads  and  ten 
horns"  ;  and  how  strange  was  the  picture  presented  to  the  apostle's  view  of  "  the 
great  whore,"  as  seated  upon  him.  Here,  too,  was  a  position  indicative  of  cruelty 
towards  men,  as  well  as  of  hostility  towards  God.  The  beast  on  which  she  sat 
was  scarlet-coloured,  betokening  war  and  bloodshed.  It  was  a  position,  neverthe- 
less, of  allurement  and  seduction.  For  she  was  seen  as  one  who  had  in  her  hand 
"  a  golden  cup,"  too  successfully  held  forth  to  "  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,"  who 
are  represented  as  having  been  "  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication." 
Her  position  once  more  was  that  of  a  deceiver  and  destroyer.  The  cup  held  forth 
was  "  golden."  But  its  contents,  as  seen  by  the  apostle — what  were  they  ?  It  was 
"  full  of  abominations,"  &c.  2.  Her  attire.  "  The  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple, 
and  scarlet-coloured,"  indicative  of  her  real  dignity;  "and  decked  with  gold  and 
precious  stones  and  pearls  " — illustrative  of  her  vast  wealth.  How  many,  behold- 
ing a  female  thus  adorned,  would  at  once  wish  to  occupy  her  place !  Yet  such 
might  be  arrayed  on  earth  in  purple,  and  fail  of  being  hereafter  arrayed  in  white 
in  heaven.  Instead  of  wishing  to  be  "  decked  with  gold  and  precious  stones,"  such 
as  John  saw  glittering  on  "  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth," 
let  the  heart  go  after  that  "redemption  of  the  soul"  which  is  "precious,  and 
ceaseth  for  ever."  3.  Her  names.  (1)  "  Mystery."  Such  she  would  have  been 
to  John  but  for  the  angel's  explanation.  Such,  even  with  that  explanation,  she  to  a 
certain  extent  remained  to  him.  And  such  she  was  destined  to  remain  to  the  Church 
of  God  through  a  long  succession  of  ages.  Let  it  be  observed,  however,  that  inquiry 
into  the  import  of  the  vision  was,  as  it  were,  challenged  by  the  angel  who  showed 
this  "  woman  "  to  John.  We  do  not,  therefore,  act  unbecomingly  in  endeavouring  to 
ascertain  what  this  "  woman  "  was  destined  to  represent  to  the  apostle.  (2)  "  Babylon 
the  Great."  In  having  this  name  inscribed  upon  her  "  forehead,"  she  was  exhibited 
to  the  apostle  in  a  vaunting  attitude,  and  as  under  the  influence  of  a  spirit,  similar  to 
that  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv.  30).  Elsewhere,  too,  in  this  book  we  find  her 
displaying  a  boastful  and  vainglorious  temper  of  mind  (chap,  xviii.  7).  This  should 
be  a  lesson  to  us  not  to  be  high-minded,  as  the  possessors  of  either  worldly  or 
religious  distinctions.  (3)  "  The  mother  of  harlots,  and  abominations  of  the  earth." 
This  was  indeed  to  have  "  a  whore's  forehead,"  and  to  be,  as  the  Jewish  nation 
was  once  charged  with  being,  one  that  "refused  to  be  ashamed."  Behold  the 
woman  with  unblushing  effrontery  proclaiming  to  the  world  her  character  and 
misdoings ;  and  see,  in  her,  the  foreshowing  of  those  "  latter  times,"  in  which 
"  doctrines  of  devils  "  shall  be  promulgated,  and  "  men,  giving  heed  to  seducing 
spirits,  shall  depart  from  the  faith  "  ;  times  when  there  shall  be  a  "  forbidding  to 
marry."  It  would  seem  that  in  this  way  Babylon  the  Great  is  destined  to  become 
"  the  mother  of  harlots  " — namely,  by  an  authoritative  prohibition  of  the  nuptial 
tie  ;  a  doing  away  with  marriage  throughout  the  wide  extent  of  her  dominion,  and  a 
consequent  abandonment  of  society  to  general  dissoluteness.  4.  Her  condition. 
"  And  I  saw  the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints,"  &c.  What  a 
spectacle  was  this  !  fitted  to  awaken  in  his  bosom  feelings  at  once  of  disgust  and 
horror.    How  fearful  an  amount  of  persecuting  rage  against  the  Church  of  God, 


CHAP.  XVII.]  REVELATION.  529 

as  destined  to  become  apparent  in  the  days  of  the  ascendency  of  "  Babylon  the 
Great,"  was  thus  prophetically  indicated  to  him  !  And  of  what  an  amount  of 
suffering,  on  the  part  of  the  saints,  and  of  the  witnesses  for  Jesus,  was  he  thus 
made  aware  beforehand.  II.  The  Beast.  1.  His  colour.  A  scarlet-coloured 
beast.  What  did  this  indicate  ?  Perhaps,  his  regal  character.  We  are  fore- 
warned that  he  will  be  a  king  of  widely-extended  rule.  In  another  vision  John 
saw  "power  given  him  over  all  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  nations."  "And  the 
dragon  gave  him  his  power,  and  his  seat,  and  great  authority."  We  conclude, 
then,  that  in  being  foreshown  to  John  as  a  scarlet-coloured  beast,  the  regal 
character  of  the  Man  of  sin  may  have  been  prophetically  indicated,  and  in  par- 
ticular his  character,  as  vicegerent  on  earth,  of  the  "  great  red  dragon  "  (chap, 
xii.  3).  But  it  is  more  probable  that,  in  presenting  him  thus  to  the  view  of  the 
apostle,  the  Divine  purpose  may  have  been  to  foreshow  to  the  Christian  world  the 
character  of  antichrist,  as  a  warrior  and  persecutor  of  the  Church  of  God.  Such 
he  most  certainly  will  be.  As  a  scarlet-coloured  beast  he  might  be  very  fitly 
presented  to  view — a  monster  dyed,  as  it  were,  in  blood — when  it  is  considered  that 
the  time  of  his  ascendency  will  be  "  a  time  of  trouble  such  as  never  was,  since 
there  was  a  nation  to  that  same  time  "  (compare  chap.  xii.  12 ;  Dan.  xii.  1),  and 
"  except  that  the  Lord  had  shortened  those  days,  no  flesh  would  be  saved."  Power 
was  given  to  him  to  make  war  forty-and-two  months  " — no  longer.  Then  he  was, 
as  foreshown  to  John,  "  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone." 
2.  His  names.  "He  was  full  of  names  of  blasphemy,"  which  make  us,  as  they 
made  the  apostle,  aware  that  antichrist,  when  he  shall  come,  besides  "  wearing  out 
the  saints,"  will  "  speak  great  words  against  the  Most  High  " — "  marvellous  things 
against  the  God  of  gods."  In  times  long  gone  he  was  foreshown  to  the  prophet 
Daniel  as  one  who  would  act  thus.  It  will  be  one  special  end  of  his  mission,  as 
Satan's  prime  minister  in  the  world,  to  blaspheme.  3.  His  figure.  He  had 
"  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,"  and  must,  hence,  have  presented  to  the  apostle 
an  aspect  at  once  singular,  hideous,  and  terrible — indicative,  however,  of  large 
intelligence  and  vast  power.  4.  His  manifestation,  contemporaneously  with  that 
of  "Babylon  the  Great."  Together  they  will  flourish — together  they  will  fall. 
The  day  of  power  to  both  will  be  one  and  the  same.  The  day  of  doom  also. 
5.  His  subservience  to  her  exaltation  and  advancement.  She  is  seated  on  him. 
He  "  carrieth  her."  Her  prosperity,  glory,  and  dominion  will  be  consequent  on, 
and  commensurate  with,  his  own.  III.  The  apostle's  wonder  at  the  spectacle. 
"  And  when  I  saw  her  I  wondered  with  great  admiration."  But  John  was  rebuked 
on  account  of  the  "  great  admiration  "  with  which  he  "  wondered  "  at  the  woman 
on  whom  he  was  looking.  He  writes,  "  And  the  angel  said  unto  me,  wherefore 
didst  thou  marvel  ?  "  What  you  have  now  before  you  is  not,  in  itself,  a  spectacle 
that  ought  to  be  wondered  at,  as  it  now  is,  by  you.  And,  even  if  the  world  will 
wonder  at  it,  should  you  do  so  ?  "  They  shall  wonder,  whose  names  were  not 
written  in  the  book  of  life,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world "  (ver.  8).  But 
"  wherefore  shouldst  thou  marvel  ?  "  IV.  The  angel's  promise  to  John.  "  I 
will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman."  This  vision  was  granted  to  the  apostle 
for  the  purpose  of  instruction,  not  of  mere  entertainment.  The  angel  will  unfold 
the  mystery  to  him.  The  promised  revelation,  however,  of  all  to  him,  a  holy  man 
of  God  and  a  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  in  accordance  with  what  we 
read  elsewhere  (Psa.  xxv.  14).  {H.  Edtcards.)  The  martyrs  of  Jesus. — The 
noble  army  of  martyrs: — I.  What  do  the  "martyrs  of  Jesus"  teach  us 
ABOUT  themselves  ?  1.  Their  heroic  faith.  They  had  unswerving  reliance  in  Christ, 
and  knew  they  were  not  following  cunningly  devised  fables.  These  martyrs  had 
not  simply  an  opinion  or  impression,  but  a  deep  belief ;  they  were  resting  upon 
evidence  which  they  felt  to  be  sufficient  and  immovable.  They  believed  in  a 
living,  risen,  and  reigning  Lord.  2.  Their  sublime  hope.  All  they  could  see 
seemed  to  be  against  them,  all  their  surroundings  were  calculated  to  depress  them ; 
but  they  looked  not  at  things  seen  and  temporal,  but  for  an  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible, and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away.  3.  Their  ardent  love.  They 
loved  their  country,  home,  and  friends ;  but  they  loved  their  Master  more,  and 
they  were  prepared  to  relinquish  all  for  the  love  they  bore  to  Him.  4.  Their 
complete  obedience.  They  had  their  marching  orders,  and  they  marched  on  under 
the  Great  Captain  of  their  salvation,  to  do  and  dare  and  die.  They  reciprocated 
His  love.  5.  Their  transparent  sincerity.  6.  Their  restful  satisfaction.  They 
felt  they  had  not  only  sufficient,  but  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.     They  found  in  Him  all  they  needed  to  satisfy  the  wishes  and  wants  of 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

their  spirits,  so  nothing  could  move  them  or  shake  their  steadfastness.     II.  What 

DO    "THE    MAETYRS    OF    JESUS  "    TEACH    US   RESPECTING    HiM  ?       1.    He  COUld  haVB  been 

no  myth.  These  martyrs  were — as  the  word  literally  means — witnesses,  not 
inventors,  or  historians  merely,  they  had  the  evidence  of  their  senses  as  well  as 
the  experience  of  their  hearts.  From  what  we  know  of  human  nature,  we  feel  it 
would  have  been  impossible  for  the  early  Christians  to  have  died  for  a  myth  or 
phantom  :  they  were  in  a  position  to  test  most  fully  the  historic  claims  of  Christ, 
and  to  prove  His  personality  and  identity  at  the  various  points  of  His  mission  and 
ministry.  2.  He  could  not  have  been  a  deceiver.  Men  may  submit  to  be  deluded 
when  they  have  much  to  gain  and  nothing  to  lose  ;  but  when  it  is  the  reverse  they 
will  exercise  the  utmost  vigilance  and  practise  the  strictest  caution.  3.  How 
faithful  Christ  was  to  His  promise  never  to  leave  nor  forsake  them,  and  they 
witness  to  the  victorious  power  of  His  religion  to  sustain  the  soul  in  the  most 
trying  circumstances,  in  torturing  pain,  and  the  dying  hour.  4.  The  impotence  of 
error  and  the  omnipotence  of  truth.  Truth  is  mighty,  and  must  prevail ;  more  is 
for  it  than  all  that  can  be  against  it.  Error,  in  its  rage  and  cowardice,  has  drawn 
the  sword  and  gone  forth  to  win  its  way,  and  strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the 
true.  But  the  prospect  of  massacre  and  martyrdom  could  not  deter  the  true 
followers  of  the  Lamb :  they  have  gone  forth  feeling  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  was 
with  them,  and  that  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  was  their  refuge.  The  King 
Immortal,  Invisible,  steers  and  guards  His  own  ark,  and  all  shall  ultimately  and 
utterly  fail  and  fall  who  lay  their  unholy  alien  hands  upon  it.  The  noble  army  of 
martyrs  praise  God,  and  they  preach  to  us.     {F.  W.  Brown.) 

Vers.  7-14.  I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  beast 
that  carrieth  her. — A  picture  of  moral  error : — I.  Its  history  is  marvellous. 
1.  On  account  of  the  darkness  that  enfolds  its  introduction.  2.  On  account  of 
the  mask  under  which  it  works.  3.  On  account  of  the  wonderful  issues  that  will 
result  from  it.  II.  Its  course  is  laisientable.  1.  It  rises  from  the  "  bottomless 
pit " — the  fathomless  abysses  of  impure  lusts,  ravenous  greed,  burning  ambition, 
sensual  yearnings,  impious  irreverences,  blasphemous  assumptions,  &c.  2.  It  leads 
to  "  perdition  " — ruin.  III.  Its  supports  are  unstable.  Many  of  the  arguments 
that  have  sustained  it  from  time  to  time  have  appeared  as  settled  and  imposing  as 
mountains,  as  gorgeous  and  majestic  as  kings;  but  "mountains  have  fallen  and 
come  to  nought,"  and  even  imperial  bulwarks  have  disappeared  as  visions  of  the 
night.  So  it  has  been,  so  it  is,  and  so  it  must  be  to  the  end.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall  overcome  them. — 
War  and  conquest : — I.  The  opposing  forces.  Look  abroad  upon  the  earth. 
What  a  pandemonium  of  vice  and  crime,  injustice  and  cruelty,  heathenism 
and  superstition  it  is.  Oh,  how  mighty  and  multiplied  the  antagonist  hosts ! 
They  are  mustered  and  marshalled  ;  they  are  eager  for  the  strife  of  the  battle,  they 
confront  us  at  every  step  ;  and  the  great  question  is  this.  Can  they  be  overcome  ? 
Must  we  lay  down  our  arms  in  despair  !  Is  the  world  to  become  no  better  ?  II.  The 
OPPOSING  FORCES  VANQUISHED.  The  Lamb  will  overcome  them.  1.  By  the  interposi- 
tions and  changes  of  Providence.  God  has  a  purpose,  the  world  is  to  be  converted, 
and  all  things  are  working  to  accomplish  that  end ;  but  God's  way  is  in  the  sea, 
and  His  path  in  the  mighty  waters ;  He  is  the  real,  though  invisible,  ruler,  both  of 
matter  and  of  mind.  The  laws  of  providence  are  just  as  Divine  in  their  appoint- 
ments and  results  as  the  laws  of  nature.  All  things  work  to  usher  in  the  day 
predicted  by  the  angel's  song,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace, 
goodwill  toward  men."  2.  By  the  preaching  of  His  own  truth  and  the  outpouring 
of  His  Holy  Spirit.  Preaching  is  the  appointment  of  heaven.  3.  By  the  indomit- 
able zeal  and  energy  of  His  own  followers.  As  the  conflict  advances,  one  shall 
chase  a  thousand  and  two  shall  put  ten  thousand  to  flight.  In  all  ages  God  has 
carried  on  His  work  by  the  zeal,  energy,  and  courage  of  His  faithful  servants. 
He  did  it  even  in  the  ages  of  miracles.  He  will  do  it  till  the  world  is  saved ;  and 
why  shrink  from  the  task  His  benevolence  appoints  ?  Have  we  had  no  success  ? 
Did  not  Wesley  and  Whitfield  arouse  all  England  and  North  America  to  the  worth 
of  the  gospel  and  the  importance  of  eternal  things  ?  Are  we  faithful  to  the  cause 
of  the  Lamb  ?  Might  He  not  reproach  us  for  our  doubts  and  fears  ?  Where  is 
the  faith  which  wrought  those  moral  wonders  in  the  apostoUc  age?  {W.  S. 
Edwards.)  The  Royal  Christ : — A  Lamb,  and  yet  "  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of 
kings."  The  ideas  seem  incongruous.  How,  then,  is  "the  Lamb"  this?  1.  By 
rightful  authority.    Though  Son  of  Man,  He  is  also  Son  of  God  (cf.  Psa.  ii.). 


CHAP,  xvn.]  REVELATION.  531 

2.  By  virtue  of  His  sacrifice  (chap.  iv. ;  of.  Phil,  iii.),  "  Therefore  hath  God  highly 
exalted  Him,  and,"  &c.  3.  By  the  might  of  meekness.  See  how  at  His  nativity 
the  shepherds  were  told  they  should  see  the  "  Saviour,  Christ  the  Lord."  Meekness 
is  might,  sacrifice  is  sovereignty,  losing  life  is  gaining  it ;  the  cross  creates  the  crown. 
4.  By  the  consent  of  conscience.  5.  By  the  grace  he  imparted  to  His  people. 
•'  Their  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  put  to  silence  "  all  their  foes.  6.  In  His 
people.  "  They  that  are  with  Him."  The  Eevised  Version  rightly  renders 
St.  John's  words,  "  They  also  shall  overcome  that  are  with  Him,  called,  chosen, 
faithful."  St.  John  does  not  teach  that  the  Lamb  was  indebted  to  them  for  this 
victory  as  a  general  is  indebted  to  his  army.  They  are — (1)  Called.  (2)  Chosen. 
But  thus  we  may  know  if  we  be  chosen :  (3)  If  we  be  of  those  who  are  faithful. 
Called  we  are ;  chosen  we  may  be.  If  faithful,  then  we  are  of  the  chosen  too ; 
and  this,  and  this  only,  is  the  proof.      (C.  Comcay,  B.A.)  The  great  moral 

campaign  : — I.  The  contending  forces.  1.  The  one  is  represented  as  a  "  beast." 
Emblem  of  the  mighty  aggregate  of  wrong  in  all  its  elements  and  operations  :  wrong 
in  theories  and  in  institutions,  wrong  in  sentiments  and  habits,  wrong  as  imposing 
as  seven  mountains  and  as  majestic  as  kings  or  empires,  wrong  sitting  as  empress 
over  all  nations  and  peoples  and  tongues.  2.  The  other  is  represented  as  a 
"  Lamb " — emblem  of  innocence,  mil(hiess,  and  purity.  II.  The  mabvellous 
CONQUEST.  1.  The  conqueror.  The  Lamb,  though  not  a  bellicose  existence,  is — 
(1)  Invested  with  the  highest  authority.  (2)  Followed  by  a  noble  army.  2.  The 
conquered.      (D.    Thomas,    D.D.)  The    overcoming   Lamb : — I.   The   person 

MENTIONED.  He  is  not  a  lamb,  but  the  Lamb.  He  is  the  great  universal 
Lamb,  causing  the  blood  which  He  shed  to  spread  itself,  as  it  were,  aU  over 
the  world,  so  that  every  sinner  might  touch  it  and  be  saved  from  his  sins. 

II.  What  He   shall  overcome.      All  opposers,    both  nations    and    individuals. 

III.  How  He  shall  overcome  His  opposers.  There  are  two  general  methods 
— 1.  That  of  using  certain  means  to  persuade  rebellious  hearts  to  become 
reconciled  to  God.  His  greatest  effort  has  always  been  to  overcome  by  the 
passion  of  His  love.  2.  That  of  final  banishment  from  His  presence.  Oh, 
what  can  feeble  man  do  against  such  an  all-powerful  being  as  Christ  is  ? 
How  utterly  vain  have  been  the  threats  of  infidels,  that  they  would  banish 
Him  from  the  world.  (C.  H.  Wetherbe.)  And  they  that  are  with  ttitti 
are  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithfuL — The  army  of  the  Lamb : — This  is  a 
description  of  the  best  appointed  army  that  was  ever  brought  into  the  field — the 
army  of  Christ  Jesus.  It  has  been  the  presumptuous  boast  of  many  earthly 
generals  that  their  soldiers  were  invincible — such  as  no  enemy  could  overthrow. 
This  may,  however,  be  with  truth  affirmed  of  this  army.  They  carry,  as  it  were, 
this  inscription  on  their  banners,  "  Conquering  and  to  conquer  !  "  I.  The  Captain 
OF  THIS  host  of  THE  LoRD.  The  succcss  of  every  ordinary  army  depends  mainly, 
under  God,  upon  the  skill  and  valour  of  its  general.  But  of  this  spiritual  army  it 
may  with  truth  be  said  that  every  hope  of  victory  they  have  arises  altogether  from 
Him  who  leads  them  to  the  battle.  They  have  an  Almighty  leader  at  their  head, 
One  whose  presence  insures  victory  to  all  His  followers.  In  the  former  part  of  the 
verse  this  "  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host"  is  called  by  two  different  titles,  which 
seem,  at  first  sight,  scarcely  reconcilable.  1.  One  of  these  titles  is,  "  the  Lamb  " — 
a  name  which  might  seem,  at  first,  little  suited  to  the  leader  of  an  army.  But 
what  does  the  term  signify  in  the  case  of  Him  to  whom  it  is  applied  ?  Not  that 
He  is  weak  and  feeble  as  the  tender  animal  which  bears  this  name.  But  He  is  a 
•'  Lamb  "  in  reference  to  the  death  He  died  for  His  people,  when  He  was  "  led  as  a 
Lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  is  dumb  before  its  shearers  so  He  opened 
not  His  mouth."  It  is  a  title,  too,  of  endearment.  The  Lamb  is  not  more  meek 
and  gentle  than  He  is  to  His  faithful  followers.  2.  But  if  the  epithet  "  Lamb  " 
represents  His  gentleness  and  tenderness  towards  His  people  and  the  death  which 
He  has  died  for  them.  He  has  another  name  which  describes,  as  strikingly,  His 
majesty  and  power — "  Lord  of  lords  and  King  of  kings."  H.  His  soldiers.  "  They 
that  are  with  Him  are  called,  and  chosen,  and  faithful."  1.  They  are  "  called  " — 
just  as  the  soldiers  of  an  earthly  army  are  enlisted  for  the  service.  The  soldiers 
of  an  earthly  warfare  were  called  into  the  ranks  they  fill  from  very  different 
occupations :  some  from  the  shop,  some  from  the  plough.  Christ's  soldiers,  too, 
were  very  differently  occupied  when  the  call  of  grace  was  given  them.  They  were 
then  mere  children  of  the  world,  "  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
mind  " — each  busily  occupied  in  his  own  favourite  and  cherished  sins.  Various, 
too,  were  the  circumstances  under  which  the  call  was  given  to  them,  and  various 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

the  means  employed  by  the  great  Captain  of  salvation  to  make  them  hear  that  call. 
But  in  every  case  it  was  the  Saviour's  "  Follow  Me  !  "  which  brought  His  soldiers 
to  His  side.  2.  They  are  not  "  called  "  only,  but  "  chosen."  There  is  a  difference, 
even  in  earthly  armies,  between  being  called  and  being  chosen,  between  being  merely 
enlisted  and  being  what  is  called  "  picked  men,"  men  in  whom  the  general  can  place 
his  confidence.  Look  at  Gideon's  army  (Judg.  vii.  1-7).  Two-and-thirty  thousand 
then  were  called ;  three  hundred  only  chosen.  It  is  just  thus  in  the  camp  of  Jesus. 
What  multitudes  flock  into  it !  But  how  many  of  all  these  become  in  after  life 
true  soldiers  of  the  Cross  ?  Alas  !  but  a  small  remnant ;  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen."  But  they  that  are  really  with  the  Saviour,  and  who  consti- 
tute His  "  Church  militant  here  on  earth,"  are,  all  of  them,  "  picked  men." 
Whatever  exploits  Christ's  soldiers  may  perform  when  they  have  entered  on  the  fight 
of  faith,  "  by  the  grace  of  God  they  are  what  they  are."  3.  They  are  faithful. 
The  word  may  be  taken  in  two  senses,  in  each  of  which  it  is  equally  applicable 
to  the  armies  of  the  Living  God.  (1)  They  are  "  faithful  "  inasmuch  as  they  are 
full  of  faith  and  confidence  in  the  Captain  of  their  salvation.  The  soldiers  of  the 
Lamb  of  God  place  their  entire  confidence  in  the  Commander  whom  they  follow. 
(2)  A  man  is  said  to  be  faithful  who  lives  up  to  his  engagements,  and  who  adheres 
with  constancy  and  perseverance  to  the  person  whose  service  he  has  undertaken. 
Faithfulness,  in  this  understanding  of  the  word,  is  most  essential  to  the  character 
of  a  good  soldier.  One  part  of  his  faithfulness  consists  in  his  remaining  true  to 
his  commander  until  he  be  disbanded  or  dismissed.  To  run  from  his  colours,  or 
desert  the  service  of  his  king  and  country,  is  amongst  the  soldier's  greatest  crimes. 
In  this  point,  too,  the  soldiers  of  the  Lord  are  faithful.  "  They  foUow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  He  goeth,"  and  nothing  shall  ever  separate  them  from  His  love  and 
from  His  service.     {A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XVm. 

Veks.  1-8.  Babylon  the  great  is  fallen. — The  overthrow  of  wickedness: — I.  A 
GLORIOUS  ANGEL  PROCLAIMS  THIS  (cf.  vcr.  1  as  to  this  angel).  Then  such  overthrow 
must  be — 1.  Righteous.  2.  Blessed.  3.  Divine.  Had  it  been  possible  for  men  to 
effect  this,  it  would  have  been  done  long  since.  II.  God's  people  receive 
COMMAND.  1.  To  separate  themselves  from  sin.  From  which  we  learn — (1)  That 
God's  people  may  have  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  sin.  (2)  That  though  where 
wickedness  is,  they  are  not  to  be  partakers  of  it.  (3)  That  they  shall  one  day  be 
effectually  separated  from  it.  2.  To  avenge  themselves  upon  it.  Resentment  and 
wrath  are  passions  given  us  by  God.  Our  peril  and  propensity  is  lest  we  turn  them 
in  a  wrong  direction.  III.  The  friends  of  wickedness  lament.  1.  Wickedness 
has  friends.  Those  who  find  delight  in  it,  who  "live  deliciously"  in  it  (ver.  9). 
Those  who  make  profit  out  of  it.  The  merchants,  &c.  (ver.  11).  And — 2.  Their 
lament  is  loud  and  long.  They  weep,  mourn,  wail ;  say,  "  Alas,  alas ! "  cast  dust  on 
their  heads,  &c.  (vers.  11,  15,  16,  19).  3.  But  the  lament  is  utterly  selfish.  They 
mourn  not  because  of  the  wickedness  :  that  does  not  trouble  them.  Nor  even  for 
Babylon's  sufferings.  But  because  the  hope  of  their  gain  is  gone  (ver.  19).  4. 
And  they  do  not  go  to  her  help  (ver.  15).  They  stand  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her 
torment.  Look  well  at  these  friends,  for  such  are  they  that  sin  and  sinners  call 
friends.  IV,  All  heaven,  angels  and  saints,  rejoice.  When  we  read  over  the 
subject  of  their  joy,  we  find  that— 1.  It  is  not  because  in  this  Babylon  there  was 
nothing  innocent  or  good.  There  was  much.  Vers.  22,  23  tell  of  what  was  lawful 
and  right  in  any  community.  In  the  worst  of  men  there  is  good.  None  are  utterly 
bad.  But — 2.  That  the  main  characteristic  of  her  life  was  evil.  And  therefore 
her  destruction  was  a  matter  of  joy.  She  deceived  all  nations.  She  slew  God's 
saints.  Thus — 3.  Justice  was  done.  And — 4.  It  was  completely  done.  See  the 
symbol  of  the  angel  with  the  millstone  (ver.  21).  Nothing  like  this  has  ever  been 
accomplished  yet,  but  this  prophecy  is  a  sure  promise  that  it  will  be.  "  Who  shall 
live  when  the  Lord  doeth  this  "  ?  Amongst  whom  shall  we  be  found?  Let  us  now 
"  come  out  of  her,  that  we  be  not,"  &c.  (ver.  4).  (S.  Conway,  B.A.)  Babylon : — 
I.  The  description  of  Babylon.  1.  Its  corrupt  character.  As  before  the  prophets 
were  "  false"  and  the  spirits  were  "unclean,"  and  stood  opposed  to  God  ;  so  now 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  REVELATION,  533 

harlotry,  fornication,  drunkenness,  blasphemy,  abominations,  luxury,  persecuting, 
violence,  sorcery,  submission  to  the  beast,  warring  against  the  Lamb,  are  the  terms 
employed  to  describe  or  indicate  the  excessive  foulness  and  corruption  of  the  faith- 
less city.  This  is  "  the  woman "  having  in  her  hand  "  a  golden  cup  full  of 
abominations,  even  the  unclean  things  of  her  fornication."  This  the  "  Babylon 
the  great,"  which  is  become  "  a  habitation  of  devils,  a  hold  of  every  unclean  spirit 
and  a  hold  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird."  2.  Virulent  antagonism  to  the 
good,  even  to  the  loftiest  ideals  of  goodness.  "War  against  the  Lamb";  "blas- 
phemed the  God  of  heaven  "  ;  "  gather  together  unto  the  war  of  the  great  day  of 
God " ;  "  poured  out  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets  " ;  in  such  terms  is  the 
antipathy  to  all  righteousness  declared.  3.  Occasion  of  all  evil,  seen  in  the 
corruption  of  life,  the  deceitfulness  of  iniquity,  the  loss  of  the  blessings  of 
righteousness,  degradation  in  sin,  to  which  the  "  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and 
nations,  and  tongues"  are  reduced  "  where  the  harlot  sitteth  "  ;  and  the  judgments 
and  consequent  sufferings  in  which  they  are  involved,  4.  The  widespread,  universal 
character  of  the  desolation  caused.  In  every  aspect  this  vision  is  "  great  and 
marvellous."  It  is  "  Babylon  the  great."  The  harlot  "  sitteth  upon  many  waters," 
which  waters  are  "peoples  and  multitudes,  and  nations  and  tongues."  "And  the 
woman  is  the  great  city  which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth  " ;  "  by  the  wine 
of  the  wrath  of  her  fornication  all  the  nations  are  fallen."  "  What  city  is  like 
the  great  city,"  with  whose  "sorcery  were  all  nations  deceived"?  "In  her  was 
found  the  blood  of  all  that  have  been  slain  upon  the  earth."  This  is  the  universal 
kingdom  of  evil,  whose  "  sins  reached  unto  heaven."  This  great  kingdom  shall 
come  to  an  end.  Such  is  the  ever-recurring  promise  of  this  book.  II.  Its 
DESTRUCTION  IS  COMPLETE.  The  "  harlot "  is  made  "  desolate  and  naked " ; 
hated  by  all  over  whom  she  sat  as  a  queen ;  they  shall  "  eat  her  flesh,  and  bum 
her  utterly  with  fire."  "  Woe,  woe!"  is  pronounced  against  the  great  city,  Babylon; 
"  for  in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  come."  "  Fallen,  fallen  is  Babylon  the  great." 
"  In  one  day  shall  her  plagues  come,  death,  and  mourning,  and  famine ;  and  she 
shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire  ;  for  strong  is  the  Lord  God  which  judgeth  her." 
"  The  Lamb  shall  overcome,"  and  thus  shall  they  also  overcome  that  are  with  Him. 
"  And  a  strong  angel  took  up  a  stone  as  it  were  a  great  millstone,  and  cast  it  into 
the  sea,  saying.  Thus  with  a  mighty  fall  shall  Babylon,  the  great  city,  be  cast  down, 
and  shall  be  found  no  more  at  all."  Then  shall  the  kings  of  the  earth  that  com- 
mitted fornication  with  her,  and  the  merchants  of  the  earth  who  were  made  rich 
by  her,  and  every  shipmaster  and  mariner,  and  all  that  were  made  rich  by  her, 
■weep  and  mourn  and  lament ;  while  to  heaven  a  sweet  song  of  joy  and  thankful- 
ness shall  rise  from  them  who  with  the  Lamb  have  overcome — who  are  called,  and 
chosen,  and  faithful.  {R.  Green.)  The  fall  of  corrupt  society  : — The  fall  of 
corrupt  society  is — I.  Divinely  proclaimed.  As  there  is  a  law  of  disintegration  in 
the  material  universe,  that  so  separates  the  hugest  mountains  that  they  ultimately 
disappear,  so  there  is  in  the  moral  a  law  of  retribution,  which  will  ultimately  break 
into  pieces  the  world  of  corrupt  society.  II.  Manifestly  deserved.  As  in  the 
ruins  of  old  cities,  the  cormorant,  the  screech-owl,  the  vulture,  and  other  hideous 
creatures  are  found,  so  in  this  moral  Babylon  are  found  the  most  horrible  and 
detestable  of  all  existences.  The  utter  extermination,  or  rather  extinction,  of  such 
objects  is  urgently  required.  III.  A  reason  for  quitting  it.  1.  The  possibility 
of  good  men  Uving  in  this  moral  Babylon.  The  depravities  of  our  contemporaries 
and  neighbours  are  no  justification  for  our  defects.  2.  Good  men,  unless  they  quit 
this  corrupt  society,  will  be  involved  in  its  guilt  and  fate.  IV.  A  development  of 
retribution.  The  ruin  comes,  not  as  a  casual  event,  nor  as  a  positive  infliction, 
but  as  the  result  of  the  eternal  law  of  retribution :  a  law  silent  in  its  operation, 
resistless  in  its  force,  and  inevitable  in  its  issues  (Gal.  vi.  7).  V.  An  overwhelming 
CATASTROPHE.  When  full  judgment  comes  upon  a  corrupt  community  the  horrors 
involved  not  only  transcend  description,  but  even  imagination.  What  is  lost? 
Friendship  gives  way  to  fiendish  battlings ;  peace  gives  way  to  furious  storms ; 
hope  gives  way  to  black  despair  and  terrible  apprehensions :  liberty  gives  way  to  a 
crushing  thraldom,  to  which  every  faculty  of  the  soul  is  bound  in  chains  of  dark- 
ness. All  the  lights  of  the  soul  are  quenched,  and  the  whole  heavens  are  mantled 
in  a  starless  midnight.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  habitation  of  devils. — The 
habitation  of  demons : — I.  Every  babel  -  like  city  or  system  is  doomed  to 
destruction,  and  will  fall  into  an  abyss  of  fearful  degradation.  This  is 
the  lesson  of  all  history  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  We  see  it  in  the  over- 
throw of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  of  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  kingdoms,  and  of 


534  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

the  Greek  and  Eoman  Empires.  Wherever  we  find  a  nation  that  is  supremely 
devoted  to  the  things  of  sense,  we  have  Babel-like  adolaters,  who  are  destined  to 
a  certain  fall  and  degradation.  Such  is  the  appointed  end  of  every  political  or 
reUgious  system  that  ignores  God  and  His  truth,  and  seek  after  material  power  and 
prosperity  as  the  chief  objects  of  life.  Let  a  nation  lose  her  faith  in  God — let  her 
drive  truth,  virtue,  love,  and  righteousness  from  her  heart  and  life,  and  what  will 
she  become  ?  Can  she  become  anything  else  than  a  habitation  of  devils  ?  Can 
she  become  anything  else  but  the  seat  and  prey  of  demon-like  passions?  II. 
Observe  how  DiABOLiCAii  the  passions  of  men  mat  become.  "  The  most  terrible 
physical  calamity  that  can  be  imagined,"  says  one,  "  has  no  terror  to  compare 
with  that  of  fiends  let  loose  from  hell  and  taking  possession  of  human  hearts  and 
hands.  A  ship  sinking  in  a  tempest  >^ith  its  hundreds  of  helpless  passengers  ;  a 
Lisbon  overwhelmed  by  sudden  earthquake ;  a  Pompeii  buried  alive  beneath  the 
lava  and  ashes  of  Vesuvius  are  very  terrible  to  hear  of,  and  to  think  of,  but  they 
are  nothing  to  what  Paris  has  lately  seen.  Her  streets  have  been  flooded  with  the 
worst  passions  of  which  human  nature,  satanically  inspired,  is  capable.  Men, 
women,  and  even  children,  born  in  the  same  streets,  neighbours  all  their  life  long, 
who  have  traded  and  danced  and  sung  together,  pursuing  each  other  to  death  with 
the  ferocity  of  tigers,  and  inflicting  all  manner  of  dishonour  and  indignity  on  the 
mangled  remains  of  the  dead — and  all  this  in  the  most  polished  and  beautiful  city 
in  the  world — what  can  it  all  mean,  except  it  be  an  eruption  of  demons  from  the 
bottomless  pit  ?  "  IH.  We  see  what  society  has  to  expect  from  the  apostles  of 
INFIDELITY  AND  ATHEISM.  When  men  have  destroyed  the  idea  of  a  God  in  their 
own  minds,  is  it  not  natural  to  think  that  they  will  enter  on  a  career  of  destruction 
in  reference  to  other  and  smaller  things  ?  If  they  hesitate  not  to  destroy  the  idea 
of  a  God — the  fountain  of  right  and  wrong — will  they  shrink  from  destroying 
human  life  or  property?  If  the  idea  of  a  God  be  not  a  sacred  idea  to  such 
persons,  do  you  think  that  the  idea  of  the  value  of  human  life  or  property  will  be 
a  sacred  idea  to  them  ?  No.  Society  has  everything  to  lose  and  nothing  to  gain 
from  such  apostles  of  atheism  and  infidelity.  Not  from  them,  but  from  other  and 
higher  sources,  would  we  look  for  the  salvation  of  men.     IV.  All  men  are  in 

DANGER    OF    FALLING    INTO    A  BaBEL-LIKE    SPIRIT    AND    LIFE.       For    all    are    Only   tOO 

prone  to  put  faith  in  the  things  of  sense,  and  to  forget  the  things  that  are  unseen 
and  eternal.  The  Babylonian  spirit  is  not  dead.  Every  man  to  some  extent  is  a 
little  Babel.  We  have  faith  in  the  powers  of  nature.  We  have  faith  in  the  sun, 
in  the  moon,  in  the  star,  in  the  coal,  and  in  the  seed  that  we  cast  into  the  ground. 
Do  we  believe  also  in  God  ?  Have  we  a  real  and  lasting  faith  in  Him  ?  Have  we 
such  a  f£ftth  in  love,  truth,  virtue,  and  righteousness,  as  in  the  things  that  we  see 
with  the  eye  of  our  body  and  touch  with  our  hands?  {Wm.  M'Kay.)  Come  out 
of  her. — The  influence  of  the  apostate  Babylon : — When  the  great  apostate  power 
named  Babylon  comes,  as  here  set  forth,  to  utter  destruction,  it  is  seen  how  wide 
and  how  deep  its  mahgn  influence  had  been.  The  whole  fabric  of  the  world's 
commerce  is  shattered  by  its  fall ;  for  all  human  industries  and  trafl&c  and  all  the 
markets  of  the  world  had  come  to  be  diverted  from  the  service  of  God,  and  directed 
and  controlled  by  the  corrupt  principles  and  unhallowed  delights  of  the  vast 
apostasy.  Even  though  the  identity  of  this  mystic  Babylon  be  left  unfixed,  the 
warning  reaches  us  with  no  lack  of  distinctness  and  urgency.  We  need  not  wait 
until  we  can  precisely  define  and  allocate  the  form  and  system  of  wrong  which  ia 
here  denounced  before  we  determine  to  hold  ourselves  clear  of  all  wrong,  by  doing 
that  only  which  is  right,  by  acknowledging  and  serving  God  alone  in  all  particulars 
and  interests  of  our  daily  life,  at  home  and  in  the  world.  (G.  S.  Rowe.)  In  the 
cup  which  she  hath  filled  flU  to  her  double,— The  rule  of  retribution  :— I.  This  rule 
COMMENDS  ITSELF  TO  OUR  SENSE  OF  JUSTICE.  That  those  of  the  wickcd  who  in  this 
world  live  in  affluence,  and  have  more  than  heart  can  wish,  possess  abundant 
opportunities  for  intellectual  and  moral  improvement,  and  means  of  doing  good, 
should  in  future  retribution  fare  alike  with  those  who  have  none  of  these  blessings 
or  advantages,  would  be  an  outrage  on  our  sense  of  right.  Justice  requires  a 
balancing  of  human  affairs,  a  kind  of  compensation  for  existing  discrepancies, 
and  this  mankind  will  have  in  the  great  retributive  future.  II.  This  rule  answers 
TO  BIBLICAL  TEACHING.  Throughout  the  whole  Scripture  record  it  is  taught  that 
sinners,  after  they  have  passed  through  their  probationary  period,  will  be  dealt 
with  according  to  the  mercies  they  have  abused,  the  opportunities  they  have 
neglected,  and  the  advantages  they  have  wasted.  "  He  that  knoweth  his  Master's 
will  and  doeth  it  not,"  &c.     "  It  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah," 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  REVELATION.  535 

&c.  "  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  didst  receive,"  &c.  III.  This  rule 
AGREES  WITH  UNIVERSAL  EXPERIENCE.  Conscious  coutrast  between  a  propitious  past 
and  a  distressing  present  is  and  must  ever  be  an  element  in  mental  suffering. 
{Uomilist.)  She  hath  glorified  herself. — The  degenerate  Church  : — Called  to 
prepare  men  for  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  to  teach  them  to  live,  not  for 
the  present,  but  the  future,  she  becomes  herself  the  victim  of  the  present. 
She  forgets  that,  in  the  absence  of  the  Bridegroom,  her  days  are  days  of  fasting. 
She  fails  to  realise  the  fact  that  until  her  Lord  comes  again  her  state  is 
one  of  widowhood.  And,  instead  of  mourning,  she  sits  as  a  queen,  at 
ease  and  satisfied,  proud  of  her  pomp  and  jewellery.  (W.  Milligan,  D.D.) 
Therefore  shall  her  plagues  come. — National  ruin: — Our  scientific  friends  find 
yellow  bricks  still  impressed  with  the  name  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  they  go  back 
to  the  sarcophagus  of  a  monarchy  buried  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago. 
But  is  it  possible  that  that  is  all  that  remains  of  Babylon?  a  city  once 
five  times  larger  than  London  and  twelve  times  larger  than  New  York?  Wall 
three  hundred  and  seventy-three  feet  high  and  ninety-three  feet  thick.  Twenty- 
five  burnished  gates  on  each  side,  with  streets  running  clear  through  to  corre- 
sponding gates  on  the  other  side.  Six  hundred  and  twenty-five  squares.  More 
pomp  and  wealth  and  splendour  and  sins  than  could  be  found  in  any  five 
modern  cities  combined.  A  city  of  palaces  and  temples.  Great  capital  of  the 
ages !  But  one  night,  while  honest  citizens  were  asleep,  but  all  the  saloons  of 
saturnalia  were  in  full  blast,  and  at  the  king's  castle  they  had  filled  the  tankards 
for  the  tenth  time,  and  reeling  and  guffawing  and  hiccoughing  around  the  state 
table  were  the  rulers  of  the  land.  General  Cyrus  ordered  his  besieging  army  to 
take  shovels  and  spades,  and  they  diverted  the  river  from  its  usual  channel  into 
another  direction,  so  that  the  forsaken  bed  of  the  river  became  the  path  on  which 
the  besieging  party  entered.  When  the  morning  dawned  the  conquerors  were 
inside  the  city  walls.  Babylon  had  fallen.  But  do  nations  die  ?  Oh,  yes,  there 
is  great  mortality  among  monarchies  and  republics.  They  are  Uke  individuals  in 
the  fact  that  they  are  born,  they  have  a  middle  life,  they  have  a  decease,  they  have 
a  cradle  and  a  grave.  Some  of  them  are  assassinated,  some  destroyed  by  their  own 
hand.  1.  One  evil  threatening  the  destruction  of  American  institutions  is  the 
solidifying  of  the  sections  against  each  other.  This  country  cannot  exist  unless  it 
exists  as  one  body — the  national  capital,  the  heart,  sending  out  through  all  the 
arteries  of  communication  warmth  and  life  to  the  very  extremities.  2.  Another 
evil  threatening  the  destruction  of  our  American  institutions  is  the  low  state  of 
public  morals.  What  killed  Babylon  of  my  text  ?  What  killed  Phoenicia?  What 
killed  Eome  ?  Their  own  depravity ;  and  the  fraud  and  the  drunkenness,  and  the 
immorahty  which  have  destroyed  other  nations  will  destroy  ours,  unless  a  merciful 
God  prevent.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Vers.  9-24.  The  merchants  of  the  earth  shall  bewail  her,  and  lament  for  her. — 

The  fall  of  the  corrupt  in  human  life  : — Wrong,  including  all  that  is  morally  evil  in 
human  thought,  feeUng,  and  action  is  constantly  falling.  Though  it  has  a  very 
slow  death,  it  will  by  the  eternal  law  of  moral  disintegration  be  one  day  brought 
down.  I.  The  lamentation  of  the  bad.  1.  The  ruling  class.  True  kinghood 
is  the  majesty  of  intellect  and  goodness.  2.  The  mercantile  class.  When  the 
grand  altruistic  truth  of  Christian  socialism  becomes  realised  by  the  masses — "  Let 
no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  man  another's  wealth  " — then  the  every-man-for- 
himself  principle  will  fall,  and  with  its  fall  what  will  become  of  the  enormous 
possessions  which  they  have  obtained  merely  by  working  for  themselves  ?  11.  The 
JUBILATION  OF  THE  GOOD.  1.  Because  the  fall  is  just.  Evil  has  no  right  to  exist. 
2.  Because  the  faU  is  beneficent.  It  is  the  uprooting  of  those  thorns  and  thistles 
and  noxious  weeds  that  have  turned  the  paradise  of  our  being  into  a  howling 
wilderness.  3.  Because  the  fall  is  complete.  Destroyed  once,  it  is  destroyed  for 
ever.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  commercial  Babylon  : — 1.  We  should  first  of  all 
learn  that  the  hold  of  God  on  all  that  we  have  and  are  is  absolute.  We  are  but 
tenants-at-will.  The  proud  and  conceited  talk  as  if  the  world  were  ours — "  My 
river  is  my  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for  myself  " — is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord. 
God  has  never  waived  His  rights  in  entrusting  to  us  His  loans.  Let  merchants, 
stockbrokers,  bankers,  bondholders,  traders  learn  this  lesson.  At  any  moment  God 
may  bring  all  our  possessions  to  nought ;  and  He  will  do  that  at  His  own  time,  not 
waiting  for  ours.  2.  It  may  well  yield  us  matter  for  lamentation  that  the  use  of  so 
much  earthly  capital  is  a  perverted  one.     Many  of  God's  gifts  are  put  in  alliance 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

with  overreaching,  corruption,  and  fraud.  But  when  things  of  wealth  and  beauty 
become  the  instruments  of  apostaey  it  is  sad  indeed.  3.  Let  us  learn  to  look  at 
whatever  is  beautiful  and  costly  and  artistic  as  precious  in  the  truest  sense  only  as 
it  is  allied  to  or  in  harmony  with  righteousness.  Beauty  and  wealth  are  only  of 
genuine  value  when  employed  in  accordance  with  God's  will  and  Word.  4.  Let  us 
take  care  that,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  we  have  no  share  in  this  heart-apostacy 
of  Babylon  the  great,  even  in  the  commercial  world.  The  voice  cries  now,  "  Come 
out  of  her,  my  people  "  (Isa.  xlviii.  20,  lii.  11 ;  Jer.  i.  8,  li.  6,  45 ;  2  Cor.  vi. 
14-17).  If  we  would  not  share  her  plagues  we  must  not  share  her  sins.  There  are 
those  who  are  in  Babylon  the  great,  the  slaves  of  godless  gain  or  godless  pleasure. 
There  are  those  who  belong  to  the  new  and  eternal  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  who 
engrave  on  the  bells  of  the  horses,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  whose  daily  toil  is 
being  sanctified  for  Him.  It  may  cost  something  to  renounce  all  fellowship  with 
Babylon.  But  it  is  worth  infinitely  more  than  it  costs.  Yea,  to  be  right  is  so 
transcendently  great,  that  the  question  of  cost  should  scarce  be  deemed  worth  a 
thought.    Better  die  with  Christ  than  reign  with  CsBsar.     {S.  Conway,  B.A.) 

Vers.  13-20.  Souls  of  men. — The  manhood  traffic  : — I.  One  of  the  causes  of  the 
BUiN  of  this  Babylon  was  heb  extbavagant  luxubt.  The  history  of  the  world  is 
full  of  solemn  lessons  concerning  the  enervating  influence  of  luxury.  It  is  scarcely 
too  much  to  say  that  luxury  was  the  chief  destroyer  of  all  the  great  empires  of 
antiquity.  But  human  nature  is  very  slow  to  learn  this  lesson,  though  it  has  been 
written  for  us  again  and  again  in  letters  of  blood  and  fire ;  and,  in  spite  of  all,  we 
are  constantly  discovering  a  proneness  to  fall  away  into  the  ease-taking  and  self- 
pampering  which  ruined  the  great  empires  of  ancient  Babylon,  of  Media  and 
Persia,  of  Greece  and  Kome.  Self-indulgence  prepares  the  heart  to  be  the 
receptacle  of  all  the  errors  of  anti-Christ.  Christ-like  self-renunciation  is  a  virtue 
which  cannot  grow  in  the  soil  of  luxurious  living.  The  immense  sums  which  are 
spent  in  this  country  in  merely  tickling  the  palate  with  expensive  and  often 
injurious  articles  of  food  are  simply  appalling.  A  friend  recently  told  me  that  one 
gentleman  whom  he  had  persuaded  to  sign  the  pledge  told  him  that  by  so  doing  he 
had  saved  him  £500  per  year.  What  criminal  waste !  Yet  there  are  many  men  in 
this  country  whose  wine-bill  far  exceeds  this.    II.  It  is  to  the  two  last  items  in 

THIS  EXTBAOBDINABY  INVENTOBY  THAT  I  WISH  TO  CALL  YOUB  ATTENTION,  VIZ.,  SLAVES, 

AND  SOULS  OF  MEN.  As  the  margin  informs  us,  the  literal  translation  is  "  bodies  and 
souls  of  men."  In  Greek  literature  the  word  "bodies"  is  often  used  to  describe 
slaves  when  regarded  as  articles  of  merchandise,  and  that  is  why  our  translators 
have  rendered  it  "  slaves."  But  inasmuch  as  it  is  here  used  in  conjunction  with  the 
word  "  souls,"  it  seems  to  me  manifest  that  the  apostle  intended  to  employ  it  in  its 
proper  and  ordinary  sense,  and  to  declare  that  the  height  of  Babylon's  sin  is  that  she 
throws  manhood,  body  and  soul,  into  the  common  heap  of  merchandise  in  her 
market,  and  that  she  treats  what  God  has  redeemed  with  the  most  precious  thing  in 
the  universe  as  a  mere  chattel  to  be  bought  and  sold  for  money.  1.  I  very  much 
fear,  thanks  to  the  cruel,  heartless,  atheistic  political  economy  which  this  country 
learnt  from  Jeremy  Bentham,  John  Stuart  Mill,  and  company,  that  very  much  of 
our  commerce  is  practically  a  traffic  in  the  blood,  and  bones,  and  nerves,  and  souls 
of  men.  The  idea  that  any  relationship  between  one  man  and  another  can  ever  be 
reduced  to  one  of  cash-payment  is  to  be  for  ever  and  utterly  denounced.  All 
commerce  based  upon  such  an  idea  carries  within  itself  the  germs  of  ruin  and 
desolation.  The  only  true  relations  between  man  and  man,  be  they  commercial,  or 
political,  or  what  else,  are  those  which  are  cemented  by  love.  2.  The  drink  traffic, 
the  opium  traffic,  and  whoremongering  are  other  manifestations  of  this  awful  trade 
in  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.  Surely  it  is  wrong  that  adultery  which  by  almost 
aU  heathen  nations  has  been  treated  as  a  criminal  offence  should  in  a  Christian 
nation  be  regarded  as  only  a  civil  misdemeanour,  and  it  is  a  crying  abomination 
that  there  should  not  be  equal  laws  for  men  and  women  on  these  matters.  Our 
complicity,  however,  in  this  traffic  in  womanhood  is  most  horrible  in  relation  to  our 
Indian  Army.  It  is  awful  to  think  that  the  name  of  Christ  should  be  blasphemed 
among  the  heathen  through  the  diabolical  provision  deliberately  made  by  the 
officials  of  a  Christian  nation  to  ruin  poor  Hindoo  women  for  the  gratification  of  the 
lusts  of  our  soldiers.  We  Christian  citizens  ought  to  use  all  the  influence  we 
possess  to  put  the  speediest  possible  end  to  such  shameful  wickedness.  Then  in  the 
matter  of  opium  we  are  engaged  in  traffic  in  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.  Our 
relation  to  the  trade  in  China  ought  to  make  every  Briton  bow  down  before  God  in 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  REVELATION.  537 

shame  and  confusion  of  face.  At  this  moment  we  as  a  nation  are  manufacturing 
this  drug  not  in  a  form  prepared  for  medicinal  purposes,  but  in  a  form  deliberately 
prepared  for  vicious  indulgence.  And  what  is  the  plea  for  all  this  ?  Oh !  revenue, 
revenue !  We  are  told  that  we  cannot  govern  India  without  money  derived  from 
this  shameful  manhood  traffic.  Are  we  Englishmen  going  for  a  moment  to 
tolerate  this  shameless  doctrine,  "Let  us  do  evil  that  good  may  come"?  In  the 
name  of  righteousness,  if  we  cannot  govern  India  without  blood-money,  let  us  give 
up  governing  it.  Whatever  comes,  we  must  not  commit  the  crime  of  destroying  men 
for  money.  Nay,  our  work  as  Christians  is  not  to  make  merchandise  of  men  but  to 
redeem  them,  both  in  their  bodies  and  souls,  to  redeem  them,  if  need  be,  by  the  sur- 
render of  ourselves  to  death.  This  is  the  norm  of  Christian  ethics  (1  John  iii.  16, 
E.V.).  If  the  Church  would  do  her  Master's  work  she  must  arise  and  be  the 
champion  of  the  poor,  the  enemy  of  all  sweating,  the  inexorable  foe  of  all  manhood 
traffic.  She  must  minister  to  the  bodies  of  men,  visiting  them  in  prison,  feeding 
the  hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  and  nursing  the  sick.  She  must,  above  all,  care 
for  their  souls  by  doing  all  in  her  power  to  ward  them  off  from  vice,  and  to  lead 
them  into  a  pure,  noble,  and  beautiful  life.  {G.  A.  Bennetts,  B.A.)  Soul  mer- 
chants : — In  the  inventory  which  is  given  us  of  the  merchandise  of  Babylon,  the  last 
entry  is  an  item  that  you  would  least  of  all  have  expected  to  find  mentioned  as  an 
article  of  traffic;  and  that  teaches  us  with  terrible  emphasis,  how  lawless  and 
tyrannous  a  thing  unprincipled  commerce  is — how  it  will  invade  the  most  spiritual 
sanctuary  of  humanity,  and  lay  violent  hands  upon  its  sacred  things.  Having 
trafficked  and  made  its  gain  out  of  everything  else,  it  is  here  represented  as  bringing 
into  the  market  and  producing  as  an  article  of  merchandise  the  souls  of  men. 
And  it  suggests  to  us  as  our  appropriate  inquiry  the  way  in  which  modern  commerce 
invades  the  domain  of  the  spiritual  in  man ;  and  not  only  makes  its  mart  in  the 
soul,  but  brings  the  soul  itself  into  the  mart,  and  deals  with  it  as  an  article  of 
merchandise,  and  estimates  it  as  a  thing  or  capability  of  profit  and  loss.  Not 
only  does  it  turn  the  merchant  into  a  thorough  worldling,  and  quench  within  him 
all  the  yearning  energies  of  his  own  soul ;  but  it  makes  of  him  a  trafficker  in  the 
souls  of  others,  a  soul  merchant,  unhesitatingly  sacrificing  the  spiritual  interests  of 
aU  around  him,  if  they  stand  in  the  way  of  his  bargaining,  or  impose  a  limit  upon 
his  gain.  And  we  can  hardly  wonder  at  this — for  if  a  man  be  so  bent  upon  gaining 
the  world,  as  virtually  to  give  for  it  his  own  soul,  it  would  be  extremely  unreason- 
able to  expect  that  he  would  be  hampered  by  any  scruples  about  the  souls  of  others. 
But  that  we  may  deal  fairly  with  those  whom  we  have  to  denounce,  we  observe — 1. 
That  commercial  greatness  is  not  in  itself  a  thing  of  evil  or  of  moral  condemnation : 
and  that  we  are  by  no  means  to  be  understood  as  sympathising  with  the  ascetic 
sentiment,  that  connects  the  highest  forms  of  piety  with  abstinence  from  secular 
pursuits,  and  would  drive  a  man  out  of  this  world  in  order  to  purify  him  for  the 
next.  We  are  no  advocates  for  "  a  cloistered  piety."  A  healthy  Christianity  knows 
nothing  of  the  pseudo  pietism  and  moral  effeminacy  that  would  make  a  man  a 
hermit,  in  order  to  make  him  a  Christian.  It  is  by  no  means  the  best  way  of  being 
kept  from  moral  evil  to  be  taken  out  of  society;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  simply 
exchanging  the  perils  of  social  intercourse  and  activity  for  the  probably  greater 
perils  of  solitude.  Christianity  therefore  preaches  no  crusade  against  so-called 
secular  pursuits ;  it  has  no  word  to  say  against  business  activity  and  commercial 
prosperity  in  themselves  considered — against  the  laudable  desire  to  excel  in  the 
chosen  walk  of  life,  nor  against  the  plying  of  "  the  diligent  hand  that  maketh  rich." 
Man's  life  is  a  whole,  and  earth  and  heaven  are  but  the  two  great  scenes  of  it ;  and 
he  alone  rightly  lives  who  connects  both,  whose  life  on  earth  is  the  moral  beginning 
of  his  life  in  heaven,  and  whose  life  in  heaven  is  the  proper  moral  issue  of  his  life 
on  earth.  We  best  therefore  prepare  for  the  future,  not  by  turning  aside  from  the 
present,  that  we  may  deliberately  anticipate  its  coming  and  adjust  ourselves  to  it, 
but  by  earnestly  engaging  in  the  present  and  religiously  doing  the  present  work. 
If  these  principles  be  true  therefore,  there  is  no  necessary  evil  in  commercial 
pursuits.  2.  A  great  deal  of  the  moral  evil  of  our  modern  commercial  life  is  not  to 
be  attributed  to  commerce  as  the  necessary  cause  of  it.  It  springs  rather  from  the 
common  corruption  of  man's  heart,  and  takes  the  forms  it  does,  because  commerce 
is  the  incidental  occasion  of  it.  It  is  just  as  it  is  with  many  other  things,  the 
common  duties  of  life  are  to  us  as  we  are  to  them,  spiritual  or  unspiritual,  accord- 
ing to  the  temper  in  which  we  approach  and  apprehend  them ;  but  no  man  can 
carry  his  unsanctified  heart  into  the  midst  of  his  business,  and  then,  because  he 
remains  without  holy  feehng,  and  is  guilty,  it  may  be,  of  unholy  doings,  attribute  it 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvin. 

all  to  the  essential  secularity  of  business.     It  has  a  deeper  root  than  this  :  his  busi- 
ness, like  affliction,  would  he  but  permit  it  to  be  so,  would  be  a  fine  school  for  his 
virtue  and  nurse  of  his  piety;  but  instead  of  this,  it  is  the  occasion  of  his  bad 
tempers  and  the  embodiment  of  his  sin.     3.  While  commerce  is  in  itself  a  lawful 
thing,  and  while  much  of  the  moral  evil  associated  with  it  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
moral  condition  of  human  nature,  that  abuses  and  corrupts  whatever  it  touches,  yet 
■we  do  in  fact  often  see  it  overpassing  its  domain,   and  encroaching  upon  the 
province  of  the  spiritual,  and  seeking  ends  and  making  use  of  methods  that  are 
utterly  unholy.    Within  her  own  proper  limits  commerce,  as  the  minister  of  man's 
material  life,  has  her  proper  function  always  lawful,  and  possibly  religious  ;  but  let 
her  once  overpass  those  limits,  let  her  proffer  her  material  good  to  the  spiritual  soul 
of  man,  or  let  her,  as  in  the  case  the  text  describes,  lay  hold  upon  man's  spiritual 
soul  itself,  and  make  it  drag  its  chariot,  or  grind  at  its  mill,  or  prostitute  itself  for 
gain,  and  commerce  becomes  an  unqualified  and  unutterable  curse ;  it  is  guilty  of 
man's  crowning  sacrilege ;  it  perpetrates  his  crowning  folly.    Whatever  else  may  be 
a  thing  of  traffic,  the  soul  may  not ;  its  spiritual  affections  and  inspirations  may 
not  be  given  to  material  things  or  for  them  ;  its  spiritual  interests  are  heavenly  and 
supreme.     God  claims  these  exclusively  for  Himself  and  for  moral  good ;  they  are 
beyond  the  power  of  any  other  man  to  claim,  beyond  the  power  of  the  man  himself 
to  surrender ;    there  is  an  essential  morality  and  sacredness  in  the  soul  that 
imperatively  demands  to  be  preserved  inviolate.    When  I  speak  of  the  soul  of  man, 
I  mean  that  spiritual  part  of  his  complex  nature  that  consists  of  moral  affections 
and  passions,  in  which  the  ideas  of  God  and  of  virtue  are  implanted,  and  over 
which  conscience  has  its  proper  supremacy ;  I  mean  that  consciousness  of  intelli- 
gence and  of  morality  which  enables  him  to  know  the  true  and  to  choose  the  right, 
to  admire  the  beautiful  and  to  enjoy  the  good  ;  I  mean  that  consciousness  of  moral 
being  and  relationships,  that  puts  an  impassable  gulf  between  man  and  all  other 
animals,  that  enables  communion  with  the  great  and  spiritual  Father,  and  that  fills 
us  with  yearnings  for  His  likeness  and  love ;  that  consists  in  a  deep  and  unutter- 
able sympathy,  a  direct  and  ineffable  intercourse  between  God  and  His  creatures. 
And  it  is  into  this  awful  domain  that  commerce  sacrilegiously  intrudes ;  it  is  upon 
these  mysterious  thoughts,  and  feelings,  and  aspirations  that  it  lays  its  irreverent 
hands ;  it  interposes  itself  between  these  spiritual  faculties  and  spiritual  things ; 
and  it  says,  "  Nay,  but  ye  shall  be  my  servants  "  ;  and  it  makes  them  its  "  hewers  of 
wood  and  drawers  of  wat^r."    As  we  have  said,  a  sordid  and  unspiritual  commerce 
invades  the  soul  in  two  ways — it  takes  possession  of  the  soul  of  the  merchant,  and 
it  constrains  him  to  sacrifice  his  own  spiritual  interests  to  his  gain,  and  it  so  fkr 
infatuates  him  that  he  does  not  hesitate,  whenever  he  can  command  them,  to 
sacrifice  the  souls  of  others.    This  latter  impiety  it  perpetrates  in  two  ways.     1.  It 
is  a  traffic  in  souls,  when  a  service  is  demanded  by  employers  inconsistent  with  the 
principles  of  moral  rectitude.    And  here  we  must,  I  fear,  arraign  many  of  the 
principles  and  methods  of  our  modern  commerce — ^the  adulterations  of  manu- 
factures, the  methods  of  purchase  and  sale,  the  sophistries  and  subterfuges,  the 
deceptions  and  concealments  needful  for  efficiency  as  a  shopman.    Is  not  the  false 
article  often  labelled  as  the  true,  the  adulterated  as  the  pure.    Now,  what  is  all  this 
but  trafficking  in  souls  ?  first,  and  chiefly,  in  your  own  souls.    Are  you  not  barter- 
ing for  a  per  centage  of  profit — your  moral  integrity,  your  conscience,  your  godly 
simplicity  and  moral  sensitiveness,  your  purity  and  your  peace  ?    If  you  do  not  give 
your  whole  soul  for  the  whole  world,  you  give  part  of  the  one  for  as  much  as  you 
can  get  of  the  other ;  you  give  its  virtue  and  its  peace,  its  prosperity  and  its  purity. 
If  you  do  not  sell  it,  assuredly  you  put  it  in  pledge,  and  can  hope  to  redeem  it  only 
by  your  after  repentance  and  reformation.    But  the  point  for  our  present  emphasis 
is,  that  you  throw  into  the  bargain  the  souls  of  those  whom  you  employ.    You  make 
these  practices  the  condition  of  your  employment,  and  bring  to  bear  upon  them  a 
coercion  that  they  may  not  have  strength  to  resist.     We  talk  of  the  enormity  of 
dealing  in  the  bodies  of  men ;  but  it  is  trivial  compared  with  this  traffic  in  men's 
souls.    It  is  worse  than  suicide  for  you  to  destroy  the  virtue  of  your  own  soul,  and 
•worse  than  murder  for  you  to  destroy  the  virtue  of  others,  "  when  souls  perish  more 
than  blood  is  shed."    And  yours  is  the  deliberate  destruction  of  these  young  men's 
souls  ;  for  the  sake  of  your  accursed  gain  you  deliberately  trample  out  every  spark 
of  conscience,   and  every  struggle  of  spiritual  life.    Your  merchandise,   in   its 
grossest  form  and  directest  sense,  is  the  "  souls  of  men."     2.  It  is  a  traffic  in  souls 
when  a  service  is  demanded  by  employers  incompatible  with  spiritual  culture  and 
religious  duty.    Here,  therefore,  we  most  seriously  join  issue  with  the  present  shop- 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  REVELATION.  539 

keeping  system  in  our  large  towns  and  cities ;  the  protracted  hours  of  business  we 
hold  to  be  not  only  a  physical  and  social  wrong,  but  one  of  the  most  serious 
religious  evils  and  obstacles  that  exist  amongst  us.  One  of  the  most  important,  if 
not  the  most  important,  classes  of  society,  is  our  young  men  ;  and  one  of  the  most 
vital  points  for  the  welfare  of  the  Church,  and  the  conversion  of  the  world,  is  their 
efficient  religious  culture.  And  they  are  the  victims  of  this  social  evil.  The  great 
mass  of  them  utterly  cut  off  from  all  means  even  of  intellectual  improvement,  save 
during  the  jaded  hours  of  their  reduced  and  damaged  Sabbath.  {H.  AlloUy  D.D.) 
Alas,  alas  that  gre^t  city. — Is  England's  greatness  on  the  decline  ? — The  area  of  the 
earth  is  covered,  we  may  almost  say,  with  the  ruins  of  extinct  empires.  The 
empires  which  have  risen  upon  those  ruins  have  no  more  inherent  right  and  title  to 
perpetuity  than  their  predecessors  had.  The  debris  of  the  grandeur  of  Rome  are 
around  us  and  beneath  us,  even  as  we  sit  here.  If  the  greatness  of  Eome  collapsed 
and  fell,  why  not  England's  ?  The  life  of  a  nation  is  a  wonderful,  a  most  complex, 
and  a  most  subtle  thing.  First  of  all,  there  is  that  which  is  the  most  obvious  and 
patent  of  all — its  material  prosperity,  its  command  of  the  good  things  of  this  life. 
How  high  England  stands  amongst  the  nations  in  this  respect  we  all  know.  There 
is  no  question  as  to  her  being  the  wealthiest  nation  of  the  world.  Now  this  she 
might  be,  and  yet  the  wealth  might  be  so  concentrated  in  a  few  hands  as  to  add 
nothing  to  the  welfare  and  well-being  of  the  nation  regarded  as  a  whole.  In 
England,  however,  at  the  present  moment,  this  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  the  case. 
The  present  tendency  of  things  undoubtedly  is  towards  a  more  equal  distribution  of 
the  wealth  of  the  community.  The  general  rise  of  wages  has  had  the  effect  of 
diffusing  the  comforts  of  life  over  a  much  wider  area  than  formerly.  And  there  is 
nothing  as  yet  to  indicate  that  this  tendency  has  exhausted  itself,  or  is  likely  in  the 
near  future  to  run  in  the  contrary  direction.  The  words  from  which  we  set  out 
suggest  a  danger  of  a  different  kind — a  gradual  drying-up  of  the  springs  of 
industry  through  a  gradual  drying-up  of  the  profits  of  capital,  tending  to  a  transfer 
of  that  capital  to  other  countries  and  other  employments.  This,  however,  is  still 
only  a  possible  danger.  There  is  nothing  as  yet  to  show  that  any  such  dangerous 
reaction  has  decisively  set  in.  So  far,  then,  as  England's  greatness  depends  upon 
her  material  prosperity  there  is  nothing  as  yet  to  show  that  that  greatness  is  on  the 
decline.  But  then  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that  to  say  this  is  not  saying  very 
much.  "  With  thy  wisdom  and  with  thine  understanding,"  writes  Ezekiel  of  Tyre, 
in  language  which  might  be  transferred  without  the  alteration  of  a  single  letter  to 
the  case  of  England,  "thou  hast  gotten  thee  riches,  and  hast  gotten  gold  and 
silver  into  thy  treasuries :  by  thy  great  wisdom  and  by  thy  traffic  hast  thou 
increased  thy  riches,  and  thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  riches."  And  what 
then  ?  Is  all  this  wealth  in  the  prophet's  eye  any  pledge  of  permanent  greatness, 
any  guarantee  against  the  decline  of  that  greatness  ?  On  the  contrary,  the  prophet's 
last  word,  in  God's  name,  upon  Tyre  is  this :  "  Thou  hast  defiled  thy  sanctuaries 
by  the  iniquity  of  thy  traffic ;  therefore  will  I  bring  forth  a  fire  from  the  midst  of 
thee;  it  shall  devour  thee,"  &o.  Upon  the  whole,  then,  so  far  as  England's 
material  prosperity — its  wealth,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word — is  concerned, 
though  there  may  be  cause  for  anxiety,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  to  compel  alarm. 
We  may  pass,  then,  now  to  the  discussion  of  another  element  of  a  nation's  life, 
which  I  may  describe  as  the  intellectual  element.  In  the  case  of  England,  very 
little  needs  to  be  said  about  this ;  and  that  little  has  no  right  to  be  unhopeful  or  dis- 
couraging. The  education  of  the  masses  has  advanced  of  late  years,  and  still  con- 
tinues to  advance,  with  giant  strides ;  and,  however  it  may  have  been  or  may  still 
in  a  measure  be,  it  will  certainly  not  be  long  before  England  will  cease  to  be  liable 
to  the  reproach  of  being  backward  amongst  the  nations  in  the  race  of  intellectual 
culture.  But  what  about  those  moral  and  reUgious  elements  which  constitute,  far 
above  everything  else,  the  vital  forces  of  a  nation's  life  ?  What  about  these — these, 
which  are  indeed  that  •'  soul,"  by  which  alone,  according  to  the  poet's  most  true 
words,  "the  nations  "  can  be  "great  and  free"?  In  that  passage  which  I  have 
already  quoted  from  Ezekiel's  Book  there  is  a  phrase  which  is  not,  I  fear,  without 
its  sting  for  England  now,  as  for  Tyre  then:  "  The  iniquity  of  thy  traffick."  What 
the  special  iniquity  of  Tyre's  traffic  was,  it  is  impossible  at  this  distance  of  time,  and 
indeed  it  is  not  for  us,  to  say.  But  will  any  Englishman  dare  to  maintain  that 
there  is  not,  nor  has  been,  any  iniquity  in  the  traffic  of  England  ?  For  example,  is 
not  that  word  "business"  used  to  cover  a  multitude  of  practices  which,  if  carried 
beyond  the  circle  of  trade  and  commerce,  would  be  at  once  stigmatised,  in  plain 
English,  as  false,  counterfeit,  hypocritical?    And  will  it  be  urged  that  a  he  is  less 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

a  lie,  and  therefore  less  hurtful  and  demoralising  to  him  who  tells  it,  if  told  in  the 
counting-house,  or  behind  the  counter,  or  in  the  workshop  or  factory,  than  if  told  in 
the  domestic  or  social  circle,  or  in  the  common  intercourse  of  daily  life  ?  We  are 
discussing,  remember,  the  moral  and  religious  aspects  of  our  English  Ufe,  with  the 
object  of  ascertaining  whether  they  indicate  the  decay  of  our  national  greatness,  or 
not.  That  there  are  dangerous  symptoms  no  one  will  deny.  We  trace  them, 
unmistakably,  in  things  so  notorious  as  the  vast  dimensions  of  the  liquor  traffic — 
the  spread  of  secularism  and  unbelief — and  a  mass  of  misery  and  wretchedness, 
due  to  improvidence  and  vice  and  violation  of  the  sanctities  of  the  home  life.  But 
as  it  is  in  the  natural  body,  so  it  is  also  in  the  body  politick.  In  both  there  are 
forces  of  decay  and  dissolution  ever  at  work.  And  in  both  there  are  also  forces  of 
life  and  renovation  ever  at  work  until  the  actual  moment  of  death  supervenes. 
Indeed  the  life  of  the  natural  body  has  been  defined,  and  very  aptly  defined,  as 
"  the  sum  of  the  forces  by  which  we  resist  death."  When,  then,  we  would  forecast 
the  future,  and  shape  an  answer  to  the  question,  "  Is  England's  greatness  on  the 
decline?"  our  question  really  amounts  to  this,  "Which  set  of  forces  is  at  the 
present  moment  in  the  ascendant,  those  which  tend  to  national  decay  and  dis- 
solution, or  those  which  tend  to  national  life,  vigour,  and  health  ?  "  We  can  only 
say,  "  Thou  knowest.  Lord."  But  the  difficulty,  which  is  insuperable  speculatively, 
yields  at  a  touch  practically.  We  can,  at  any  rate,  one  and  all,  resolve  that  our 
lives  shall  be  flung  into  the  scale  in  which  are  the  forces  of  national  life  and 
strength,  and  not  into  the  opposite  scale.  First,  by  all  means  cultivate  your  minds  ; 
and  not  your  minds  only,  but  your  bodies  also.  Next,  by  all  means  cultivate  your 
citizen-liie  —your  life  as  members  of  this  great  and  noble  commonwealth  of 
England.  Last  of  all,  and  above  all,  cultivate,  with  the  utmost  diligence  and 
ardour,  your  home-life.  Do  everything  that  lies  in  your  power  for  the  comfort  and 
welfare  and  happiness  of  your  wives  and  children.  And  into  your  whole  life — as 
men,  as  citizens,  as  husbands  and  fathers — let  me  beseech  you  ever  to  carry  the 
thought  of  God,  and  an  earnest  desire  and  a  loyal  resolve  to  do  His  will.  {Canon 
D.  J.  Vaughan.) 

Vers.  21-24.  A  mighty  angel  took  up  a  stone. — A  great  millstone : — Observe 
liere — 1.  Babylon's  utter  destruction  represented  by  the  type  and  sign  of  a  millstone 
cast  into  the  sea :  like  a  miUstone  she  had  ground  and  oppressed  the  Church  of 
God ;  and  now,  like  a  millstone  thrown  into  the  sea,  she  sinks  into  the  pit  of 
destruction.  Almighty  God,  by  this  symbol,  signified  to  St.  John  that  Babylon's 
ruin  should  be  violent,  irrecoverable,  and  irreparable ;  she  falls  never  to  rise  more. 
The  casting  of  a  stone  into  the  sea  was  anciently  the  emblem  of  everlasting  forget- 
fulness.  2.  The  amplification  of  Babylon's  ruin  particularised  in  several  instances. 
(1)  That  nothing  should  ever  more  be  found  in  her  that  belonged  to  pleasure  or 
delight;  no  voice  of  harpers,  musicians,  or  trumpeters.  (2)  Nothing  which 
belonged  to  profit  or  trading,  no  artificers  and  craftsmen.  (3)  Nothing  belonging  to 
food,  no  noise  of  a  millstone  for  grinding  corn  and  making  provision  for  bread.  (4) 
Nothing  to  relieve  against  the  darkness  and  terror  of  the  night,  as  the  light  of  a 
candle.  (5)  No  means  for  the  propagation  of  mankind  by  marriage — the  voice  of 
the  bride  and  the  bridegroom  shall  be  heard  no  more.  All  which  expressions  do 
imply  extreme  destruction  and  utter  desolation,  intimating  that  Babylon  shall  be  a 
place  utterly  abandoned  and  forsaken.  3.  A  threefold  cause  assigned  for  all  this, 
to  wit — (1)  Damnable  covetousness :  her  merchants  were  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth.  Her  sinful  way  of  merchandising,  by  dealing  in  spiritual  commodities, 
seems  here  to  be  pointed  at ;  her  making  merchandise  of  the  souls  of  men,  as  we 
have  it  (ver.  13).  (2)  Her  bewitching  idolatry,  called  here  sorceries,  whereby  she 
enticed  people  to  join  with  her  in  her  superstitious  worship.  (3)  Her  cruelty  and 
bloodshed  ;  in  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of  all  that 
were  slain  upon  the  earth.  But  how  can  the  blood  shed  by  others  be  laid  to  her 
charge  ?  1.  Because  the  doctrines  which  caused  their  blood  to  be  shed  were  with 
her.  2.  Because  her  jurisdiction  gave  commission  to  slay  the  saints  which  were 
slain  in  other  kingdoms.  3.  Because  by  the  influence  of  her  example  at  home 
much  blood  had  been  shed  abroad.  God  wiU  charge  upon  others,  as  he  did  upon 
Babylon,  not  only  the  sin  which  they  have  acted,  but  all  the  sins  which  they  have 
been  accessary  unto.  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Moral  evil  symbolised : — I.  A  sym- 
bolisation  of  its  kature.  If  you  want  to  see  sin,  or  moral  evil,  in  all  its  hideous 
aspects,  in  aU  its  infernal  operations,  in  all  its  damning  consequences,  study  the 
great  city  of  Babylon.     The  great  city  Babylon  is  in  every  unrenewed  soul.    11.  A 


CHAP,  XIX.]  REVELATION.  641 

symbolisation  of  its  overthrow.  The  moral  evil  of  the  world  is  to  be  destroyed ;  it 
is  not  to  exist  for  ever.  1.  It  is  to  be  overthrown  by  superhuman  agency.  "  A 
mighty  angel " ;  a  messenger  from  heaven.  Was  not  Christ  a  mighty  Messenger 
sent  from  heaven  for  this  purpose?  Yes,  He  came  to  "destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil."  It  has  been  said  that  good  alone  can  overcome  evil.  True,  but  it  must  be 
good  in  a  supernatural  form,  and  in  this  form  the  gospel  brings  us  the  good.  2.  It 
is  to  be  overthrown  in  such  a  way  as  never  to  appear  again.  Babylon  is  thrown  like 
a  great  millstone  into  the  sea.  As  Pharaoh  sank  like  lead  in  the  mighty  waters, 
and  rose  no  more  to  life,  so  shall  moral  evil,  like  a  "  mighty  millstone,"  fall  into 
the  fathomless  abysses  of  eternal  ruin.     {Homilist.) 


CHAPTEE  XIX. 


Vers.  1-8.  AUeluia;  Salvation  .  .  .  unto  the  Lord  our  Ctod. — The  Eternal  in  the 
universe,  and  His  representative  to  man : — I.  A  symbolic  aspect  of  the  Eternal  in 
THE  UNIVERSE.  He  appears  here  as  receiving  the  highest  worship.  1.  The  worship 
was  widely  extensive.  Worship  is  the  vital  breath  and  inspiration  of  aU  holy 
intelligences.  On  the  Eternal  their  eyes  are  fixed  with  supreme  adoration,  and  their 
hearts  with  intensest  love  turned  in  impressive  devotion.  2.  The  worship  was 
supremely  deserved.  (1)  He  is  absolutely  true  and  righteous  in  Himself.  (2)  He 
is  true  and  righteous  in  His  procedure  against  the  wrong.  3.  The  worship  was 
intensely  enthusiastic.  The  "  Alleluias  "  seem  to  wax  louder  and  louder  as  they  are 
repeated,  until  they  become  as  "  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of 
mighty  thunderings."  H.  A  symbolic  aspect  of  the  Eternal  in  His  representa- 
tive TO  MAN.  1.  The  loving  husband  of  the  true.  (1)  Mutual  choice.  (2)  Mutual 
sympathy.  (3)  A  mutual  aim.  2.  The  triumphant  conqueror  of  the  wrong.  (1) 
The  instrumentality  He  employs,  and  the  titles  He  inherits.  (2)  The  aspect  He 
wears,  and  the  followers  He  commands.  (3)  The  course  He  pursues,  and  the  great- 
ness of  His  supremacy.  (4)  The  war  He  wages,  and  the  victories  He  achieves. 
{D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  godly — their  work  and  their  praises  : — I.  The  charac- 
teristic GIVEN  OF  THE  SAINTS.  1.  They  are  a  people,  the  people  of  God,  and  grace 
has  made  them  so.  2.  The  saints  are  represented  as  "  much  people,"  a  multitude 
which  no  man  can  number.     (1)  They  consist  of  some  of  all  ages  of  the  world. 

(2)  Some  of  all  nations.  (3)  They  will  be  found  among  some  of  every  sect  and 
party.  (4)  The  number  of  the  redeemed  includes  persons  of  all  ranks  and  condi- 
tions in  life,  and  possessing  every  variety  of  talent  and  disposition ;  the  young  and 
the  old,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  most  renowned  monarchs,  and  the  most  abject 
slaves,  n.  The  work  in  which  the  saints  in  heaven  are  employed.  1.  It  was  "a 
great  voice  "  which  the  apostle  heard  in  heaven,  and  may  be  so  denominated 
on  three  accounts.  (1)  It  was  exceeding  loud,  like  that  which  John  heard  in 
another  vision,  as  the  sound  of  many  waters,  or  as  when  seven  thunders  utter  their 
voices.  (2)  It  was  a  great  voice  in  regard  to  the  subject  or  occasion  of  it,  for 
it  related  to  a  great  salvation  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  great  destruction  on  the  other. 

(3)  It  was  a  great  voice  in  reference  to  the  numbers  who  joined  in  it,  a  uniform  and 
melodious  voice  from  aU  that  were  round  about  the  throne.  2.  The  great  voice  of 
much  people  in  heaven  cried  "  Hallelujah."  This  may  teach  us — (1)  That  it 
becomes  the  people  of  God  to  be  joyful :  praise  is  comely  for  the  upright,  however 
unseemly  it  may  be  in  the  lips  of  a  deceiver.  (2)  That  our  joy  must  not  terminate 
in  ourselves.    (3)  That  our  praises  must  not  terminate  in  any  creature  like  ourselves. 

(4)  Our  praises  must  all  centre  in  God,  in  the  excellences  of  the  Divine  nature. 
ni.  The  subject  matter  of  the  song  of  the  redeemed.  1.  Observe,  after  the 
general  shout  of  "  hallelujah,"  they  ascribe  "  salvation  "  unto  the  Lord  our  God. 

2.  They  ascribe  "  glory  and  honour  "  unto  the  Lord  our  God.  Glory  is  the  highest 
degree  of  honour,  and  is  more  immediately  appropriated  to  the  Supreme  Being,  to 
whom  alone  the  highest  praise  is  due,  and  who  will  not  give  His  glory  to  another. 

3.  The  ascription  of  "power,"  as  well  as  honour  and  glory,  makes  a  part  of  the  song 
of  the  redeemed.  Power  implies  ability  or  strength,  and  when  predicated  of 
the  Supreme  Being  it  denotes  His  almightiness  and  all-sufficiency,  by  which  He 
is  able  to  do  all  things.  4.  All  this  glory  is  ascribed  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  as  what 
properly  belongs  to  Him.    Salvation  and  glory,  and  honour  and  power,  are  Hia 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

exclusively,  and  in  the  most  eminent  degree.  Improvement.  1.  How  dreadful 
is  the  sin  of  ingratitude,  especially  towards  our  best  and  only  Benefactor.  2.  The 
exultations  of  the  saints  in  glory  may  teach  us  how  unseemly  are  the  idle  songs  and 
profane  mirth  of  carnal  men,  and  how  utterly  inconsistent  everything  of  this  kind 
is  with  the  profession  of  Christianity.  3.  The  spirit  and  employment  of  the 
redeemed  and  glorified,  may  serve  as  a  criterion  of  true  religion,  by  which  we  may 
judge  whether  we  are  made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light.  4.  A  gracious  heart  would  have  all  that  is  glorious  ascribed  to  God,  and  to 
Him  alone  ;  and  not  only  the  glory  of  salvation  in  general,  but  of  his  own  salvation 
in  particular.  5.  Let  mourning  saints  take  comfort,  from  a  view  of  the  blessedness 
of  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.  Those  who  now  hang  their  harps  upon  the 
willows,  saying,  "How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land?"  shall  shortly 
have  their  hearts  attuned  to  joy  and  praise,  when  like  Judah  they  return  from  their 
captivity.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Amen ;  Alleluia. — Amen ;  Alleluia : — I.  We  have 
in  these  two  words  (which  sum  up  and  condense  the  whole  spirit  and  tenour  of  the 
adoration  of  the  saints  in  bliss)  a  marvellous  simplicity  of  perfected  intelligence, 
blending  in  one  eternity  of  love  and  infinity  of  thought.  It  would  not  be  heaven  if 
either  of  these  words  were  wanting ;  it  must  be  heaven  where  both  are  felt.  For 
what  is  Amen  ?  The  perfect  receiving  of  every  dispensation  from  God.  And  what 
is  Alleluia  ?  The  perfect  giving  back  of  all  praise  in  every  dispensation  to  the  bosom 
of  God.  Amen  is  the  open  breast  to  receive  ;  Alleluia  is  the  full  heart  to  return  the 
ray  :  for  Amen  gathers  all,  and  Alleluia  reflects  all :  Amen  sits  still  and  endures  ; 
but  Alleluia  soars  away  in  praise.  The  one  sets  to  its  seal  that  God  is  true ;  but  the 
other  encircles  the  confession  with  a  crown  of  glory  :  and  the  passing  and  repassing 
of  their  crossing  rays  is  heaven.  But  let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  each  component 
part  in  the  whole,  which  is  not  to  be  divided.  1.  Amen  is  nothing  else  but 
the  ratification  of  another's  will.  Thus  Christ,  being  the  ratification,  in  the  counsels 
of  the  adorable  Trinity,  of  His  Father's  will,  and  perfectly  performing  it,  is  called 
the  true  '•  Amen."  The  promises  of  our  redemption  in  God  are  said  to  be  "Yea  and 
Amen."  God  Himself  is  called  in  Isaiah  the  "  God  of  Truth,"  or  (in  the  original) 
the  "  God  of  Amen."  Thus  man's  truth  comes  from  God's  truth.  They  who  desire 
to  say  a  full  Amen  in  prayer,  must  thereby  understand  that  they  not  only  ask 
or  appropriate  to  themselves  all  that  the  mouth  of  the  interceding  priest  or  of  the 
petitioner  desires;  but  far  more  than  this;  that  there  may  be  on  all  points 
agreement  between  their  mind  and  the  mind  of  God;  that  whether  the  prayer 
be  granted  or  denied,  they  may  equally  subscribe  with  the  heart,  and  say  "  Amen," 
and  desire  that  all  the  mind  of  God,  expressed  or  unexpressed,  may  be  fulfilled  in 
them.  This  is  indeed  to  say  "  Amen."  And  who  can  estimate  the  peace  of  a  mind 
thus  at  one  with  God,  which  should  never  turn  over  a  leaf  of  time  before  subscribing 
an  Amen  to  the  last?  Would  you  gain  such  a  mind?  You  must  recognise 
the  ever-present  care  of  God.  You  must  seek  to  acquaint  yourself  with  Him  whom 
you  seek  to  obey.  You  must  not  only  connect  the  event  with  God,  and  God  with 
love  ;  but  you  must  connect  God  and  all  events  in  one  great  scheme,  of  which  you 
see  only  the  outline :  you  must  look  on  to  the  grand  result  of  all  this  complicated 
work  :  you  must  live  much  in  the  distant  future ;  and  there — not  in  this  preparatory 
scene,  but  in  that  grand  development — must  learn  to  ponder  reverently  on  the 
being,  the  character,  the  design  of  God,  till  you  are  able  to  bring  back  with  you  to 
this  lower  world  your  firm  Amen.  2.  Now  consider  the  word  '•  Alleluia."  It  is 
one  which,  in  the  letter,  is  found  only  in  this  chapter,  where  it  is  several  times 
repeated  as  the  native  language  of  heaven.  But  that  it  is  known  too  upon  earth, 
David  shows  :  for  in  all  those  Psalms  which  begin  "  Praise  the  Lord,"  the  word  is 
"Alleluia";  yet,  doubtless,  we  shall  pronounce  it  as  a  foreign  word,  till  we 
have  learnt  the  accents  of  our  home.  Still,  even  upon  earth,  we  can  associate  and 
connect  it  with  our  nearest  approaches  to  the  future  bliss.  It  is  when  no  cloud  comes 
in  between  to  obscure  the  light  of  God's  countenance ;  it  is  when  we  read  Him 
in  His  full  and  overflowing  mercy ;  it  is  when  we  kneel  in  lowly  adoration  at  the 
altar,  and  the  Lord  whom  we  seek  comes  to  His  temple ;  it  is  when  we  most  feel,  as 
then,  "This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever,"  that  Alleluia,  unprompted 
and  untaught,  is  wont  to  flow.  Had  we  to  define  Alleluia  as  it  regards  God, 
we  should  say  it  is  admiration  of  God,  affection  to  Him,  joy  in  Him.  Had  we  to 
define  it  as  regards  man,  we  should  call  it  a  present  bliss,  the  earnest  of  a 
bliss  future,  and  deeper  still.  II.  It  is  not  needful  to  consider  whether  of  the  two  is 
the  sweeter  sound,  the  Amen  or  the  Alleluia.  Let  us  not  so  love  the  one  as  to  forget 
the  other.      Sometimes  the  thought  of  past  mercies  will  give  us  preparation. 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  543 

of  'heart,  and  the  Amen  will  grow  up  out  of  the  Alleluia.  Sometimes 
trial  itself  will  lead  us  into  the  experience  of  such  deep  and  blessed 
comfort,  that  our  Amen  will  pass  gradually  from  acquiescence  into  Eucharist. 
The  more  we  join  the  two,  the  deeper  our  portion  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
the  nearer  our  approach  to  the  worship  of  redeemed  souls.  {J.  S.  Bartlett,  M.A.) 
Praise  our  God,  all  ye  His  servants. — Praise  to  God  from  all  saints  : — Consider 
what  God  is ;  how  infinitely  above  the  highest  angels ;  the  only  Fountain 
of  goodness  and  life  and  immortality,  and  whatsoever  is  blessed  and  glorious 
either  in  heaven  or  in  earth.  Consider  again  what  we  are — mortal,  sinful, 
unworthy  creatures.  Does  it  not  almost  seem  as  if  we  might  well  be  afraid 
to  praise  Him?  But  Almighty  God,  by  His  infinite  condescension  in  Holy 
Scripture,  encourages  us  not  to  keep  silence.  He  declares  Himself  ready  to 
accept  our  praise  and  thanksgiving  as  a  sacrifice  of  a  freewill  offering.  Here  in 
the  text  we  find  His  approbation  yielded,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  to  the  duty 
and  blessing  of  praising  Him,  as  it  has  been  understood  and  practised  from  the 
beginning  by  all  saints.  "  A  voice  came  out  of  the  throne,  saying.  Praise  our  God, 
all  ye  His  servants,  and  ye  that  fear  Him,  both  small  and  great."  What  voice  was 
that  ?  It  was  the  voice  of  God,  for  it  came  out  of  the  throne ;  out  of  the  un- 
approachable glory,  where  none  but  God  was.  It  was  the  voice  of  the  Lamb  of 
God,  of  Him  who  is  set  down  in  glory  on  His  Father's  right  hand,  having  been 
slain,  and  redeemed  us  to  God  by  His  blood.  We  know  it  is  His  voice  from  the 
manner  in  which  He  speaks:  "Praise  our  God,  all  ye  His  servants";  not  your 
God  only,  but  our  God.  "  I  ascend,"  He  said,  "  unto  My  Father  and  your  Father, 
and  unto  My  God  and  your  God."  In  hke  manner,  here  at  the  very  end  of  the 
New  Testament,  He  speaks  from  His  everlasting  throne  to  the  whole  Church,  now 
represented  as  triumphing  over  her  enemies,  and  makes  Himself  one,  in  the  work 
of  praising  God,  with  all  God's  servants,  and  all  who  fear  Him,  of  all  sorts  and 
degrees,  •'  both  small  and  great."  "Praise  our  God,  all  ye  His  servants,"  says  that 
gracious  but  awful  voice.  His  servants  only  are  privileged  to  praise  Him  ;  that  is, 
as  we  should  call  them,  His  slaves ;  those  who  have  given  themselves  up  to  Him 
entirely ;  who  try  to  have  no  will  but  His ;  who  give  up  what  else  would  please 
them  best  when  they  understand  it  to  be  displeasing  to  Him,  and  take  joyfully 
affliction,  labour,  self-denial,  when  He  lays  it  upon  them,  and  would  prepare  them 
thereby  for  His  heavenly  kingdom.  Nor  let  any  one  Christian  draw  back  in 
indolence  or  timidity,  as  if  he,  for  one,  had  no  part  in  this  merciful  invitation  of 
our  Saviour.  Observe  with  what  encouraging  words  He  concludes  it :  •*  Praise  our 
God  all  ye  His  servants,  and  ye  that  fear  Him,  both  small  and  great."  Fearing 
God  is  the  great  thing;  and  they  who  have  that  in  their  hearts,  how  unequsS 
soever  in  other  respects,  may  come  here  with  aU  saints  and  unite  in  praising  Him. 
In  this  place,  if  nowhere  else,  all  ranks  and  degrees  are  equal.  {Plain  Sermons  by 
Contributors  to  the  Tracts  for  the  Times.)  The  voice  of  a  g^reat  multitude. — 
Common  prayer : — I  wish  to  speak  to  you  about  our  Church  services.  I  wish  to  ask 
you  to  help  me  in  making  them  different  from  what  they  now  are.  There  is  a  coldness 
and  a  hfelessness  about  our  services  which  to  my  mind  is  very  painful.  When  we 
meet  together  in  God's  house  we  come  especially  to  pray.  And  if  we  come  to  pray, 
we  come  to  present  ourselves  before  God.  The  very  idea  of  prayer  and  of  all 
worship  implies  at  once  that  we  are  entering  into  God's  presence.  1.  Now,  first,  if 
God  is  in  the  midst  of  us  the  thought  will  teach  us  reverence.  2.  And  one  word 
about  inattention  and  wandering  thoughts  before  I  go  on.  It  is  a  great  grief  to 
many  a  worshipper,  and  it  comes  even  to  the  best.  But  you  are  not  without  a 
remedy.  Besides  your  prayers  for  grace  to  resist  these  wanderings  of  eye  and 
thought,  I  beheve  the  best  help  will  be  to  use  the  Prayer-book  more,  and  to  keep 
the  eye  more  fixed  on  the  page.  You  are  less  likely  to  think  of  other  things  when 
you  are  following  the  words.  3.  But  there  is  another  help,  which  perhaps  is 
more  effectual  still,  that  you  should  take  your  proper  part  in  the  services  of  the 
Church.  And  it  is  especially  of  this,  the  responding  aloud,  the  joining  in  the  common 
worship  of  Almighty  God,  that  I  wish  to  speak.  In  the  early  days  of  the  Church 
we  read  of  the  worshippers  joining  so  heartily  in  the  prayers  that  their  responses, 
we  are  told,  sounded  like  thunder,  or  like  the  roar  of  waters.  And  still,  in  our 
own  day,  when  our  missionaries  come  back  to  England,  they  almost  invariably 
speak  with  pain  of  the  coldness  of  our  English  worship.  Among  their  own  people, 
among  the  converts  whom  they  have  gathered  round  them,  there  is  an  intelligent 
taking  part  in  the  services ;  aU  responding  where  the  responses  are  to  be  made, 
and  all  repeating  the  "  Amen"  at  the  end  of  the  prayers.    It  is  to  oar  great  loss 


544  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

that  we  fail  in  this.  It  is  a  mighty  power,  that  power  of  sympathy.  It  helps  to 
keep  up  our  own  flagging  attention.  It  helps  to  increase  our  own  devotions  to  find 
that  others  are  praying  at  our  side,  following  the  words,  and  joining  in  the  service. 
It  moves  and  quickens  the  heart  to  feel  that  your  voice  is  blending  with  the  voice 
of  others,  that  your  petitions  are  going  up,  not  singly,  but  united  with  other 
prayers,  to  the  throne  of  grace.  And  surely  in  that  stronger  enthusiasm  there  was 
a  sense  of  God's  presence :  a  real  honest  belief  that  He  was  near  to  bless,  because 
His  blessing  was  really  desired.  The  real  dignity  and  power  of  the  service  of  our 
Church  will  not  be  understood  till  you  have  learned  its  congregational  character, 
till  you  have  come  to  understand  how  grand  is  the  effect  of  a  great  multitude  of 
voices  uniting  in  praise  together,  or  together  imploring  God's  pardon  and  grace ; 
each  encouraging  the  other,  and  so  each  contributing  to  the  noble  tribute  of 
worship,  which  ascends  like  sweet  incense  before  God's  throne  from  a  Christian 
congregation  met  together  in  His  name.  And  in  this  way,  also,  you  will  be 
approaching  nearer  to  the  service  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven.  We  read  in  the 
Kevelation  of  St.  John  of  the  great  company  of  aU  nations  and  kindreds,  and 
people  and  tongues,  standing  around  the  throne.  And  out  of  the  throne  there 
came  forth  a  voice,  calUng  all  that  mighty  host  to  praise  their  God.  And  we 
are  to  do  our  part  in  fulfilling  the  vision  of  the  apostle,  when  he  heard  "  every 
creature  which  is  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth,"  c&c.  (Canon  Nevill.)  Alleluia :  for  the 
Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth. — The  hymn  of  the  reign  of  God : — This  hymn 
is  sung  after  the  destruction  of  Babylon.  They  sang  with  no  diffident  breast.  It 
was  a  great  voice  breaking  forth  into  syllables  distinct  and  strong.  They  sang  of 
the  reign  of  God.  At  last  the  yearned-for  result  has  been  attained.  "  The  Lord 
God  Omnipotent  reigneth."  I.  It  is  the  true  interpretation  of  worldliness. 
The  name  of  the  world  is  applied  in  Scripture  to  two  facts — one  is  transience,  the 
other  is  godlessness.  Because  it  is  passing  away  we  are  warned  against  loving  the 
world :  but  we  are  told  how  transience  may  degenerate,  and  the  feeling  of  in- 
security infect  the  whole  character,  because  "  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love 
of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  This  is  a  natural  sequence ;  for  the  affection 
towards  the  trivial  and  passing  destroys  affection  towards  the  great  and  abiding. 
It  is  a  contradiction  of  our  nature  too  ;  and  any  such  contradiction,  any  continued 
violafon  of  a  natural  law  in  the  moral  world,  means  weakness  and  disease.  What 
else  could  come  to  that  great  world-city  of  Babylon?  Her  delicious  living  and 
extravagance,  her  selfishness  and  impurity,  could  find  in  all  the  universe  but  one 
goal.  Nor  can  it  be  otherwise.  For  nations,  for  cities,  and  for  men,  there  is  the 
one  law  unchangeable  and  irrevocable.  The  worldly  mind,  the  fleshly,  sensuous 
mind,  is  decay  and  death.  Selfishness  can  only  destroy  self ;  luxury  but  ruin 
comfort,  and  passion  but  annihilate  pleasure.  II.  It  teaches  us  that  faith  and 
holiness  are  never  alone.  It  was  as  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude — a  voice  of 
thunder — a  voice  of  many  waters.  The  young  Christian  thinks  he  stands  some- 
times absolutely  by  himself.  In  the  counting-house,  the  school,  the  shop,  he  finds 
none  to  stand  with  him.  There  is  not  a  voice  to  utter  anything  in  harmony  with 
what  his  heart  most  dearly  loves.  All  have  gone  after  their  Baal,  and  the  danger 
is  that  he  rolls  himself  within  his  own  loneliness,  and  shrinking  back  becomes 
morbid  and  unhappy.  But  all  the  while  others,  under  perhaps  the  colour  of  some 
worldly  cant,  are  longing  as  he  has  longed.  The  same  thoughts  have  filled  their 
minds ;  the  same  fears  have  held  their  hearts.  Had  any  of  them  the  courage  to 
speak  out  his  own  thoughts,  had  the  voice  been  strong  and  his  heart  brave,  he 
would  instantly  have  won  companions  and  friends.  III.  It  shows  us  the  nature 
OF  TRUE  progress.  The  first  step  therein  is  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb.  (W.  M. 
Johnston,  M.A.)  The  reign  of  the  Lord  a  source  of  consolation  : — I.  He  reigneth 
THROUGH  THE  EXERCISE  OF  His  PROVIDENCE.  When  we  speak  of  the  providence  of 
God,  we  speak  of  the  exercise  of  His  perfections,  of  His  power  and  wisdom  and 
goodness,  co-operating  for  the  direction  of  the  universe.  We  say  that  He  is  every- 
where present,  and  superintends  whatever  happens  here  below  ;  that  all  things  are 
the  result,  not  of  unmeaning  chance  or  relentless  fate,  but  of  the  purpose  and 
pleasure  of  God.  We  say  that  all  dispensations,  whether  great  or  smaU,  prosperous 
or  adverse,  are  entirely  to  be  explained  on  the  supposition  of  the  present  as  an 
arrangement  of  things  of  which  we  are  enjoined  to  confide  in  the  equity  of  the 
end,  though  neither  our  diligence  nor  sagacity  can  always  discover  the  fairness 
of  the  means.  We  say  that  He  exercises  a  moral  government  over  His  rational 
creation ;  that  angels  and  archangels  fulfil  His  pleasure  ;  that  the  spirits  of  dark- 
ness are  under  His  control,  and  that  we  ourselves  are,  in  an  especial  manner,  the 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  545 

subjects  of  His  administration  ;  that  by  Him  our  very  thoughts  are  observed ;  the 
circumstances  of  our  condition  arranged,  and  watched,  as  it  were,  with  the  vigilance 
of  individual  attention.  We  say,  in  short,  that  the  world,  instead  of  being  a 
kingdom  deprived  of  its  head,  abandoned  to  be  the  victim  of  the  lawless  passions 
of  its  inhabitants,  and  to  suffer  all  the  vicissitudes  of  degradation  and  advancement, 
is  under  the  direction  of  Him  to  whom  not  merely  its  interests  are  known,  but  by 
whom  they  are  also  secured.  It  is  interesting  to  trace  the  workings  of  a  pious 
character  that  has  taken  much  of  its  form,  and  that  is  advancing  towards  its 
maturity,  under  the  strong  operation  of  this  consolatory  truth.  Even  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  events,  when  others  see  things  going  on  only  as  they  did  since 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  he  discerns  an  Intelligent  Keality,  silently,  but  success- 
fully, supporting  an  infinite  charge  of  dependent  beings,  and  not  the  less  every- 
where present,  hidden  though  His  glory  be  beneath  the  curtains  of  the  material 
world.  Amid  the  uncertainty  of  surrounding  events,  amid  the  fluctuation  of  his 
hopes  and  fears,  he  feels  that  he  need  not  be  afraid ;  for  this  Providence,  as  the 
Providence  of  One  incomprehensibly  excellent  in  all  perfection,  has  in  it  every 
quality  which  can  recommend  and  endear  it — every  quality  which  can  brighten 
even  the  darkest  appearances — everything  which  tends  not  only  to  secure  the 
submission,  but  also  to  engage  the  affections  of  the  heart.  He  can  look  upon  the 
present  and  enjoy  the  plenitude  of  the  passing  moment,  because  he  knows  by 
whom  every  moment,  and  all  the  events  of  every  moment,  are  dealt  out  to  him ; 
and  upon  the  faith  which  he  reposes  on  this  Providence  is  he  wilUng  to  make  the 
great  experiment  of  futurity — ready  to  go  wherever  He  will  transmit  him,  satisfied 
that  everywhere,  in  height  and  depth,  in  time  and  eternity.  He  will  be  his  portion 
for  ever.  H.  He  reigneth  through  the  mediation  of  His  Son.  In  appointing 
the  Son  to  act  as  mediator  between  Himself  and  us,  God  did  ordain  certain 
ofl&ces  for  Him  to  execute  and  certain  characters  for  Him  to  assume  ere  the 
purposes  of  His  mediation  could  be  accomplished.  He  commissioned  Him  as 
a  teacher  to  instruct  us  in  the  knowledge,  and  to  reveal  to  us  the  will  of  God — 
to  republish  that  law  of  nature  which  the  fall  had  obscured — to  dispel  those 
apprehensions  of  futurity  which  our  ignorance  and  guilt  had  engendered.  He 
gave  Him  up  as  a  sacrifice  to  make  atonement  for  our  guilt  as  weU  as  to  dispel 
our  ignorance.  He  has  established  Him  as  a  lawgiver  to  subdue  our  stubborn 
wills,  and  to  bring  them  into  His  holy  captivity ;  to  make  them  obedient  in  word 
and  deed ;  to  fashion  our  lives  after  the  rules  He  lays  down ;  and  to  mould  our 
hearts  to  the  sway  which  it  is  given  Him  to  exercise.  He  has  revealed  Him  as 
an  advocate,  as  our  ever  successful  intercessor  within  the  veil,  pleading  for  the 
pardon  of  our  sins,  for  the  supply  of  our  wants,  for  the  strengthening  of  our 
faith.  And,  finally.  He  has  exhibited  Him  as  a  model  for  us  to  admire,  a  character 
for  us  to  resemble,  a  pattern  which  we  are  called  upon  industriously  to  copy,  that 
upon  the  table  of  our  hearts  we  may  inscribe  those  graces  and  those  affections 
and  those  virtues  which  animated  and  which  distinguished  His ;  and  that,  striving 
to  walk  even  as  He  did  walk,  we  may,  by  the  zeal  with  which  we  seek  to  imitate 
Him,  and  the  prayers  we  put  forth  that  we  may  imitate  Him  with  success, 
endeavour  to  be  in  all  our  conversation  and  in  all  our  practice  the  images  and  the 
representatives  of  what  He  was  during  all  the  days  of  His  earthly  manifestation. 
And  from  this  view  of  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  slight  and  superficial  though 
it  be,  it  must  be  evident  that  the  government  which  the  Divine  Being  doth  maintain 
by  means  of  it,  is  a  government  which  is  adapted  to  all  the  varieties  of  its  subjects. 
What  are  all  the  means  of  grace  which  we  receive — what  are  they  but  just  so 
many  ways  in  which  this  government  takes  effect  ?  What  is  the  removal  of  our 
ignorance — what  is  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins — what  is  the  subjection  of  our 
rebellious  wills,  and  the  improvement  of  our  own  characters  in  excellence  and 
perfection — what  are  those  spiritual  changes  when  they  are  effected  and  brought 
about  upon  us,  but  each  a  separate  field  in  which  its  influence  has  been  displayed  ? 
m.  He  reigneth  through  the  means  of  grace  and  the  ordinances  of  His 
APPOINTMENT.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  God  might  reveal  all  the  essential  truths 
of  the  gospel  by  a  direct  and  immediate  process  to  any  man — that  inward  devotion 
might  be  excited  and  expressed  without  the  agency  of  outward  acts — that  did  it 
but  seem  good  in  His  sight  He  could  produce  the  change  which  is  necessary  to 
be  produced  upon  our  hearts  and  affections  without  the  intervention  of  means. 
But  though  this  might  be  the  case,  and  sometimes  is  the  case,  we  have  no  warrant 
for  expecting  that  it  ever  will  be  the  case.  Such  a  mode  of  procedure  forms  no 
part  of  His  ordinary  providence.     We  have  no  ground  for  anticipating  that  His 

35 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

saving  impressions  will  descend  upon  us,  except  in  the  use  and  through  the 
channels  of  the  appointed  means  of  grace.  Now  if  we  reflect  on  the  object  which 
those  ordinances  have  directly  in  view,  on  the  preparation  which  is  necessary  for 
their  right  observance,  and  upon  that  spiritual  good  which  they  actually  do  produce, 
in  respect  both  of  the  instruction  they  communicate  and  the  impression  which 
they  make  in  the  case  of  all  who  sincerely  observe  them,  we  may  have  some 
conception  of  that  reign  or  influence  which,  through  these  means,  the  Almighty 
doth  exercise.  IV.  He  reigneth  through  the  agency  of  affliction.  {John  Paul.) 
Divine  Providence : — I.  The  wide  extent  of  Jehovah's  government.  1.  With 
respect  to  holy  and  happy  angels  in  heaven.  2.  Over  the  powers  of  darkness — 
restraining  their  malignity,  bounding  their  furious  rage,  and  turning  all  their 
stratagems  into  artillery  against  themselves.  3.  Over  the  children  of  men  on  earth. 
II.  The  ESSENTiAii  properties  of  His  providential  administration  towards  man- 
kind IN  general,  and  to  His  own  renewed  adopted  children  in  particular.  The 
word  '•  providence  "  suggests  two  ideas  intimately  connected  together,  namely,  pre- 
servation and  government.  1.  In  His  dispensations  our  God  acts  as  an  independent 
sovereign,  carrying  into  certain  accomplishment  the  purposes  He  has  formed,  and 
fulfilling  them  in  His  own  way  and  at  His  own  time.  2.  Another  property  of  the 
Divine  administration  is  its  perfect  rectitude  and  purity  :  "  The  Lord  is  righteous 
in  all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His  works."  3.  The  dispensations  of  Providence 
in  this  world  are  all  subservient  to  the  enlargement  of  the  glorious  Eedeemer's 
kingdom  in  the  world.  Lessons :  1.  Doth  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reign  ?  and 
are  you  the  subjects  of  His  providential  kingdom  ?  Then  be  it  your  care  to  think, 
and  speak,  and  act,  as  becomes  His  creatures;  as  the  dependent  pensioners  on  His 
bounty,  and  as  the  dutiful  subjects  of  His  administration.  2.  While  praising  the  Lord 
God  omnipotent  for  all  the  comforts  of  life  you  hitherto  have  enjoyed,  entrust  also 
to  Him  all  your  future  interests;  for  He  justly  claims  the  right  of  imparting 
mercies  in  His  own  time  and  manner.  3.  Is  there  a  kingdom  of  grace  on  earth, 
as  well  as  a  kingdom  of  providence?  Then  be  it  your  highest  concern 
to  know  if  you  are  the  real  subjects  of  this  spiritual  kingdom.  {A.  Bonar.) 
The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come. — The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  : — I.  The  ante- 
cedents OF  this  marriage.  What  will  happen  before  the  public  marriage  is 
celebrated?  1.  One  great  event  will  be  the  destruction  of  the  harlot  church. 
Everything  which  sets  up  itself  in  opposition  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  to  be 
hurled  down,  and  made  to  sink  like  a  millstone  in  the  flood.  2.  Furthermore,  in 
the  immediate  connection,  we  note  that  before  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  there 
was  a  peculiar  voice.  Bead  the  fifth  verse :  "  And  a  voice  came."  Where  from  ? 
"A  voice  came  out  of  the  throne."  The  Mediator,  God-and-man  in  one  person, 
was  on  the  throne  as  a  Lamb,  and  He  announced  the  day  of  His  own  marriage. 
Who  should  do  it  but  He?  3.  The  voice  from  the  throne  is  a  very  remarkable  one; 
for  it  shows  how  near  akin  the  exalted  Christ  is  to  His  people.  He  saith  to  all  the 
redeemed,  "Praise  our  God,  all  ye  His  servants."  In  that  glory  He  still  owns  His 
dear  relationship,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  He  singeth  praise  unto  God  (Heb. 
ii.  11,  12).  4.  Next  notice  the  response  to  this  voice ;  for  this  also  precedes  the 
marriage.  No  sooner  did  that  one  august  voice  summon  them  to  praise,  than  im- 
mediately "  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude."  He  heard  the 
mingled  sound  as  of  an  innumerable  host  all  joining  in  the  song ;  for  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord  are  not  a  few.  5.  Observe  that  this  tremendous  volume  of  sound  will  be 
full  of  rejoicing  and  of  devout  homage.  *'  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,"  &c.  II.  The 
MARRIAGE  itself.  1.  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  the  result  of  the  eternal  gift  of 
the  Father.  Our  Lord  says,  "  Thine  they  were,  and  Thou  gavest  them  Me."  2. 
Next :  this  is  the  completion  of  the  betrothal  which  took  place  with  each  of  them 
in  time.  I  shall  not  attempt  elaborate  distinctions ;  but  as  far  as  you  and  I  were 
concerned,  the  Lord  Jesus  betrothed  each  one  of  us  to  Himself  in  righteousness, 
when  first  we  believed  on  Him.  Then  He  took  us  to  be  His,  and  gave  Himself  to 
be  ours,  so  that  we  could  sing,  "My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His."  This  was  the 
essence  of  the  marriage.  3.  The  marriage  day  indicates  the  perfecting  of  the  body 
of  the  Church.  The  Church  is  not  perfected  as  yet.  We  read  of  that  part  of  it 
which  is  in  heaven,  that  "  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect."  4.  I  can- 
not teU  you  all  it  means,  but  certainly  this  marriage  signifies  that  all  who  have 
believed  in  Him  shall  then  enter  into  a  bliss  which  shall  never  end  ;  a  bliss  which 
no  fear  approacheth,  or  doubt  becloudeth.  III.  The  character  under  which  the 
BRIDEGROOM  APPEARS  IS  THAT  OF  THE  Lamb.  "  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come." 
1.  It  must  be  so,  because  our  Saviour  was  the  Lamb  in  the  eternal  covenant ;  when 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  547 

this  whole  matter  was  ^planned,  arranged,  and  settled  by  the  foresight  and  decree  of 
eternity.  2.  It  was  next  as  the  Lamb  that  He  loved  us  and  proved  His  love.  He 
did  not  give  us  words  of  love  merely  when  He  came  from  heaven  to  earth  ;  but  He 
proceeded  to  deeds  of  truest  affection.  The  supreme  proof  of  His  love  was  that 
He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter.  3.  Love  in  marriage  must  be  on  both  sides, 
and  it  is  as  the  Lamb  that  we  first  came  to  love  Him.  I  had  no  love  to  Christ,  how 
could  I  have,  till  I  saw  His  wounds  and  blood  ?  This  is  the  great  heart-win- 
ning doctrine.  Christ  loves  us  as  the  Lamb,  and  we  love  Him  as  the  Lamb.  4. 
Further,  marriage  is  the  most  perfect  union.  Surely,  it  is  as  the  Lamb  that  Jesus  is 
most  closely  joined  to  His  people.  Our  Lord  came  very  close  to  us  when  He  took 
our  nature,  for  thus  He  became  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  5.  We 
never  feel  so  one  with  Jesus  as  when  we  see  Him  as  the  Lamb.  IV.  The  pbepabed- 
NESS  OF  THE  Brede  :  "  His  wife  hath  made  herself  ready."  Up  till  now  the 
Church  has  always  been  spoken  of  as  His  bride,  now  she  is  "  His  wife" — that  is  a 
deeper,  dearer,  more-matured  word  than  "  bride  " :  "  His  wife  hath  made  herself 
ready."  The  Church  has  now  come  to  the  fulness  of  her  joy,  and  has  taken 
possession  of  her  status  and  dower  as  "  His  wife."  What  does  it  mean — "  hath 
made  herself  ready  "  ?  1.  It  signifies,  first,  that  she  willingly  and  of  her  own 
accord  comes  to  her  Lord,  to  be  His,  and  to  be  with  Hhn  for  ever.  This  she  does 
with  all  her  heart :  "  she  hath  made  herself  ready."  She  does  not  enter  into  this 
engagement  with  reluctance.  2.  Does  it  not  mean  that  she  has  put  away  from  her- 
self all  evil,  and  all  connection  with  the  corruptions  of  the  harlot  church  has 
been  destroyed  ?  She  has  struggled  against  error,  she  has  fought  against  infidelity, 
and  both  have  been  put  down  by  her  holy  watchfulness  and  earnest  testimony  ;  and 
so  she  is  ready  for  her  Lord.  3.  Does  it  not  also  mean  that  in  the  great  day 
of  the  consummation  the  Church  will  be  one  ?  Alas,  for  the  divisions  among  us  ! 
4.  Notice  what  the  preparation  was.  It  is  described  in  the  eighth  verse  :  "  To  her 
was  granted."  I  will  go  no  further.  Whatever  preparation  it  was  that  she  made, 
in  whatever  apparel  she  was  arrayed,  it  was  granted  to  her.  When  we  shall  be 
united  to  Jesus,  the  ever  blessed  Lamb,  in  endless  wedlock,  all  our  fitness  to  be 
there  will  be  ours  by  free  grant.  Look  at  the  apparel  of  the  wife,  "  To  her  was 
granted  that  she  should  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white."  How  simple 
her  raiment !  Only  fine  hnen,  clean  and  white !  The  more  simple  our  worship, 
the  better.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  bride  of  Christ : — I.  The  Church's  final 

BLESSEDNESS   IS   FOUND   IN   AN   INDISSOLUBLE   UNION   WITH   ChRIST.      U.   FoR  THIS  THE 

Church  is  prepared  by  sanctity  and  fidelity.  HI.  The  ultimate  blessedness 
OF  THE  saints  IS  THE  OCCASION  OF  JOY  TO  ALL.  "  Blcsscd  are  they  that  are 
bidden  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  {R.  Green.)  The  righteousness 
of  saints. — Saintly  ideals  : — A  very  slight  acquaintance  with  the  lives  of  those  who 
may  most  truly  be  called  saints  will  satisfy  us  that  they  are  not  all  cast  in  one 
mould.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  characterised  by  an  almost  infinite  variety, 
diversity,  and  even  contrariety  of  form.  But  beneath  all  this  contrariety,  diversity, 
and  variety,  there  may  be  traced  a  fundamental  unity,  a  substantial  identity. 
Features  and  form  are  endlessly  different ;  the  spirit  is  one.  I  do  not  speak  now  of 
the  mere  surroundings  and  outward  circumstances  of  a  life.  Kiches  and  poverty, 
solitude  and  society,  sickness  and  health,  all  may  be  said  to  come  aUke  to  it ;  inas- 
much as  it  is  independent  of  all,  and  can  turn  all  to  good  account.  We  may 
represent  human  life,  the  life  of  each  one  of  us,  to  ourselves,  as  a  series  of  con- 
centric circles,  circle  within  circle,  all  having  the  same  centre,  and  that  centre  being 
the  "  I,"  the  soul,  the  spirit,  the  will,  the  very  substance  of  our  human  personaUty, 
call  it  by  what  name  we  will.  What  we  describe  as  the  "  circumstances  "  of  our 
lives  will  be  represented  by  the  outermost  of  these  concentric  circles.  But  we  may 
pass  inwards  from  one  to  another  on  our  way  to  the  centre  of  all,  and  still  find 
endless  variety  and  diversity,  and  yet  the  saintly  life  still.  Thus  we  will  take  what 
is  certainly  much  nearer  to  the  centre  than  the  circle  already  described,  which  was 
that  of  outward  circumstance  and  surrounding.  We  will  take  the  circle  of  ritual 
and  worship,  which,  you  will  all  agree,  touches  the  soul  much  more  nearly  than  the 
outward  form  or  fashion  of  our  lives  does  or  can  do.  Let  our  thoughts  range  back 
over  the  history  of  this  our  own  beloved  place  of  worship.  What  changes  and 
varieties  of  ritual  has  it  not  witnessed  in  the  course  of  the  many  centuries  that  have 
elapsed  between  its  first  conversion  from  a  pagan  temple  into  a  Christian  Church, 
and  the  present  moment  I  Each  generation  in  turn  has  worshipped  here  after  its 
own  fashion,  now  with  Koman  splendour,  and  now  with  Puritan  simplicity. 
Better  the  coldest,  barest,  ugliest  ritual,  with  spiritual  edification,  than  the  costliest 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

and  most  beautiful  and  most  ornate,  without.  We  pass  yet  again  within — nearer 
and  nearest  to  the  innermost  circle  and  centre  of  all.  We  take  the  circle  of 
religious  opinion,  of  doctrine  and  dogma  ;  which  is  indeed  the  very  vesture  of  the 
soul.  For  our  intellectual  behefs,  our  modes  of  thought  upon  religious  questions — 
what  are  they  but  the  garment,  as  it  were,  and  most  immediate  environment  of 
the  soul ;  an  environment,  which  acts  upon  the  soul,  and  upon  which  the  soul 
reacts,  at  once  moulding  and  moulded  ?  The  saintly  life,  therefore,  cannot  but  be 
deeply  affected  by  this  intellectual  environment ;  and,  according  to  the  nature  of 
that  environment,  accordingly,  to  a  great  extent,  will  that  life  be  conceived  of  and 
lived.  Yet,  even  in  this  nearest  circle  of  all,  it  is  astonishing  to  note  the  amount 
of  possible  variety  and  diversity  that  is  consistent  with  that  fundamental  unity  and 
substantial  identity  of  which  we  have  still  to  speak.  To  stereotype  thought  is 
to  kill  it ;  to  stereotype  reUgious  thought  is  to  destroy  its  fructifying,  generating,  or 
regenerating  power.  The  word  of  God,  if  it  is  to  be  spoken  with  power,  must  be 
spoken  under  the  influences,  and  according  to  the  intellectual,  as  well  as  the  moral 
and  spiritual,  necessities  of  the  day  in  which  it  is  spoken.  To  borrow  our  modes 
of  thought  and  speech  from  the  repertory  of  a  past  generation  however  excellent, 
or  from  teachers  however  devout  and  learned  in  their  day,  is  to  be,  at  the  best,  but 
as  a  scribe  half  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  God.  For  our  Saviour  said : 
"  Every  scribe  which  is  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man 
that  is  an  householder,  which  bringeth  forth  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and 
old."  We  pass  through  all  these  circles,  which,  even  to  the  last,  are  still  external, 
to  that  innermost  circle  which  is  the  centre  of  all.  What  is  that  inner  funda- 
mental unity,  that  substantial  identity,  of  which  we  are  in  search,  and  which 
constitutes  the  veritable  communion  of  saints ;  the  true,  everlasting  bond  of  fellow- 
ship between  God's  elect,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  here  and  hereafter?  The 
answer  is  not  far  to  seek  :  but  an  example  will  be  better  than  any  definition.  "  I 
see  nothing  else  in  the  world  that  can  yield  any  satisfaction  besides  hving  to  God, 
pleasing  Him,  and  doing  His  whole  will "  :  such  is  the  dying  confession  of  Brainerd. 
"  Wish  always,  and  pray,  liiat  the  will  of  God  may  be  wholly  fulfilled  in  thee  "  :  so 
writes  the  devout  k  Kempis.  And  we  might  multiply  such  statements  from  the 
lips  and  pens  of  the  saints  of  one  generation  after  another,  almost  without 
number — whatever  their  intellectual  creed,  and  what  men  call  their  "Denomina- 
tion." But  why  spend  time  on  the  testimony  of  those,  who  are,  after  all,  but  the 
satellites  of  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  ?  Listen  to  the  language  of  Him,  who  is  the 
King  of  Saints,  the  faithful  and  true  Witness  :  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him 
that  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work."  "  Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  My  Father 
which  is  in  heaven,  the  same  is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother."  Saints  we 
already  are — we  all  of  us  are — in  name,  by  title  and  profession,  according  to  the 
Scripture  meaning  of  the  word  "  saints,"  that  is,  persons  consecrated  or  dedicated 
to  God.  Saints  we  are  by  title  ;  but  woe  to  us,  if  we  rest  content  with  being  mere 
titular  saints  1  To  the  outward  consecration  must  be  added  the  inward  sanctifica- 
tion,  which  converts  the  name  into  a  reality ;  the  righteousness  of  saints — the 
saintly  life.  We  see  now  very  clearly  in  what  that  life  or  righteousness  consists  ; 
that  it  consists,  above  everything  else,  in  devotion  to  the  will  of  God,  in  the  recon- 
ciUation  of  our  wills  to  His  holy  and  blessed  Will,  alike  in  action  and  in  suffering, 
in  joy  and  in  sorrow.  Here  is  the  root  of  the  matter.  And  this  root  has  such 
marvellous  virtue  in  it,  that  it  will  grow  and  flourish  and  bear  fruit  in  any  soil  of 
circumstance,  of  ritual,  of  rehgious  opinion.  But  if  it  is  to  do  this  it  must  be  cul- 
tivated with  all  diligence,  by  watching,  by  striving,  by  praying — by  incessant 
struggles  against  the  snares  and  temptations  and  enticements  of  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devU — by  repeated  efforts  after  self-mastery  and  self-renunciation — 
in  a  word,  by  earnest  imitation  of  Christ  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
{Canon  D.  J.  Vaughan.) 

Ver.  9.  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the 
Lamb. — The  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  : — I.  The  Lamb.  We  know  at  once  who 
this  is ;  but  it  is  remarkable  that,  with  one  exception  and  that  occurring  in  this 
evangelist's  own  Gospel,  this  is  the  only  part  of  the  inspired  writings  in  which 
our  Lord  is  ever  called  by  this  name.  Now  this  could  not  have  happened  by 
accident.  There  is  a  meaning  in  it,  and  it  is  not  difficult  perhaps  to  see  what  it  is 
— the  Lord  Jesus  would  have  us  look  up  to  Him  in  heaven  as  the  same  Jesus  who 
died  for  us  on  the  Cross.  II.  The  marriage  supper  op  the  Lamb.  Here,  you 
observe,  is  a  complete  change  of  metaphor.     Our  Lord  puts  off  the  character  of 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  549 

a  Lamb,  and  takes  on  Him  that  of  a  Bridegroom ;  or  rather  He  takes  this  character 
on  Him  without  putting  off  the  other.  1.  A  long  looked  for  and  much  desired  hour. 
The  Saviour  Himself  desires  it.  It  is  the  hour  that  will  bring  Him  the  con- 
summation of  all  His  wishes,  the  full  reward  of  all  His  labour  and  sufferings.  And 
His  Church  desires  it.  Scarcely  had  He  disappeared,  when  its  language  was, 
"  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly."  2.  An  hour  of  great  love  and  affection.  No 
earthly  affection  is  equal  to  that  of  a  redeemed  sinner  for  his  Saviour.  There  may 
not  at  times  seem  much  warmth  in  it,  but  when  it  is  real  there  is  as  much 
strength  and  depth  in  it  perhaps  as  man's  nature,  in  its  present  state  and 
circumstances,  is  capable  of.  But  still  it  is  an  imperfect  love,  very  much  broken 
in  upon  by  the  love  of  other  things,  and  damped  by  the  cares  of  life,  its  business 
and  troubles.  It  is  an  unseen  object  too  that  we  love,  and  we  find  it  difficult 
to  realise  anything  we  have  never  seen.  And  even  in  our  best  moments,  we 
often  feel  as  though  we  only  half  loved  our  Lord.  We  long  for  a  better  and 
higher  nature,  that  we  may  love  Him  more.  At  this  marriage  supper  we  shall 
have  what  we  long  for.  We  shall  see  our  Lord,  and  see  Him  in  a  form  in 
which  we  shall  know  Him ;  and  shall  have  souls  within  us,  that  will  for  the 
first  time  feel  large  enough  to  love  Him,  and  these  souls  shall  be  filled  to 
overflowing  with  admiration  of  and  delight  in  Him.  The  love  of  this  hour  will  be 
the  perfection  of  love.  This  marriage  feast  will  be  the  feast,  the  triumph  of  love — 
the  exalted  Saviour  showing  to  the  whole  universe  that  He  loves  us  to  the  utmost 
bound  love  can  go,  and  we  loving  Him  with  a  fervour,  a  gratitude,  an  adoration, 
a  delight,  that  are  new  even  in  heaven.  3.  A  scene  of  abounding  joy.  The 
affection  that  reigns  in  it  would  of  itself  make  it  so.  "  Let  me  only  be  with  my 
Lord,"  the  Christian  says,  "and  I  ask  no  more.  That,  without  anything  else, 
will  make  me  happy,  and  happy  to  the  full."  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  provides 
for  His  guests  all  that  can  gratify  and  delight  them,  and  all  too  that  can  show  His 
love  for  them  and  His  munificence.  The  provisions  made  by  Him  for  our 
enjoyment,  will  astonish  us.  So  will  it  be  with  us  in  heaven.  We  shall  find  it  a 
feast  and  a  monarch's  feast.  HI.  Those  invited  or  called  to  it.  1.  They  are 
those  who  have  been  invited  before  to  this  supper.  And  here  we  are  all 
included.  2.  They  are  those  only  who  have  before  accepted  the  invitation  to  it. 
3.  These  guests  are  yet  further  distinguished — they  are  ready  and  prepared  for  this 
supper.  A  worldly-minded,  ungodly  man  in  heaven,  would  be  a  miserable  man 
in  heaven.  A  prepared  place  for  a  prepared  people,  a  holy  place  for  a  holy 
people — this  is  the  heaven  of  the  Bible.  IV.  The  happiness  of  these  men. 
"Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  It  is 
not  an  invitation  to  every  feast  that  will  make  a  man  happy.  Not  a  snare  or  a 
danger  can  await  them  there.  Not  a  single  being  will  they  see  there  who  can  do 
them  harm  or  whom  they  would  wish  away.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb : — I.  The  description  of  the  bridegroom.  1.  As  the  Lamb 
He  is  the  one  everlasting  sacrifice  for  sin :  He  wiU  not  be  other  than  this  in  His 
glory.  2.  As  the  Lamb,  suffering  for  sin.  He  is  specially  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the 
angels  and  all  other  holy  intelligences;  and  so  in  His  joyous  day  He  wears 
that  character.  3.  As  the  Lamb  He  most  fully  displayed  His  love  to  His  Church; 
and  so  He  appears  in  this  form  on  the  day  of  His  love's  triumph.  4.  As  the 
Lamb  He  is  best  loved  of  our  souls.  Behold,  how  He  loved  us  even  to  the 
death !  II.  The  meaning  of  the  marriage  supper.  1.  The  completion  and 
perfection  of  the  Church.  "  His  bride  hath  made  herself  ready."  2.  The  rising  of 
the  Church  into  the  nearest  and  happiest  communion  with  Christ  in  His  glory. 
"  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come."  The  espousals  lead  up  to  this.  3.  The 
fulfilment  of  the  long  expectations  of  both.  4.  The  open  publication  of  the  great 
fact  of  mutual  love  and  union.  5.  The  overflowing  of  mutual  delight  and  joy. 
"  Be  glad  and  rejoice."  6.  The  grandest  display  of  magnificent  munificence  in  a 
banquet.  7.  The  commencement  of  an  eternally  unbroken  rest.  "  He  shall  rest 
in  His  love."  The  Church,  like  Kuth,  shall  find  rest  in  the  house  of  her 
Husband.  HI.  The  persons  who  are  called  to  it.  1.  Those  who  are  so 
called  as  to  accept  the  invitation.  2.  Those  who  now  possess  the  faith  which 
is  the  token  of  admission.  3.  Those  who  love  Bridegroom  and  bride.  4.  Those 
who  have  on  the  wedding  garment  of  sanctification.  5.  Those  who  watch  with 
lamps  burning.  IV.  The  blessedness  which  is  ascribed  to  them.  1.  They 
have  a  prospect  which  blesses  them  even  now.  2.  They  have  great  honour  in 
being  called  to  such  a  future.  3.  They  will  be  blessed  indeed  when  at  that  feast, 
for — Those  who  are  caUed  will  be  admitted.    Those  who  are  admitted  will  be 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

married.  Those  who  are  married  to  Jesus  will  be  endlessly  happy.  How  many  a 
marriage  leads  to  misery!  but  it  is  not  so  in  this  case.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
"  The  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  "  ; — A  distinction  seems  to  be  drawn  between 
♦'  the  marriage,"  and  "  the  marriage  supper "  of  the  Lamb.  "  The  marriage," 
takes  place  now, — "The  marriage  supper"  is  to  follow  by  and  by.  "The 
marriage"  is  that  act  of  union  between  each  soul  and  Christ,  when  that  soul, 
drawn  by  God's  love  and  made  willing  by  His  grace,  is  linked  to,  and  made 
one  with,  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  "The  marriage  supper"  will  be  the 
public  celebration,  and  the  glorious  consummation,  of  that  union.  Therefore 
there  are  differences.  "  The  marriage  "  here,  blessed  and  beautiful  as  it  is,  has 
its  trouble  and  its  separation.  The  soul  has  to  leave,  not  without  pain,  what 
once  was  very  dear  to  it.  And  some  fear  cannot  help  to  mingle,  even  where 
love  prevails.  But  at  "the  marriage  supper"  it  will  be  aU  union,  and  no 
parting;  and  there  will  be  no  room  for  the  shadow  of  a  fear  there.  "The 
marriage"  here  is  an  individual  act.  One  by  one,  each  as  God  chooses,  one 
here,  and  another  there,  a  soul  gives  itself  to  Christ.  "The  marriage  supper" 
will  be  the  solemnity  of  the  whole  Church's  collective  partnership,  one  and  another, 
with  Jesus.  "The  marriage"  here,  at  least  so  it  seems,  sometimes,  to  the 
poor  Christian's  heart,  was  capable  of  being  dissolved  again.  But  when  "  the 
marriage  supper "  comes,  who  will  ever  think  of  breaking  the  tie  ?  In  "  the 
marriage  "  here,  real  and  perfect  though  it  be,  there  are  intervals  of  distance  ; 
seasons,  when  there  is  no  union  between  the  soul  and  Him  it  loves.  But  in 
"the  marriage  supper,"  the  felt  and  visible  presence  of  Christ  will  be  for  ever 
and  for  ever.  In  "the  marriage "  here  there  were  many  who,  though  truly  and 
indissolubly  joined  to  Christ,  yet  often  seemed  to  others,  and  seemed  to  themselves, 
not  to  be  His.  But  at  '♦  the  marriage  supper "  there  will  be  no  misunder- 
standings. Christ  will  have  proclaimed  His  own;  and  the  whole  universe  will 
confess  Him,  and  His  saints.  {Jos.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  And  lie  saith  unto  me. 
These  are  the  true  sayings  of  God. — The  Scriptures  divinely  true : — I.  A  bight 
ESTIMATE  OF  HOLY  scBiPTUBE.  1.  Thcsc  words  which  wc  find  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  are  true.  Free  from  error,- certain,  enduring,  infallible.  2.  These 
are  Divine  words.  Infallibly  inspired,  so  as  to  be  in  very  truth  "the  sayings  of 
God."  3.  These  words  are  thus  true  and  Divine  in  opposition  to  words  of  man. 
These  may  or  may  not  be  true.  Pretended  words  of  God.  False  prophets  and  men 
with  addled  intellects  profess  to  speak  in  the  name  of  God  ;  but  they  lie.  4.  These 
words  are  aU  of  them  truly  Divine.  Neither  too  severe  to  be  true,  nor  too 
terrible  to  be  uttered  by  a  God  of  love,  as  some  dare  to  say.  Nor  too  good  to  be 
true,  as  tremblers  fear.  Nor  too  old  to  be  true,  as  novelty -hunters  affirm.  Nor 
too  simple  to  be  truly  Divine,  as  the  worldly-wise  insinuate.  5.  These  words  are  a 
blessing  to  us  for  that  reason.  What  else  can  guide  us  if  we  have  no  sure 
revelation  from  God?  How  can  we  understand  the  revelation  if  it  is  not 
all  true?  IE.  The  eesult  of  fobminq  such  an  estimate.  If  you  believe  that 
"  these  are  the  true  sayings  of  God " — 1.  You  will  listen  to  them  with 
attention,  and  judge  what  you  hear  from  preachers  by  this  infallible  standard. 
2.  You  will  receive  these  words  with  assurance.  This  will  produce  confidence 
of  understanding.  This  will  produce  rest  of  heart.  3.  You  wiU  submit  with 
reverence  to  these  words,  obey  their  precepts,  believe  their  teachings,  and  value 
their  prophecies.  4.  You  will  expect  fulfilment  of  Divine  promises  under  difficulties. 
6.  You  will  cling  to  revealed  truth  with  pertinacity.  6.  You  will  proclaim  it  vnth 
boldness.  IH.  Our  justification  for  fobmino  such  an  estimate.  1.  The 
Scriptures  are  what  they  profess  to  be — the  word  of  God.  2.  There  is  a 
singular  majesty  and  power  in  them ;  and  we  see  this  when  the  truth  of  God 
is  preached.  3.  There  is  a  marvellous  omniscience  in  Scripture,  which  is  perceived 
by  us  when  it  unveils  our  inmost  souls.  4.  They  have  proven  themselves  true 
to  us.  They  warned  us  of  the  bitter  fruit  of  sin,  and  we  have  tasted  it.  They 
told  us  of  the  evil  of  the  heart,  and  we  have  seen  it.  They  told  us  of  the  peace- 
giving  power  of  the  blood,  and  we  have  proved  it  by  faith  in  Jesus.  They  told  us 
of  the  purifying  energy  of  Divine  grace  :  we  are  already  instances  of  it,  and 
desire  to  be  more  so.  They  assured  us  of  the  efficacy  of  prayer,  and  it  is  true. 
They  assured  us  of  the  upholding  power  of  faith  in  God,  and  by  faith  we  have  been 
upheld  in  trial.  They  assured  us  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  people  as  shown 
in  providence,  and  we  have  experienced  it.  All  things  have  worked  together  for  our 
good  hitherto.  5.  The  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts  confirms  our  faith  in 
Holy  Scripture.    We  believe,  and  are  saved  from  sin  by  believing.    Those  words  must 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION,  651 

be  truly  Divine  which  have  wrought  in  us  such  gracious  results.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
WorsMp  God. — The  Supreme  Being  the  only  proper  object  of  religious  worship : — I. 
The  Sckiptuke  represents  God  as  the  only  proper  object  of  religious  worship. 
n.  The  absolute  supremacy  of  God  in  all  His  great  and  essential  attributes. 
1.  God  is  supreme  in  respect  to  His  existence.  2.  God  infinitely  surpasses  all  other 
beings  in  the  immensity  of  His  presence.  3.  God  far  transcends  all  other  beings  in 
His  knowledge.  4.  God  is  absolutely  supreme  in  wisdom.  5.  God  is  supreme  in 
power.  6.  God  is  supremely  excellent  in  His  holiness,  goodness,  or  benevolence, 
in.  It  is  absurd  to  pay  religious  worship  to  any  being  who  is  not  possessed  of 
THE  essential  ATTRIBUTES  OF  DIVINITY.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  testimony  of 
Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy. — The  great  prophetic  burden : — I.  The  theme  ob 
BURDEN  OF  THE  BiBLE  IS  Jesus.  Not  philosophy,  nor  science,  nor  theology,  nor 
metaphysics,  nor  morality,  but  Jesus.  II.  The  theme  of  Bible-annals  is  Jesus. 
Not  mere  history,  but  history  as  containing  Jesus.  Not  the  mere  rise  and  fall  of 
nations  and  kingdoms,  but  these  as  connected  with  the  promised  seed  of  the  woman. 
in.  The  theme  of  the  Psalms  is  Jesus.  It  is  not  mere  poetry,  Hebrew  poetry,  that 
we  find  in  them,  but  Jesus.  It  is  poetry  embodying  Jesus ;  it  is  praise,  of  which 
every  note  is  Immanuel.  IV.  The  theme  of  prophecy  is  Jesus.  It  is  not  certain 
future  events,  dark  or  bright,  presented  to  the  view  of  the  curious  and  speculative ; 
it  is  Jesus ;  earthly  events  and  hopes  and  fears  only  as  linked  with  Him.  {H. 
Bonar,  D.D.)  The  one  witness  and  the  one  testimony  (with  Rev.  xxii.  20) : — 
I.  The  oneness  of  the  testifier.  He  is  the  one  God.  The  sender  of  the  testimony 
is  the  one  Jehovah ;  the  subject  of  the  testimony  is  the  one  Jesus ;  the  inspirer  is 
the  one  Spirit.  Through  many  lips  He  has  spoken,  by  many  pens  He  has  written ; 
but  it  is  the  mind,  the  wiU,  the  purpose,  the  revelation  of  the  one  God  that  is  here. 
n.  The  oneness  of  the  messenger.  It  is  intimated  here  that  it  was  one  angel 
alone  that  was  employed  to  communicate  the  testimony.  He  was  sent  to  patriarchs 
and  prophets  of  old,  to  apostles  and  brethren  in  later  times.  The  instrument  or 
medium  of  communication  was  a  created  being,  an  angel ;  but  it  was  the  same 
throughout.  HI.  The  oneness  of  the  testimony.  It  is  not  many  testimonies,  but 
one ;  it  is  the  word  (not  words)  of  God.  It  was  given  at  sundry  times  and  divers 
manners ;  in  fragments  and  portions,  great  and  small ;  yet  there  is  unity  through- 
out, not  discord  or  contradiction — marvellous  unity,  which  can  only  be  accounted 
for  on  the  fact  that  there  was  in  reality  but  one  writer.  He  to  whom  one  day  is  as  a 
thousand  years,  and  that  therefore  the  truths  enunciated  are  the  offspring  of  one 
mind,  the  thoughts  of  one  heart.  This  testimony  bore  aU  upon  one  point,  one 
person,  one  work,  one  kingdom.  It  was  the  "  testimony  of  Jesus,"  that  is,  it  testified 
of  Him  from  first  to  last ;  for  Christ  is  the  all  and  in  all  of  prophecy,  the  all  and  in 
aU  of  the  Bible.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  11-16.  A  white  horse ;  and  He  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and 
True. — The  rider  on  the  white  horse  and  the  armies  with  Him : — I.  John  saw  ouk 
Captain,  the  King  of  kings.  1.  Let  us  notice  His  glorious  state.  Our  Lord  is  here 
described  as  sitting  upon  a  gallant  steed,  charging  His  foes  upon  a  snow-white 
horse.  (1)  This  means  that  Christ  is  honoured  now.  In  royal  state  our  Jesus 
goeth  forth  to  war,  not  as  a  common  soldier,  but  as  a  glorious  prince,  royally 
mounted.  (2)  By  a  horse  is  denoted  not  only  honour,  but  power.  To  the  Jews  the 
employment  of  the  horse  in  warfare  was  unusual,  so  that  when  it  was  used  by  their 
adversaries  they  imputed  to  it  great  force.  Jesus  Christ  has  a  mighty  power  to-day, 
a  power  which  none  can  measure.  (3)  Here  is  symbolised  swiftness,  too.  His  word 
rimneth  very  swiftly.  The  colour  of  the  horse  is  also  meant  to  denote  victory.  He 
comes  to  fight,  but  the  fight  is  for  peace ;  He  comes  as  a  conqueror,  but  it  is  as  a 
delivering  conqueror  who  scatterelh  fiowers  and  roses  where  he  rides,  breaking  only 
the  oppressor,  but  blessing  the  citizens  whom  he  emancipates.  2.  John  looked  into 
the  open  vault  of  heaven,  and  he  had  time  not  only  to  see  the  horse,  but  to  mark 
the  character  of  Him  that  sat  upon  it.  He  says  that  He  that  sat  upon  him  was 
called  Faithful  and  True.  By  this  you  may  know  your  Lord.  3.  John  still  looked, 
and  as  he  gazed  with  open  eye  he  marked  the  mode  of  action  and  of  warfare  which 
the  champion  employed,  for  he  says,  "  In  righteousness  He  doth  judge  and  make 
war."  Jesus  is  the  only  king  who  always  wars  in  this  fashion.  4.  One  other  thing 
John  saw,  and  that  was  His  name.  But  here  he  seems  to  contradict  himself.  He 
says  that  He  had  a  name  which  no  man  knoweth,  yet  he  says  that  His  name  was 
the  Word  of  God.  Oh,  but  it  is  all  true,  for  in  such  a  one  as  our  Master  there  must 
be  paradoxes.  No  man  knoweth  His  name.    None  of  you  know  all  His  nature.    His 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

love  passes  your  knowledge ;  His  goodness,  His  majesty,  His  humiliation,  His  glory, 
all  these  transcend  your  ken.  You  cannot  know  Him.  Oh,  the  depths  !  II.  His 
FOLLOWERS.  1;  Christ  has  a  great  following — not  one  army,  but  "  armies,"  whole 
hosts  of  them,  numbers  that  cannot  be  counted.  2.  These  that  follow  Him,  you 
notice,  are  all  mounted.  They  followed  Him  on  white  horses.  They  are  mounted 
on  the  same  sort  of  horses  as  Himself,  for  they  fare  as  He  fares :  when  He  walks, 
they  must  walk ;  when  He  bears  a  cross,  they  must  carry  crosses  too ;  but  if  ever 
He  gets  a  crown,  He  cries,  "  They  shall  be  crowned  too."  3.  The  armies  of  Christ 
followed  Him  on  white  horses.  Look  steadily  at  these  white  horses,  and  observe 
the  armour  of  their  riders.  Cromwell's  men  wore  at  their  side  long  iron  scabbards 
in  which  they  carried  swords,  which  oftentimes  they  wiped  across  the  manes  of  their 
horses  when  they  were  red  with  blood.  But  if  you  look  at  these  troops  there  is  not 
a  sword  amongst  them.  They  are  not  armed  with  lance  or  pike,  and  yet  they  are 
riding  forth  to  war.  Do  you  want  to  know  the  armour  of  that  war  ?  I  will  teU 
you.  They  are  clothed  in  white  linen,  white  and  clean.  Strange  battle  array  this ! 
And  yet  this  is  how  they  conquer,  and  how  you  must  conquer  too.  This  is  both 
armour  and  weapon.  Holiness  is  our  sword  and  our  shield.  4.  Yet  I  have  said 
they  were  all  on  horses,  which  shows  you  that  the  saints  of  God  have  a  strength 
that  they  sometimes  forget.  You  know  not  that  you  ride  on  a  horse,  0  child  of 
God ;  but  there  is  a  supreme  invisible  power  which  helps  you  in  contending  for 
Christ  and  for  His  truth.  You  are  mightier  than  you  know  of,  and  you  are  riding 
more  swiftly  to  the  battle  and  more  rapidly  over  the  heads  of  your  foes  than  ever 
you  dream.  HI.  The  warfaee.  What  is  this  warfare?  There  cannot  be  war 
without  a  sword,  yet  if  you  look  all  along  the  ranks  of  the  white-robed  armies  there 
is  not  a  sword  amongst  them  all.  Who  carries  the  sword  ?  There  is  one  who  bears 
it  for  them  all.  It  is  He,  the  King,  who  comes  to  marshal  us.  He  bears  a  sword. 
But  where  ?  It  is  in  His  mouth !  Yet  this  is  the  only  sword  my  Lord  and  Master 
wields.  Mahomet  subdued  men  with  the  scimitar,  but  Christ  subdues  men  with  the 
gospel.  We  have  but  to  tell  out  the  glad  tidings  of  the  love  of  God,  for  this  is  the 
sword  of  Christ  with  which  He  smites  the  nations.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  On  His 
head  were  many  crowns. — The  Saviour^s  many  crowns : — ^I.  First,  let  every  believing 
heart  rejoice  while  it  sees  the  many  crowns  of  dominion  upon  His  head.  First  and 
foremost  there  sparkles  about  His  brow  the  everlasting  diadem  of  the  King  of 
Heaven.  His  empire  is  higher  than  the  highest  heaven,  and  deeper  than  the  lowest 
hell.  This  earth  also  is  a  province  of  His  wide  domains.  Though  small  the  empire 
compared  with  others,  yet  from  this  world  hath  He  perhaps  derived  more  glory  than 
from  any  other  part  of  His  dominions.  He  reigns  on  earth.  On  His  head  is  the 
crown  of  creation.  "  All  things  were  made  by  Him ;  and  without  Him  was  not  any 
thing  made  that  was  made."  His  voice  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  there  was 
light.  It  was  His  strength  that  piled  the  mountains,  and  His  wisdom  balances  the 
clouds.  Together  with  this  crown  of  creation  there  is  yet  another,  the  crown  of 
providence,  for  He  sustaineth  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power.  Let  Him  once 
withdraw  His  hands,  and  the  pillars  of  earth  must  tremble ;  the  stars  must  fall  like 
fig  leaves  from  the  tree,  and  all  things  must  be  quenched  in  the  blackness  of  an- 
nihilation. On  His  head  is  the  crown  of  providence.  And  next  to  this  there 
glitters  also  the  thrice-glorious  crown  of  grace.  He  is  the  King  of  grace ;  He  gives, 
or  He  withholds.  The  river  of  God's  mercy  flows  from  underneath  His  throne ;  He 
sits  as  Sovereign  in  the  dispensation  of  mercy.  He  reigneth  in  His  Church  amidst 
willing  spirits ;  and  He  reigns  for  His  Church  over  aU  the  nations  of  the  world,  that 
He  may  gather  unto  Himself  a  people  that  no  man  can  number  who  shall  bow 
before  the  sceptre  of  His  love.  Methinks  I  hear  one  say,  "If  this  be  so,  if  Christ 
hath  these  many  crowns  of  dominion,  how  vain  it  is  for  me  to  rebel  against  Him." 
Believer,  look  to  Christ's  thrice-crowned  head  and  be  comforted.  Is  providence 
against  thee  ?  Correct  thy  speech ;  thou  hast  erred ;  God  Jiath  not  become  thine 
enemy.  Providence  is  not  against  thee,  for  Jesus  is  its  King ;  He  weighs  its  trials 
and  counts  its  storms.  Thy  enemies  may  strive,  but  they  shall  not  prevail  against 
thee;  He  shaU  smite  them  upon  the  cheek-bone.  Art  thou  passing  through  the 
fire  ?  The  fire  is  Christ's  dominion.  Art  thou  going  through  the  floods  ?  They 
shall  not  drown  thee,  for  even  the  floods  obey  the  voice  of  the  Omnipotent  Messiah. 
Wherever  thou  art  called  thou  canst  not  go  where  Jesu's  love  reigns  not.  Commit 
thyself  into  His  hands.  II.  Christ  hath  many  crowns  of  victory.  The  first 
diadems  which  I  have  mentioned  are  His  by  right.  He  is  God's  only  begotten  and 
well-beloved  Son,  and  hence  He  inherits  unlimited  dominions.  But  viewed  as  the 
Son  of  Man,  conquest  has  made  Him  great,  and  His  own  right  hand  and  His  holy 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  553 

arm  have  won  for  Him  the  triumph.  In  the  first  place,  Christ  has  a  crown  which 
I  pray  that  every  one  of  you  may  wear.  He  has  a  crown  of  victory  over  the  world. 
For  thus  saith  He  Himself,  "Be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world."  I 
would  that  we  could  imitate  Christ  in  our  battle  with  the  world.  But  alas,  the  world 
oftentimes  gets  the  upper  hand  of  us.  Sometimes  we  yield  to  its  smiles,  and  often 
do  we  tremble  before  its  frowns.  Have  hope  and  courage,  believer ;  be  like  your 
Master,  be  the  world's  foe  and  overcome  it,  yield  not,  suffer  it  never  to  6ntrap  your 
watchful  feet.  Stand  upright  amid  all  its  pressure,  and  be  not  moved  by  all  its 
enchantments.  Christ  did  this,  and  therefore  around  His  head  is  that  right  royal 
crown  of  victory,  trophy  of  triumph  over  the  entire  forces  of  the  world.  Further- 
more, the  next  crown  He  wears  is  the  crown  by  which  He  has  overcome  sin.  He 
has  cast  down  every  shape  and  form  of  evil,  and  now  for  ever  stands  He  more  than 
a  conqueror  through  His  glorious  sufferings.  Oh,  how  bright  that  crown  which  He 
deserves  who  hath  for  ever  put  away  our  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  And  then 
again,  Christ  wears  about  His  head  the  crown  of  death.  He  died,  and  in  that 
dreadful  hour  He  overcame  death,  rifled  the  sepulchre,  hewed  death  in  pieces,  and 
destroyed  the  arch-destroyer.  Glorious  is  that  victory !  Angels  repeat  the  trium- 
phant strain.  His  redeemed  take~  up  the  song ;  and  you,  ye  blood-bought  sons  of 
Adam,  praise  Him  too,  for  He  hath  overcome  all  the  evil  of  hell  itself.  And  yet, 
once  again,  another  crown  hath  Christ,  and  that  is  the  crown  of  victory  over  man. 
Would  to  God  that  He  wore  a  crown  for  each  of  you.  Say,  has  His  love  been  too 
much  for  you  ?  Have  you  been  compelled  to  give  up  your  sins,  wooed  by  His  love 
Divine  ?  Have  your  eyes  been  made  to  run  with  tears  at  the  thought  of  His  affec- 
tion for  you  and  of  your  own  ingratitude  ?  If  this  be  the  case  with  you,  then  you 
may  yourself  recognise  one  of  the  many  crowns  that  are  on  His  head.  IH.  The 
CROWNS  OF  THANKSGIVING.  Surcly  conceming  these  we  may  well  say,  "  On  His  head 
are  many  crowns."  In  the  first  place,  all  the  mighty  doers  in  Christ's  Church 
ascribe  their  crown  to  Him.  Not  a  martyr  wears  his  crown ;  they  all  take  their 
blood-red  crowns,  and  then  they  place  them  on  His  brow — the  fire  crown,  the  rack 
crown,  there  I  see  them  all  glitter.  For  it  was  His  love  that  helped  them  to  endure ; 
it  was  by  His  blood  that  they  overcame.  And  then  think  of  another  list  of  crowns. 
They  who  turn  many  to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever. 
What  crowns  shall  theirs  be  when  they  come  before  God,  when  the  souls  they  have 
saved  shall  enter  paradise  with  them.  What  shouts  of  acclamation,  what  honours, 
what  rewards  shall  then  be  given  to  the  winners  of  souls  I  What  will  they  do  with 
their  crowns  ?  Why,  they  will  take  them  from  their  heads  and  lay  them  there 
where  sits  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  But  see,  another  host  approaches. 
I  see  a  company  of  cherubic  spirits  flying  upwards  to  Christ,  and  who  are  these  ? 
The  reply  is,  "We  lived  on  earth  for  sixty,  or  seventy^ or  eighty  years,  until  we 
tottered  into  our  graves  from  very  weakness ;  when  we  died  there  was  no  marrow 
in  our  bones,  our  hair  had  grown  grey,  and  we  were  crisp  and  dry  with  age." 
"How  came  ye  here?"  They  reply,  "Aiter  many  years  of  strife  with  the  world, 
of  trials  and  of  troubles,  we  entered  heaven  at  last."  "  And  ye  have  crowns,  I  see." 
"Yes,"  they  say,  "but  we  intend  not  to  wear  them."  "Whither  are  ye  going, 
then  ?  "  "  We  are  going  to  yonder  throne,  for  our  crowns  have  been  surely  given 
us  by  grace,  for  nothing  but  grace  could  have  helped  us  to  weather  the  storm  so 
many,  many  years."  I  see  the  grave  and  reverend  sires  pass  one  by  one  before  the 
throne,  and  there  they  lay  their  crowns  at  His  blessed  feet,  and  then,  shouting  with 
the  infant  throng,  they  cry,  "  Salvation  unto  Him,"  &c.  And  then  I  see  following 
behind  them  another  class.  And  who  are  ye  ?  Their  answer  is,  "  We  are  the  chief 
of  sinners  saved  by  grace."  And  here  they  come — Saul  of  Tarsus,  and  Manasseh, 
and  Kahab,  and  many  of  the  same  class.  And  how  came  ye  here  ?  They  reply, 
"  We  have  had  much  forgiven,  we  were  grievous  sinners,  but  the  love  of  Christ 
reclaimed  us,  the  blood  of  Christ  washed  us ;  and  whiter  than  snow  are  we,  though 
once  we  were  black  as  hell."  And  whither  are  ye  going?  They  reply,  "We  are 
going  to  cast  our  crowns  at  His  feet,  and  '  Crown  Him  Lord  of  all.' "  (Ibid.) 
Many  crowns:—!.  On  His  head  is  the  crown  of  conquest  of  sin.  This  is  the 
victory.  II.  On  His  head  is  the  crown  of  the  conquest  of  sorrow.  That  reigned 
supreme.  HI.  On  His  head  is  the  crown  of  the  conquest  of  suffering.  IV.  On 
His  head  is  the  crown  of  the  conquest  of  Satan.  No  light  conquest !  V.  On 
His  head  is  the  crown  of  the  conquest  of  death.  {W.  M.  Statham,  M.A.) 
The  royalty  of  the  glorified  Redeemer : — I.  The  glory  of  the  great  Redeemer. 
1.  His  essential  majesty.  2.  The  grandeur  and  the  equal  diversity  of  His  peculiar 
functions.     There  is  no  work  so  glorious,  no  prerogative  so  high,  that  it  is  not 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

specifically  ascribed  to  Him  in  the  pages  of  inspiration,  3.  The  greatness  of  those 
obstacles  He  is  represented  to  have  overcome  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  exalted 
undertakings.  4.  The  completeness  of  His  victories  in  themselves.  5.  His  result- 
ing satisfaction  and  the  fuhiess  of  His  joy.  6.  The  same  almighty  power  which 
displayed  itself  so  illustriously  in  His  personal  conquests  was,  even  in  the  earliest 
age,  exhibited  in  the  progress  of  His  cause,  and  the  preservation  of  His  followers,  in 
spite  of  the  most  aggravated  injuries  and  most  threatening  dangers.  7.  We  must 
now  turn,  somewhat  more  directly,  to  the  spiritual  consequences  of  redemption, 
whence  the  real  value  of  that  recompense  the  Saviour  has  attained  for  all  His  pri- 
vations, humiliation,  and  sorrow.  They  are  of  every  kind.  His  victories  are 
those  of  pity  and  of  wrath,  of  indignation  and  of  tenderness,  of  insulted  majesty 
avenging  its  own  wrongs,  and  of  mercy  rejoicing  against  justice.  They  spread 
over  every  department  of  the  Divine  administration,  extend  to  every  diversity  of 
power  which  menaces,  or  of  impurity  which  would  pollute,  or  of  sorrow  which 
would  darken  and  afflict,  diffusing  their  happy  consequences  through  an  unlimited 
territory  and  a  never-ending  duration.  II.  Those  obvious  practical  reflections 
THE  SUBJECT  SO  FORCIBLY  SUGGESTS.  1.  Let  its  Contemplation  teach  us  the  senti- 
ments we  should  habitually  cherish  respecting  the  power  and  glory  of  the  Saviour. 
2.  Let  us  cultivate  those  associations  which  belong  to  His  supremacy,  for  we  cannot 
too  highly  exalt  Him.  Let  us  see,  in  all  that  is  fair  and  good  amidst  the  scenes 
that  encompass  us,  the  skill  of  His  workmanship — the  beauty  of  His  image.  Let 
the  convulsions  of  empire  and  the  vicissitudes  of  time  instruct  us  to  confide  in  that 
eternal  presidency  over  the  affairs  of  men,  by  which  the  ends  of  His  redemption 
shall  be  finally  secured.  (JR.  S,  McAll,  LL.D.)  The  supreme  kingship  of  Christ : — 
The  supreme  kingship  of  Jesus  Christ  as  Mediator  is  manifestly  the  theme  of  our 
text.  The  ruling  principle  in  the  mediatorial  empire  is  benevolence.  The  final 
purpose  of  the  mediatorial  empire  is  the  highest  possible  good  of  man.  This  Jesus 
is  able  to  accomplish  by  reason  of  His  infinite  attributes  of  wisdom  and  of  power. 
I.  Let  us  look,  then,  at  the  material  universe.  There  are  many  kings  in  matter. 
The  sun  is  the  king  of  day  ;  the  moon  is  the  queen  of  night.  The  planet,  with  its 
attendant  satellites,  exercises  a  kingly  rule  over  them.  Gravitation,  subtle  and 
invisible,  yet  permeating  all  things,  and  influencing  all  things  in  sea,  air,  and  land, 
exercises  a  kind  of  kingly  rule  over  everything  within  the  range  of  its  influence. 
Just  as  the  British  Empire  has  its  colonies  and  dependencies  in  Africa,  Australia, 
and  America  ;  each  possessing  its  own  governor  and  its  own  mode  of  government ; 
each  independent  in  its  place,  yet  dependent  upon  the  parent  power ;  each  supreme 
in  its  own  locality,  subject  nevertheless  to  the  higher  supremacy  of  the  Queen  :  so 
is  it  in  this  material  creation.  It  is  divided  into  miniature  kingdoms,  petty  empires, 
and  in  each  kingdom  therS  is  a  king.  Look  at  the  bee-hive.  There  is  congregated 
under  that  straw  cone  an  empire.  All  the  elements  of  a  kingdom  are  found  there. 
A  queen  rules  within.  Authority  and  subjection,  rule  and  submission  may  be 
found  under  that  covering.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  ant-hiU.  The  naturalist 
assures  us  that  order  and  harmony  prevail  in  what  appears  to  us  confused  chaos. 
There  a  kingly  rule  is  recognised,  submission  to  supreme  authority  is  observed, 
and  in  these  you  have  the  elements  of  an  empire.  Lifting  your  eyes  from  the 
earth  around  you  to  the  heaven  above  you,  we  are  told  that  those  heavens  are 
divided  into  districts  and  groups  of  worlds,  that  in  each  group  there  is  one  system 
exercising  a  kingly  rule  over  the  rest.  Far  above  all  these  petty  kingdoms  and 
minute  empires  is  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  He  moulded  every  atom. 
He  brightened  every  star.  He  fashioned  every  system.  He  appointed  to  each  its 
boundary.  He  created  all  forces  and  originated  all  laws.  From  Him  all  things 
proceed.  To  Him  all  things  tend.  For  Him  all  things  exist.  And  around  Him 
all  things  revolve.  He  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  in  the  material  world. 
The  disciples  of  a  sceptical  science  have  endeavoured  to  extort  from  nature  evidence 
against  her  King.  The  geologist  has  dived  into  the  depths  of  the  earth,  hoping  to 
discover  some  strange  hieroglyphics  on  the  rocks  of  nature  which  would  bear 
testimony  against  the  King  of  nature.  The  astronomer  has  soared  into  heaven, 
and  tried  to  get  the  very  stars  in  their  courses  to  fight  against  Him  who  made 
them.  In  fact,  nature  has  been  twisted  and  torn  and  disembowelled  in  order  to 
obtain  evidence  against  her  Lord.  Faithful  to  her  mission,  she  moves  on  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  great  purposes  for  which  her  King  has  made  her  ;  so  that, 
whether  by  her  regular  movement,  or  the  occasional  suspension  of  her  laws,  as  in 
the  case  of  miracles,  she  asserts  the  kingship  of  her  Lord,  and  proves  her  obedience 
to  her  Master.     This  world  materially  considered  is  eminently  fitted  for  Christ  as 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  688 

Mediator.  Wo  can  only  conceive  of  three  kinda  of  worlds.  One  in  which  there 
shall  be  nothing  but  purity,  and  consequently  nothing  but  happiness ;  such  ia 
heaven.  The  Hoeond,  a  world  in  which  there  Khali  be  nothing  but  sin,  and  conse- 
quently nothing  but  niisory  ;  Huch  is  hell.  The  third,  a  world  in  which  there  shall 
be  an  admixture  of  the  two,  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong;  such  is  the  world  we 
ocoupy.  This  world,  take  it  geologically,  is  not  fitted  for  atjything  else  than  a 
mediatorial  world.  It  is  not  fitted,  as  to  its  material  construction,  to  bo  a  heaven, 
a  world  of  unsullied  purity,  and,  constMiuently,  a  world  of  unnuxod  happiness. 
Lightnings  and  storms  ruthlessly  pursue  their  destructive  and  desolating  course ; 
the  volcano  belches  forth  its  dostrucitivo  lava,  which  carries  desolation  to  cities  and 
villages  and  fruitful  plains.  These  things  could  not  exist  in  a  world  of  unsullied 
happiness  and  purity.  We  find  the  elenn^nts  of  ruin  and  (b'struction  in  the  very 
material  of  which  the  world  is  constructed,  and  it  is  not  fitted  on  that  account  to 
be  a  heaven.  It  is  not  fitted,  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  a  world  of  retribution  and  of 
unmixed  evil.  The  sun  shines  here.  The  valleys  smile  with  luxuriance  hero. 
Thrilling  sensations  of  pleasure  are  experienced  here.  Scenes  of  loveliness  si)read 
themselves  before  the  vision  here.  There  is  no  sunshine  in  hell ;  no  beauteous 
scenes  are  there  ;  no  sweet  harmony  there  :  but  they  do  exist  here.  Why  have  we 
this  admixture  of  destructive  and  benevolent  forces  stored  up  in  the  secret  places 
of  nature  ?  These  elements  are  necessary  in  order  that  the  earth  may  be  a  fitting 
theatre  for  Jesus  Christ  to  carry  out  His  mediatorial  purposes.  Ho  nmst  have 
elements  to  appeal  to  man's  fears,  and  He  finds  them  in  the  destructive  forces  of 
nature.  Ho  must  have  elements  to  appeal  to  man's  hopes,  and  He  finds  them  in 
the  benevolent  forces  of  nature.  The  component  parts  of  earth  were  adjusteil, 
put  together,  with  a  view  to  redeeming  purposes.  All  the  elements  of  nature,  all 
its  laws,  and  all  its  forces  have  been  nuide  for  Christ  as  Mediator,  and  are  placed 
under  His  immediate  control.  He  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  in  the 
material  world.  H.  In  the  mkntal  would  Jesus  Christ  is  King  of  kings.  Karth 
has  her  crowned  kings,  monarchs  surrounded  with  symbols  of  royalty  ;  the  crown, 
the  sceptre,  and  the  throne.  The  extent  of  their  dominions  varies,  as  does  also  the 
amount  of  power  they  wield.  Some  are  despotic,  arbitrary,  and  al)solute  ;  others 
are  mild  and  paternal  in  their  rule.  Some  are  the  mere  tools  of  parties,  and  retain 
nothing  akin  to  kingship  but  the  symbol.  While  some  of  them  happily  and  trust- 
fully acknowledge  the  supronuicy  of  Christ,  there  are  others  who  recognise  no 
authority  higher  than  their  own,  and  no  power  superior  to  their  own.  Nations  are 
organised  and  held  together,  scattered  or  established  on  the  one  principle  of  sub- 
serviency to  the  empire  of  Christ.  The  ruling  powers  of  earth  exist  for  Him. 
Willingly  or  unwillingly  they  are  His  servants.  Consciously  or  unconsciously  they 
are  carrying  out  His  purpos(!S,  When  they  cease  to  be  His  instruments  He  often 
removes  them,  and  brings  others  in  their  place.  "  By  Me  princes  rule,"  •*  by  Me 
kings  reign  and  princes  decree  justice."  Sceptics  sneeringly  say,  "  Your  Christianity 
has  been  in  the  world  for  eighteen  hundred  years,  and  this  surely  is  time  enough 
for  it  to  subdue  the  world.  The  fact  that  it  has  failed  to  meet  with  universal 
acceptance  throughout  all  the  ages  is  proof  enough  that  it  is  not  the  Divine  religion 
you  profess  it  to  be."  Our  reply  is,  God  feels  no  hurry.  When  man  strongly 
desires  to  accomplish  an  object  he  often  exercises  haste.  He  is  liable  to  so  numy 
contingencies.  Unforeseen  circumstances  may  arise  to  check  his  progress  and  to 
defeat  his  purpose.  But  God  exercises  no  haste,  nor  doubts  the  issue.  Eternity  is 
before  Him ;  endless  ages  are  waiting  for  Him.  But  there  are  also  uncrowned 
kings — men  who  never  wore  a  crown,  perhaps  never  saw  one  ;  but  who,  neverthe- 
less, are  the  true  kings  of  society,  who  possess  minds  of  kingly  proportions  and 
imperial  mould,  who  influence  and  move  and  control  minds  inferior  to  their  own. 
There  have  been  the  founders  of  false  religions,  the  origituitors  of  errors,  like 
Buddha,  Mahomet,  Sabollius,  Arius;  and  nearer  our  own  times  men  like  Tom 
Paine,  Voltaire,  Gibbon,  Hume  ;  and  men  of  our  own  day  like  Strauss  and  Kenan. 
These  men  possess  kingly  intellects,  and  wield  a  kingly  power  over  many  other 
Intellects.  1  hey  have  set  themselves  up  against  the  kingly  rule  of  Christ.  They 
have  inspired  millions  with  their  errors.  The  battle  they  have  waged  with  the 
King  of  Truth  is  fierce  and  desperate.  It  has  been  going  on  for  ages,  liut  this  we 
know,  Jesus  is  unchanging  and  immortal.  His  enemies  in  succession  die  and  pass 
away,  but  He  never  dies.  Let  the  kings  of  the  earth,  crowned  and  uncrowned, 
Bocial  rulers  and  mental  rulers,  set  tbems(>lve8  against  God's  anointed ;  let  them 
join  in  an  unhallowed  conspiracy,  and  associate  with  them  the  whole  mass  of 
infernal  powers,  and  rise  up  in  rebellion  against  the  kingly  rule  of  Christ,  all  that 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

they  can  do  is  but  the  menace  of  a  puny  worm  against  One  whose  frown  is, 
perdition.  "  The  Lamb  shall  overcome  them."  A  reverent  universe  will  then  bow 
at  the  feet  of  His  victorious  Majesty,  and  creation  shall  become  vocal  with  the 
song,  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  "  have  "  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  III.  Jesus  Christ  is 
supreme  in  the  moral  woeld.  Men  are  everywhere  actuated  by  principles,  passions, 
purposes,  motives  existing  within  them.  These  inward  forces  are  in  possession  of 
the  mastery;  they  exercise  kingship.  Li  the  language  of  the  Scriptures,  they 
reign,  they  have  dominion.  "  Know  ye  not,  that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves 
servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey  ;  whether  of  sin  unto  death, 
or  of  obedience  unto  righteousness."  The  lust  of  power,  the  lust  of  money,  the  lust 
of  pleasure,  the  lust  of  pride,  the  lust  of  envy,  are  the  imperial  powers  which 
control  men,  bringing  them  into  vile  and  degrading  bondage,  and  hurrying  them 
into  wrong  doing.  Evil,  when  thus  dominant,  exercises  a  crushing  sway  over  its 
victim.  Some  of  you  have  been  conscious  of  this.  Some  base  passion  has  mastered 
you.  And  after  a  short  conflict  you  had  to  beat  a  retreat  and  own  yourself  again 
mastered.  But  why?  Because  you  faced  the  foe  in  your  strength.  Sin  has  but 
one  master,  one  king,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil, 
and  it  is  through  Him  strengthening  you  that  you  can  be  made  victorious. 
However  mighty  evil  may  be  when  enthroned  in  the  human  heart,  Jesus  is 
jiiightier  far.  He  is  stronger  than  the  strong  man  armed.  Christ  while  yet  on 
earth  confronted  and  mastered  moral  evil  under  a  variety  of  forms  and  circum- 
stances. Look  at  Him  again  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  He  saw  in  that  grave 
evidence  of  the  triumph  of  moral  evil— a  proof  that  sin  had  obtained  kingship  over 
human  life,  and  reversed  the  destiny  of  man  from  life  to  death.  His  tears  were 
shed  over  sin  and  its  sad  results  as  witnessed  in  that  sepulchre.  His  contest  was 
not  with  death  but  with  moral  evil.  But  there  are  moral  laws  as  well  as  moral 
forces  in  the  world.  We  will  just  mention  one  or  two  as  an  illustration.  One  law 
is  this:  that  hardness  is  the  inevitable  result  of  resistance.  Just  as  the  anvil 
becomes  hardened  by  every  stroke  of  the  hammer,  the  heart  of  man  is  hardened 
by  every  resistance  it  offers  to  the  Divine  Word  and  Divine  Spirit.  This  is  not  an 
arrangement.  It  is  a  law  in  God's  moral  empire,  and  this  law  explains  to  me 
what  otherwise  seems  to  be  paradoxical  in  the  history  of  Pharaoh.  The  penalty  of 
hardness  was  inflicted  by  God,  that  is,  by  an  inevitable  law  which  He  appointed  ; 
and  in  this  sense  it  may  be  said  that  God  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  Pharaoh  did  the  wrong,  the  penalty  of  which  is  hardness.  God  neither 
compelled  nor  disposed  him  to  resist.  God  is  responsible  for  the  law  which  inflicts 
hardness  as  the  penalty  of  resistance ;  but  Pharaoh  alone  is  responsible  for  setting 
that  law  at  defiance,  and  thereby  incurring  the  penalty  of  hardness.  Another  great 
law  in  the  mediatorial  government  of  Jesus  is  that  sin  is  its  own  punishment. 
Where  there  is  wrong-doing  there  must  be  suffering.  That  is  God's  law.  And  so 
we  understand  the  declaration,  "Tophet  is  ordained  of  old;  the  breath  of  the 
Lord  doth  kindle  it."  God  affixed  suffering  as  the  penalty  of  wrong-doing.  But 
the  wrong-doer  alone  is  responsible  for  bringing  himseK  under  the  dominion  of 
that  law.  God  has  made  it  a  law  that  fire  should  burn.  If  I  foolishly  thrust  my 
hand  into  the  flame  I  become  a  sufferer  under  the  dominion  of  that  law.  God  is 
responsible  for  the  law :  but  who  is  responsible  for  my  suffering  ?  Certainly  not 
God,  but  myself  alone.  Why  does  not  retribution  fall  at  once  on  transgressors  ? 
It  is  because  the  Mediator  reigns.  He  is  above  law,  superior  to  law.  He  restrains 
the  action  of  the  law  of  retribution.  He  holds  back  the  penalty.  But  what  right 
has  Jesus  Christ  to  interfere  with  the  law  and  to  delay  retribution  ?  This  right  is 
not  based  on  His  absolute  sovereignty,  but  on  His  atonement.  The  kingly  title  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  written  on  His  vesture.  What  kind  of  a  vesture  is  it  ?  It  is  not 
a  kingly  robe,  but  a  priestly  one.  He  is  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood. 
His  kingship  is  based  on  sacrifice.  But  this  restraint  will  only  be  exercised  for  a 
time.  Probation  being  over,  the  impenitent  will  be  given  up  to  the  law  of  retribu- 
tion. IV.  In  the  SPIRITUAL  universe  Jesus  Christ  is  supreme.  There  is  not  a 
portion  of  the  universe  where  His  sway  is  not  felt  and  confessed.  There  is  not  a 
locality  abandoned.  That  dominion  extends  to  the  place  of  banishment,  the  abode 
of  the  lost.  Kings  many  dwell  in  hell.  Princely  titles  are  given  to  them.  They 
are  designated  "  principalities  "  and  "  powers,"  "  spiritual  wickedness."  They  are 
masters  in  evil,  but  they  are  in  chains.  Jesus,  while  yet  on  earth,  confronted  some 
of  these  spiritual  rulers,  and  proved  His  kingship  over  them  by  mastering  them. 
His  dominion  extends  also  to  heaven,  the  abode  of  the  holy.     Good  spirits  are 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  557 

subject  to  His  kingship.  "The  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  Him  upon 
white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean  "  (ver-.  14).  These  consti- 
tute His  retinue,  accompanying  Him  in  His  march  of  conquest,  sharing  His  toils, 
sympathising  with  His  purposes,  and  aiding  His  triumphs.  With  outspread  wings 
they  are  ever  waiting  His  behests  ;  ever  ready  to  execute  His  purpose,  whether  of 
judgment  or  of  mercy.  His  will  is  their  rule,  His  word  their  law.  What  a  pledge 
have  we  of  the  final  triumph  of  truth  !  If  Jesus  is  the  King  of  all  beings,  all 
forces,  all  laws ;  if  all  power  is  given  Him  in  heaven,  earth,  and  hell ;  if  He 
regulates  and  overrules  aU  events,  we  need  have  no  doubt  of  the  issue.  From  the 
beginning  He  keeps  one  end  steadily  in  view,  the  subjugation  of  moral  evil,  the 
destruction  of  the  works  of  the  devil.  We  have  spoken  to  you  of  the  kingship 
based  on  atonement,  but  we  would  remind  you  of  the  kingship  based  on  power. 
The  title  is  written  not  only  on  the  priestly  vesture,  but  also  on  His  thigh.  But 
why  upon  the  thigh  ?  The  thigh  is  a  symbol  of  power.  It  is  the  strongest  place 
in  a  man.  It  is  the  place  where  the  muscles  congregate.  The  angel  of  the 
covenant  touched  Jacob  on  the  thigh,  and  sent  him  limping  all  the  way  through 
life,  to  humble  him,  and  to  remind  him  how  weak  he  was  even  in  his  strongest 
place  when  God  touched  him.  Hence  the  kingship  of  Jesus  is  written  on  His  thigh. 
Men  who  will  not  yield  willing  submission  to  His  authority  and  the  claims  of  His 
love  shall  be  made  to  yield  unwilling  submission  to  His  retributive  justice.  If  the 
milder  aspects  of  His  kingly  character  fail  to  subdue  them,  He  must  turn  upon 
them  the  sterner  aspects  of  that  character.  If  the  kingship  of  the  vesture  fail  to 
subdue  you  He  must  turn  upon  you  the  kingship  of  the  thigh.  If  the  revelation  of 
His  mercy  and  love  fail  to  allure  you,  He  must  by  a  revelation  of  power  break  what 
refused  to  bend.  We  all  must  be  the  subjects  of  either  the  kingship  of  the  vesture 
or  the  kingship  of  the  thigh.  [Richard  Roberts.)  The  crotoned  Christ : — 1. 
Christ's  perfect  physical  health  and  bodily  beauty  is  a  crown  that  attracts  us.  We 
read  of  His  fatigue,  hunger,  and  lack  of  sleep  ;  but  nowhere  of  inability  to  sleep,  or  of 
disgust  of  food,  or  of  any  physical  infirmities.  2.  There  is  the  crown  of  intellectual 
wisdom.  Not  that,  indeed,  of  scholastic  and  rabbinic  lore ;  but  there  was  a 
marvellous  maturity  of  mind,  a  balance  of  faculties,  a  felicity,  aptness,  and  pro- 
portion about  His  mental  development.  3.  The  crown  of  moral  perfection  rests  on 
the  head  of  Christ.  4.  Divine  love.  When  on  earth  there  was  in  Christ  this 
element  which  drew  men  to  Him.  5.  The  crown  of  suffering.  6.  Power  to  save. 
This  is  operative  here  and  now  as  well  as  in  the  future  life.  {A.  J.  Lyman,  D.D.) 
Many  crowns — Christ  as  King  : — I.  To  understand  this  passage  we  must  compare 
it  with  a  very  similar  passage  in  chap,  vi.,  where  is  described  the  beginning  of  a 
conflict  which  is  here  drawing  to  a  victorious  end.  There  the  Rider  on  the  white 
horse,  going  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer,  is  foUowed  by  riders  on  red  and 
black  and  pale  horses — powers  which  were  to  destroy,  hunt,  kill.  Here  these  riders 
have  vanished.  Now,  "  the  armies  that  were  in  heaven  followed  Him  upon  white 
horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white  and  clean."  There  "  a  crown  "  was  given  to 
Him.  Here  He  has  "many  crowns,"  or  rather  diadems,  upon  His  head.  The 
same  crown  is  still  worn,  but  now  it  is  glorified  by  many  circlets,  which  have  been 
added  to  it  one  by  one.  Each  has  been  a  diadem  or  crown  of  victory;  each  repre- 
sents a  new  conquest  over  the  powers  of  evil  II.  Notice  that  the  crown  itself  is 
the  King's  by  gift  (chap.  vi.  2).  This  crown  was  given  to  Jesus  at  His  Incarnation, 
when  He  came  forth  out  of  the  heavenly  places,  conquering  and  to  conquer.  He 
had,  indeed,  before  that  day  a  crown  which  was  His  own  by  right  and  by  inherit- 
ance. But  that  crown  He  laid  aside.  With  infinite  condescension  He  emptied 
Himself  of  all  that  glory  (Phil,  ii,  6-8).  Then  He  accepted  this  crown  as  a  gift. 
Being  already  King  of  the  angels.  King  of  the  universe.  He  now  stooped  to  become 
King  of  humanity.  But  this  world,  to  which  He  thus  came  to  be  its  King,  was  a 
scene  of  rebellion.  He  had  to  win  His  sovereignty,  to  vindicate  and  prove  His 
title.  Opposition  had  to  be  crushed,  mighty  foes  to  be  vanquished.  Each  of  His 
achievements  wins  for  Him  another  circlet  in  that  golden  crown.  The  glory  at  the 
end  will  be  infinite,  even  as  His  humiliation  was  infinite.  III.  There  is  an  old 
reading  which  makes  the  text  run  thus :  "  On  His  head  were  many  crowns  having 
names  written,"  as  though  each  circlet  contained  its  own  description.  Well  do  we 
know  the  single  words  which  would  glitter  on  some  of  the  brightest  of  the  diadems 
— Suffered ;  crucified  ;  dead  ;  buried  ;  descended  into  hell  1  Each  of  them  sounds 
indeed,  like  a  defeat,  and  yet  each  is,  we  know,  a  stupendous  victory.  Then  will 
follow  those  two  in  which  His  triumph  is  openly  displayed — He  rose  again  from 
the  dead ;  He  ascended  into  heaven,  &c.     IV.  The  tale  is  not  yet  completed.     More 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

circlets  have  yet  to  be  added.  The  things  which  Jesus  began  to  do  and  to  teach 
up  to  the  day  when  He  was  taken  up,  He  left  His  Church  to  go  on  doing  and 
teaching  till  the  end  of  time.  Not  until  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  have 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ  will  the  crown  of  Jesus  be 
complete,  and  the  many  diadems  have  reached  their  full  number.  Lessons  :  1.  The 
duty  of  loyalty  to  our  King.  2.  Personal  devotion  to  our  King.  3,  Each  should 
do  something  for  the  spread  of  His  kingdom.  (1)  We  ought  to  do  it,  because  He  is 
our  King  and  the  nations  belong  to  Him  of  right.  (2)  We  shall  be  anxious  to  do 
it,  in  proportion  as  we  realise  the  beauty  of  His  character.  {R.  H.  Parr,  M.A.) 
Christ's  kingly  authority  : — I.  Christ,  in  His  mediatorial  character,  has  a  crown  of 
SUPREME  DIGNITY.  11.  Christ,  as  Mediator,  has  a  crown  of  victory.  IH.  Jesus,  as 
Mediator,  has  a  crown  of  sovereign  power.  Unto  Him  is  given  all  power  in  heaven 
and  upon  earth  :  as  far  as  the  bounds  of  creation  reach,  so  far  does  His  dominion 
reach.  IV.  Christ,  as  Mediator,  has  a  crown  of  sovereign  right.  He  has  not  only 
the  power  to  compel,  but  the  right  to  demand  the  obedience  of  every  creature  ;  and 
it  is  the  great  distinction  between  those  who  are  and  those  who  are  not  His  people, 
that  while  all  the  creatures  of  God,  whether  willingly  or  unwillingly,  must  execute 
Christ's  pleasure,  those  who  are  indeed  His  submit  joyfully  and  heartily  to  His  rule, 
and  keep  themselves  ready  to  do  or  suffer  whatever  He  requires  of  them,  simply 
because  He  requires  it.  V.  Jesus,  as  Mediator,  has  a  crown  of  judicial  authority: 
"  The  Father  Himself  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the 
Son,"  &c.  (Wm.  Ramsay.)  The  many  crowns : — I.  It  is  most  probable  that 
special  attention  is  hereby  meant  to  be  drawn :  first,  to  that  multiplicity  of  char- 
acters in  which  our  Lord  is  set  forth.  Those  words  which  we  so  glibly  utter — 
Mediator,  Advocate,  Saviour,  Eedeemer,  Intercessor — are  not  dUEferent  words  to 
represent  the  same  thing.  Every  one  has  its  own  true  and  proper  signification ; 
every  one  gathers  up  into  itself,  and  expresses  a  distinct  and  independent  part  of 
His  work  for  man.  But,  further  than  this,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  Being 
who  possesses  more  than  one  Nature.  These  varied  offices  spring  out  of  this  further 
truth.  They  are  the  branches  which  grow  out  of  the  doctrine  that  He  is  at  once 
the  Root  and  Offspring  of  David,  being  both  God  and  Man.  II.  But  there  is  a 
further  interpretation  to  be  given  of  the  mystic  crowns.  It  is  a  remarkable  pro- 
phecy of  Isaiah  when  addressing  the  spiritual  Zion,  that  is,  the  Christian  Church, 
"  Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,"  making  the  diadem 
of  Christ  to  be  the  company  of  His  elect.  So  also  St.  Paul  writes  (Phil.  iv.  1 ; 
1  Thess.  ii.  19).  The  idea  in  all  these  passages  is  the  same,  that  the  disciples  are 
the  crown  of  the  teacher.  And,  transferring  this  to  our  Blessed  Lord,  we  get 
another,  and  perhaps  the  most  blessed  signification  of  the  text,  even  this — that  the 
crowning  of  the  Redeemer,  and  His  highest  glory  within  the  Heaven  of  Heavens, 
are  the  Churches  which  have  been  gathered  unto  Him,  and  the  souls  which  have 
been  saved  through  Him.  Let  us  pause  upon  this  thought  in  connection  with  the 
Mission  work  of  the  Church.  Why  should  we  take  an  interest  in  it  ?  Why,  with 
confessedly  great  calls  upon  us  at  home,  must  we  contribute  money  and  send  men 
to  labour  beyond  the  sea  ?  Now  observe,  first,  that  if  there  were  no  visible  results 
to  encourage  us,  we  should  still  be  bound  fo  "  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
The  Church  forgets  one  main  purpose  of  its  existence  if  it  forgets  this.  But  observe, 
secondly,  that  God  does  seem  to  have  vouchsafed  us  a  measure  of  success,  at  least, 
in  proportion  to  our  exertions  and  the  short  time  during  which  the  work  has  been 
carried  on.  And  whilst  there  is  a  great  dearth  of  men  abroad,  is  there  not  also 
a  great  dearth  of  prayer  at  home  ?  {Bp.  Woodford.)  The  crowns  of  Christ : — 
[See  Matt,  xxvii.  29.]  Contrasts  often  powerfully  reveal  truth.  But  never  did  the 
universe  present  a  contrast  so  striking  as  that  suggested  by  our  texts.  Yonder  in 
Jerusalem  is  a  despised  Nazarene,  forsaken  by  His  friends,  hated,  mocked,  scourged, 
crowned  with  thorns  !  Yonder  in  heaven  is  the  same  Being,  gloriously  apparelled, 
crowns  of  victory  on  His  head,  worshipped  by  myriads  of  radiant  spirits  as  "  King 
of  kings,"  &c.  I.  The  crown  of  thorns  symbolised  Christ's  submission  to  sin  ; 
THE  crowns  of  GLORY  His  TRIUMPH  OVER  SIN.  The  world  has  often  looked  upon 
this  most  unnatural  sight,  this  reversal  of  the  true,  Divinely-appointed  order  of 
things — the  evil  triumphing  over  the  good.  The  Son  of  Heaven's  King  is  crowned 
with  thorns  and  crucified ;  who  will  keep  His  laws  or  care  for  His  sceptre  now  ? 
The  sharp  thorns  which  pierced  Him  have  healed  many  a  wounded  heart.  His 
death  has  been  a  spring  of  life  to  the  world.  His  shame  has  won  immortal  glory 
for  countless  redeemed  souls.     II.  The  crown  of  thorns  shadowed  forth  Christ's 

LOVE   TO   MEN  ;     THE     CROWNS     OF     GLORY     MEN'S    LOVE    TO   HiM.      HI.    ThE    CROWN   OP 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  559 

THORNS    SHOWED    THAT    ChKISt's     KiNGDOM    IS     LIMITED     IN    ITS     INSTRUMENTS;     THE 

CROWNS  OF  GLORY  THAT  IT  IS  UNIVERSAL  IN  ITS  EXTENT.  The  excited  multitude 
would  have  made  Jesus  a  King,  and  placed  earthly  weapons,  soldiers,  &c.,  at  His 
disposal;  but  He  thrust  all  these  aside.  He  wore  a  "crown  of  thorns"  to  show 
that  He  was  a  King  ruUng  not  by  force,  but  by  influence,  not  by  material  instru- 
ments, civil  power,  &c.,  but  by  spiritual  weapons,  love,  truth,  &c.  Universal 
dominion  has  been  the  dream  of  proud  conquerors,  Alexander,  Napoleon ;  but  they 
have  traced  their  empires  on  shifting  sands,  to  be  obUterated  by  the  next  storm 
blast.  But  man's  dream  is  God's  sober  truth.  IV.  The  crown  of  thorns  un- 
folded  THE   TRANSITORINESS    OF     ChRIST's    SUFFERINGS — ^HE    CROWNS  OF   GLORY  THE 

ETERNITY  OF  His  JOY.  Thoms  1  Perishable  in  their  very  nature.  The  '•  many 
crowns  "  point  to  the  everlasting  joys  which  thrill  the  Eedeemer's  heart.  His 
happiness  is  as  permanent  as  His  sovereignty.  (T.  W.  Mays,  M.A.)  The 
Redeemer's  crowns  : — To  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  belongs  the  crown  of — 1.  Koyal 
descent.  2.  Victory.  3.  Empire.  4.  Priesthood.  5.  Every  excellence.  6. 
Eternal  glory.  {Preacher's  Portfolio.)  Christ  and  His  croicns : — I.  The  regal 
CROWN.  1.  The  crown  of  universal  proprietorship  belongs  to  Christ.  2.  The  crown 
of  universal  dominion  belongs  to  Christ.  II.  The  victor's  crown.  The  Kedeemer 
proved  Himself  a  conqueror  in  three  respects  :  by  His  life,  by  His  death,  and  by  His 
resurrection,  1.  He  won  the  crown  of  unspotted  obedience.  2.  He  won  the  crown 
of  immortality.  3.  He  won  the  crown  of  championship  over  the  grave.  III.  The 
■bridegroom's  crown.  The  Church  is  to  be  presented  "  as  a  chaste  virgin "  to 
Christ.  Then  "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be  satisfied."  Then 
shall  another  crown  be  added — the  crown  of  universal  adoration  and  gratitude. 
{The   Study.)  The  dignities  of  Christ : — I.  These  dignities  are  of  priceless 

value.  What  on  earth  does  man  regard  as  more  valuable  than  a  "  crown  "  ?  But 
what  are  all  the  crowns  of  the  world  to  the  diadems  that  encircle  the  being  of 
Christ  ?  II.  These  dignities  are  manifold.  There  is  the  dignity  of  an  all-know- 
ing intellect ;  of  an  immaculate  conscience ;  of  an  absolutely  unselfish  love ;  of  a 
will  free  from  all  the  warping  influences  of  sin,  error,  and  prejudice.  III.  These 
DIGNITIES  ABE  SELF-PRODUCED.  All  His  dignities  are  but  the  brilliant  evolutions  of 
His  own  great  soul.  IV.  These  dignities  are  imperishable.  How  soon  the 
"crowns"  worn  by  men  grow  dim  and  rot  into  dust!  But  Christ's  diadems  are 
incorruptible  ;  they  will  sparkle  on  for  ever,  and  fill  all  the  heavens  of  immensity 
with  their  brilliant  lustre.  {Homilist.)  The  Saviour  crowned: — I.  Whence  it 
IS  that  these  honours  ACCUMULATE  UPON  HiM.  1.  From  the  essential  dignity  of 
His  nature.  2.  From  the  offices  He  sustains  in  the  economy  of  salvation.  3. 
From  the  exploits  He  has  won  and  the  conquests  He  has  achieved.     II.  By  what 

MEANS    WE    MAY   CONTRIBUTE   TO   MULTIPLY    THE     HONOURS     OP    THE     SaVIOUR's    NAME. 

1.  By  our  personal  submission  to  His  spiritual  empire.  We  must  all  take 
a  side.  2.  By  consecrating  an  individual  interest  to  His  cause.  3.  By  taking 
part  in  the  great  institutions  of  the  times  in  which  we  live.  (M.  Braithwaite.) 
He  was  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood. — The  war  in  heaven : — Who,  then, 
is  the  being  whom  St.  John  sees  in  the  spiritual  world  appearing  eternally  as  a 
warrior,  with  his  garments  stained  with  blood,  the  leader  of  armies  smiting  the 
nations,  ruling  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ?  St.  John  tells  us  that  He  has  one  name 
which  none  knew  save  Himself.  But  He  tells  us  that  He  has  another  name  which 
St.  John  did  know;  and  that  it  is  "the  Word  of  God" ;  and  He  tells  us,  more- 
over, that  He  is  called  Faithful  and  True.  And  who  He  is  all  Christian  men  are 
bound  to  know.  He  it  is  who  makes  perpetual  war,  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of 
lords.  He  Himself  is  full  of  chivalry,  full  of  fidelity ;  and,  therefore,  all  which  is 
base  and  treacherous  is  hateful  in  His  eyes,  and  that  which  He  hates  He  is  both 
able  and  willing  to  destroy.  He  it  is  who  makes  perpetual  war.  He  makes  war  in 
righteousness.  Therefore,  all  men  and  things  which  are  unrighteous  and  unjust 
are  on  the  opposite  side  to  Him,  His  enemies,  and  He  will  trample  them  under  His 
feet.  But  the  meek  and  gentle  Jesus  ?  That  the  Lord  was  meek  and  gentle  when 
on  earth,  and  is,  therefore,  meek  and  gentle  in  heaven,  from  all  eternities  to  all 
eternities,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  But  with  that  meekness  and  lowliness  there  was 
in  Him  on  earth,  and,  therefore,  there  is  in  Him  in  heaven,  a  capacity  of  burning 
indignation  against  all  wrong  and  falsehood,  especially  against  that  worst  form  of 
falsehood,  hypocrisy;  and  that  worst  form  of  hypocrisy,  covetousness,  cloaking 
itself  under  the  name  of  religion.  For  that  He  had  no  meek  and  gentle  words ; 
but,  Ye  serpents,  ye  generation  of  vipers !  How  shall  ye  escape  the  damnation  of 
Gehenna  ?     And  because  His  character  is  perfect  and  eternal — because  He  is  the 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever — therefore  we  are  bound  to  believe  that  He 
has  now,  and  will  have  as  long  as  evil  exists,  the  same  Divine  indignation,  the 
same  Divine  determination  to  cast  out  of  His  kingdom — which  is  simply  the  whole 
universe — all  that  offends,  and  whosoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie.  The  wisest 
of  living  Britons  has  said  :  "  Infinite  pity,  yet  infinite  rigour  of  law.  It  is  so  that 
the  universe  is  made."  I  should  add :  It  is  so  that  the  universe  must  needs  be 
made,  because  it  is  made  by  Christ,  and  its  laws  are  the  reflection  of  His  character 
— pitiful  because  Christ  is  pitiful ;  rigorous  because  Christ  is  rigorous.  So  pitiful 
is  Christ  that  He  did  not  hesitate  to  be  slain  for  men,  that  mankind  through  Him 
might  be  saved.  So  rigorous  is  Christ  that  He  does  not  hesitate  to  slay  men,  if 
needful,  that  mankind  by  them  may  be  saved.  I  know  but  too  well  that  most  people 
find  it  very  difficult,  always  have  in  every  age  and  country  found  it  most  difficult 
to  believe  in  such  a  God  as  Scripture  sets  forth — a  God  of  boundless  tenderness, 
and  yet  a  God  of  boundless  indignation.  Men's  notion  of  tenderness  is  too  often 
a  selfish  dislike  of  seeing  other  people  uncomfortable,  because  it  makes  them 
uncomfortable  themselves.  They  hate  and  dread  honest  severity  and  stern  exercise 
of  lawful  power;  till  it  has  been  bitterly  but  truly  said  that  public  opinion  will 
allow  a  man  to  do  anything  except  his  duty.  Now  this  is  a  humour  which  cannot 
last.  It  breeds  weakness,  anarchy,  and,  at  last,  ruin  to  society.  And  then  the 
effeminate  and  luxurious,  terrified  for  their  money  and  their  comfort,  fly  from  an 
unwholesome  tenderness  to  an  unwholesome  indignation ;  and,  in  a  panic  of  selfish 
fury,  become — as  cowards  are  too  apt  to  do — blindly  and  wantonly  cruel,  and  those 
who  fancied  God  too  indulgent  to  punish  His  enemies  are  the  first  and  the  fiercest 
to  punish  their  own.     •'  Christian,"  says  a  great  genius  and  a  great  divine— 

*'  If  thou  wouldst  learn  to  love, 
Thou  first  must  learn  to  hate." 

And,  if  any  answer :  Hate  ?  even  God  hateth  nothing  that  He  hath  made ;  then  the 
rejoinder  is  :  And  for  that  very  reason  He  hates  evil,  because  He  has  not  made  it, 
and  it  is  ruinous  to  all  that  He  has  made.  Let  every  man  go  and  do  likewise. 
Let  him  hate  what  is  wrong  with  all  his  heart,  and  mind,  and  soul,  and  strength, 
for  so  only  will  he  love  God  with  all  his  heart,  and  mind,  and  soul,  and  strength. 
Let  him  say,  day  by  day — aye,  almost  hour  by  hour — "  Strengthen  me,  0  Lord,  to 
hate  what  Thou  hatest  and  to  love  what  Thou  lovest " ;  that  so  when  that  dread 
day  shall  come,  when  every  man  shall  receive  the  reward  of  the  deeds  done  in  the 
body,  whether  they  be  good  or  whether  they  be  evil,  he  may  have  some  decent 
answer  to  give  to  the  awful  question:  "  On  whose  side  hast  thou  been  in  the  battle 
of  life  ?  On  the  side  of  God  and  all  good  beings,  or  on  the  side  of  all  bad  spirits 
and  bad  men?  "  {C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  The  grand  review  : — When  my  text,  in 
figure,  represents  the  armies  of  the  glorified  as  riding  upon  white  horses,  it  sets  forth 
the  strength,  the  fleetness,  the  victory,  and  the  innocence  of  the  redeemed.  The 
horse  has  always  been  an  emblem  of  strength.  When  startled  by  sudden  sight  or 
sound,  how  he  plunges  along  the  highway !  The  hand  of  the  strong  driver  on  the 
reins  is  like  the  grasp  of  a  child.  1.  Therefore,  when  the  redeemed  are  represented 
as  riding  on  white  horses,  their  strength  is  set  forth.  The  days  of  their  invalidism 
and  decrepitude  are  past.  O  the  day  when,  having  put  off  the  last  physical 
impediment,  you  shall  come  to  the  mightiness  of  heavenly  vigour  1  There  will  be 
hardly  anything  you  cannot  lift,  or  crush,  or  conquer.  2.  The  horse  used  in  the 
text  is  also  the  emblem  of  fleetness.  The  wild  horses  on  the  plain,  at  the  appearance 
of  the  hunter,  make  the  miles  slip  under  them,  as  with  a  snort  they  bound  away, 
and  the  dust  rises  in  whirlwinds  from  their  flying  feet,  until,  far  away,  they  halt 
with  their  faces  to  their  pursuer,  and  neigh  in  gladness  at  their  escape.  More 
swift  than  they  shall  be  the  redeemed  in  heaven.  O  the  exhilaration  of  feeling  that 
you  can  take  worlds  at  a  bound,  vast  distances  instantly  overcome — no  difference 
between  here  and  there  I  3.  The  horse  in  the  text  is  also  a  symbol  of  victory.  He 
was  not  used  on  ordinary  occasions ;  but  the  conqueror  mounted  him,  and  rode  on 
among  the  acclamations  of  the  rejoicing  multitude.  So  all  the  redeemed  of  heaven 
are  victors.  Yea,  they  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  hath  loved 
them.  My  text  places  us  on  one  of  the  many  avenues  of  the  Celestial  City.  The 
soldiers  of  God  have  come  up  from  earthly  battle,  and  are  on  the  parade.  We  shall 
not  have  time  to  see  all  the  great,  hosts  of  the  redeemed ;  but  John,  in  my  text, 
points  out  a  few  of  the  battalions  :  "  And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed 
■him  upon  white  horses."    Now,  come  on  the  battalions  of  the  saved.     Here  passes 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  561 

the  regiment  of  Christian  martyrs.  They  endured  all  things  for  Christ.  They 
were  hounded  ;  they  were  sawn  asunder ;  they  were  hurled  out  of  life.  Here  comes 
up  another  host  of  the  redeemed  :  the  regiment  of  Christian  philanthropists.  They 
went  down  into  the  battle-fields  to  take  care  of  the  wounded ;  they  plunged  into 
the  damp  and  moulded  prisons,  and  pleaded  before  God  and  human  governors  in 
behalf  of  the  incarcerated ;  they  preached  Christ  among  the  besotten  populations 
of  the  city ;  they  carried  Bibles  and  bread  into  the  garrets  of  pain  :  but  in  the  sweet 
river  of  death  they  washed  off  the  filth  and  the  loathsomeness  of  those  to  whom 
they  had  administered.  There  is  John  Howard,  who  circumnavigated  the  globe  in 
the  name  of  Him  who  said:  "I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  Me."  Here  goes  Elliott, 
who  once  toiled  for  Christ  among  savages,  saying  to  them  :  "  I  am  about  the  work 
of  the  great  God.  Touch  me  if  you  dare !  "  Here  comes  a  great  column  of  the 
Christian  poor.  They  always  walked  on  earth.  The  only  ride  they  ever  had  was 
in  the  hearse  that  took  them  to  the  Potter's  Field.  They  went  day  by  day  poorly 
clad,  and  meanly  fed,  and  insufficiently  sheltered.  But  a  shining  retinue  was 
waiting  beyond  the  river  for  their  departing  spirits,  and  as  they  passed  a  celestial 
escort  confronted  them,  and  snow-white  chargers  of  heaven  are  brought  in,  and 
the  conquerors  mounted ;  and  here  they  pass  in  the  throng  of  the  victors — poor- 
house  exchanged  for  palace,  rags  for  imperial  attire,  weary  walking  for  seats  on  the 
white  horses  from  the  King's  stable.  Kide  on,  ye  victors  1  Another  retinue  :  that 
of  the  Christian  invalids.  These  who  pass  now  languished  for  many  a  year  on 
their  couches.  But  I  cannot  count  the  interminable  troops  of  God  as  they  pass,  the 
redeemed  of  all  ages,  and  lands,  and  conditions.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  His 
name  is  called  the  Word  of  God. — The  victory  of  the  Word  of  God : — "  The  Word 
of  God."  What  is  it?  where  is  it?  is  it  at  all?  Has  God  spoken?  If  so,  how 
has  He  spoken,  and  what  is  the  word  He  has  spoken  ?  I.  What  is  a  word  ?  A 
word  may  be  broadly  defined  as  that  which  expresses  thought.  Now,  thought  is 
expressed  to  some  extent  by  language,  but  only  to  some  extent.  It  is  also  expressed 
by  action.  Action,  therefore,  is  a  word.  Conduct  is  a  word.  Everything  that 
man  has  made  or  done  is  a  word,  because  it  expresses  thought,  and  expresses  it 
sometimes  much  more  effectively  than  any  spoken  or  written  language  can.  The 
artist  can  best  express  his  thought  by  a  picture ;  the  sculptor,  by  a  statue ;  the 
musician,  by  his  music.  Action  is  a  word.  Everything  that  man  has  done  or 
made  is  a  word,  because  it  expresses  thought.  The  houses  we  build,  the  factories, 
the  ships,  the  churches,  the  clothes  we  wear,  the  movements  we  make,  everything 
that  man  has  made  or  done,  from  the  easiest  and  simplest  and  most  trifling  thing 
up  to  the  hardest  and  most  complex — it  all  stands  for  thought,  is  the  expression  of 
thought,  is  resolvable  back  into  thought — the  word,  the  embodiment,  the  manifesta- 
tion of  thought.  In  the  Book  of  Genesis  it  is  said  that  God  speaks  it  into  existence. 
God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light."  Light  is  His  word,  the  expression  of  His  thought, 
and  He  speaks  it.  And  God  said,  "  Let  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  and 
the  dry  land,  and  living  creatures  appear  "  ;  the  sun,  the  stars,  the  living  creatures 
— these  are  His  words,  the  expression  of  His  thought,  and  therefore  it  is  said,  He 
speaks  them  into  existence.  Is  there  any  other  word  that  God  has  spoken  ?  Is 
there  any  other  expression  of  His  thought  ?  In  making  up  the  inventory  of  the 
contents  of  the  universe,  we  must  not  leave  humanity  out  of  the  reckoning  ;  and  if 
the  sun,  the  stars,  the  great  globe  itself,  be  the  expression  of  thought,  and  constitute 
the  word  of  the  infinite  God,  must  not  human  nature  also  be  regarded  as  the  word 
of  the  infinite  God  ?  Yes,  man  is  God's  word  as  well  as  physical  nature,  expressing 
the  thought  of  God.  But  that  statement  must  be  guarded,  must  be  qualified.  For 
nowhere  in  our  ordinary  life  do  we  see  what  man  is,  and  therefore  cannot  know 
from  the  study  of  the  ordinary  man  what  God  is.  We  see  much  that  is  good  and 
noble  in  the  history  of  man,  and  we  also  see  many  things  that  are  base  and  ignoble, 
and  which  our  moral  sense  will  not  permit  us  in  any  wise  to  attribute  to  God  ;  and 
looking  upon  these  evil  things  in  human  history,  we  are  forced  to  say,  "  Some 
enemy  hath  done  this,  and  the  tares  have  sprung  up  with  the  wheat."  But  let  our 
eyes  somewhere  see  the  perfect  man,  in  whose  humanity  there  is  no  flaw  or  blemish ; 
then  and  there  we  shall  see  the  perfect  word  of  God,  "  the  brightness  of  His  glory 
and  the  express  image  of  His  person."  II.  And  now,  having  found  what  in  the 
broadest  sense  is  meant  by  the  Word  of  God,  let  us  consider  the  victory  of  that 
Word  ;  and,  first,  as  we  see  it  in  the  forms  and  forces  of  the  physical  creation  about 
us.  Physical  science,  as  we  call  it,  is  the  dominant  study  to-day,  and  marvellous 
are  the  results  which  have  been  accomplished  by  it.  Not  only  have  we  explored 
'  the  earth  and  gathered  its  hidden  treasures,  but  the  heavens,  and  the  waters  under 

30 


562  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

the  earth,  and  all  the  forces  of  nature,  we  have  gathered  in  golden  chains  around 
the  feet  of  man.  And  yet  if,  as  the  result  of  all  this,  man  is  only  becoming  greater 
and  richer  in  material  products  ;  if  all  the  forces  of  nature  which  he  has  discovered 
and  utilised  are  only  giving  him  greater  material  growth  and  expansion,  then, 
although  to-day  he  can  send  his  messages  under  the  waters  and  across  the  seas,  and 
the  earth  has  been  made  to  give  its  coal  and  iron  and  oil  and  mineral  treasures  to 
him,  and  the  stars  in  their  courses  fight  for  him  instead  of  against  him,  then  I  say 
that  in  spite  of  all  these  things  he  is  just  as  much  a  prisoner — although,  indeed,  he 
is  bound  with  golden  chains — as  in  the  days  of  Sisera  and  of  Job ;  and,  with  the 
materialistic  philosophy  coming  in  to  tell  him  that  there  is  nothing  but  matter  and 
force  about  him — no  thought,  no  spirit,  no  heaven,  no  God — not  even  a  •*  prisoner  of 
hope."  Let  us  eat  and  drink  and  be  merry,  for  to-morrow  we  die.  But  no  !  The 
physical  universe  about  us  is  not  merely  matter  and  force ;  it  is  the  word  of  mind. 
There  is  thought  in  it,  through  it,  pervading  it.  It  is  the  embodiment  of  the  thought 
of  God.  And,  looking  at  it  in  this  way,  then  does  human  life  become  truly  rich, 
and  is  "  crowned  with  many  crowns."  We  are  standing,  not  on  the  floor  of  a 
prison,  with  the  walls  of  a  prison  around  us,  and  the  great  sealed  roof  of  a  prison 
over  our  heads  :  we  are  living  in  the  open  of  God,  and  "  There  is  not  a  bird  that 
sings,  There  is  not  a  flower  that  stars  the  elastic  sod.  There  is  not  a  breath  the 
radiant  summer  brings.  But  is  a  word  of  God."  But  human  nature  as  well  as 
physical  nature — the  world  of  man  as  well  as  the  world  of  nature — is  the 
word  of  God.  And  in  the  perfect  man  Christ  Jesus,  as  I  have  tried  to  show,  we 
have  His  perfect  word ;  and,  oh,  what  victories  that  Word  of  God  has  wrought ! 
The  story  of  civilisation  is  the  story  of  its  triumph.  All  the  best  things  in  the  world 
to-day,  all  the  best  and  purest  feelings  that  touch  and  sway,  if  they  do  not  completely 
control,  the  heart  of  man — his  highest  conduct,  his  bravest  deeds,  his  noblest 
sacrifices,  his  brightest  hopes  for  the  future,  without  which  the  future  is  cold  and 
dreary  and  impenetrable  darkness  to  him — that  Word  of  God  has  inspired.  By  that 
Word  of  God  we  have  been  taught  that  we  are  sons  of  God ;  and,  looking  out 
upon  the  vast  physical  creation  about  us,  or  looking  up  through  the  moral  and 
spiritual  clouds  above  us,  we  have  been  able  to  say,  "  Our  Father,  who  art  in 
heaven,  Thine  is  the  kingdom  of  the  physical  creation  about  us ;  Thine  is  the 
power  that  is  working  mysteriously  in  our  human  life  for  our  good ;  Thine  is  the 
glory  for  ever !  "  And,  finding  our  fatherhood  in  God,  we  have  found  our  brother- 
hood in  one  another;  with  the  consciousness  of  that  brotherhood  we  have  been 
trying  to  live  and  perform  our  duties,  and  are  trying,  with  many  infirmities,  to 
perform  our  duties  to-day.  Far  as  we  yet  come  short  of  that  ideal  form  of  life,  we 
are  moving  toward  it,  and  will  continue  to  move  until  at  last,  here  or  somewhere — 
it  matters  not,  for  everywhere  we  are  in  the  open  of  God — here  or  somewhere  we 
shall  all  come,  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God, 
unto  the  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(D.  K.  Greer,  D.D.)  The  Word  of  God :— The  Infinite  Father  has  spoken  two 
great  words  to  His  intelligent  family.  One  word  is  Nature.  "  The  heavens  declare 
His  glory,"  &c.     The  other  word  is  Christ.     He  is  The  Logos.     I.  The  word  of 

ABSOLUTE    INFALrLIBIIilTY.      II.    The    WOrd    Of    EXHAUSTLESS    SIGNIFICANCE.      IH.    The 

word  of  ALMIGHTY  POWER.  IV.  The  word  of  universal  intebpretability.  Even 
the  written  words  that  make  up  what  we  call  the  Bible  are  frequently  uninterpre- 
table.  Hence  their  renderings  and  meanings  are  constantly  fluctuating,  and  often 
contradictive.  But  here  is  a  word  that  stands  for  ever — "the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  This  word  is  a  Life.  A  Life  a  child  can  interpret,  and  the 
greater  the  life  of  a  man,  the  more  generous,  truthful,  loving  he  is,  the  more  readily 
a  child  can  read  and  understand  him.  Hence  no  life  is  so  interpretable  as  Christ's 
life.  {Homilist.)  The  four  names  of  Christ : — I.  The  •'  faithful  and  true  " 
(ver.  11).  So  was  He :  1.  In  avenging  His  people.  2.  In  carrying  out  His 
purposes.  It  mattered  not  who  or  what  withstood.  3.  The  past  proves  the 
righteousness  of  this  name.  His  prophecies  have  been  fulfilled.  His  promises 
made  good.  His  precepts  owned  as  just.  II.  The  unknown  name.  (Ver.  12,  "  And 
He  had  a  name  written,  that  no  man  knew,  but  He  Himself.")  It  was  a  written 
name,  but  illegible,  incomprehensible,  to  all  but  Himself.  The  names  advance  in 
majesty.  "Faithful  and  True" — that  is  an  august  name,  but  it  cannot  be 
said  to  be  incomprehensible,  and  known  to  none  but  Himself.  Glory  be  to 
Him  that  we  do  know  Him  by  that  name,  and  that  the  name  is  rightly  His.  But 
now  the  ineffable  nature  of  the  Son  of  God  seems  to  be  suggested.  "  Who  by 
searching  can  find  out  God  ?  "    Christ  is  more  than  all  our  thought,  than  all  we 


CHAP.  XK.]  REVELATION.  563 

have  understood  or  have  imagined.     Who  knows  what  is  the  relation  between 
Him  and  the  Father,  and  what  the  nature  of  the  union  in  Him  of  humanity  and 
God  ?     Who  can  understand    the    profound   philosophy   of   the  Atonement,  the 
Incarnation,  the  Resurrection?     "No  man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father" — so 
said  our  Lord ;  and  this  unknown  name,  written,  though  not  read,  endorses  that 
sublime  saying.     And  do  we  wonder  that  we  cannot  understand  ?     Why,  this  we 
fail  to  do  even  with  our  fellow-men  if  they  be  of  higher  nature  than  our  own.     Let 
us  be  glad  and  grateful  that,  whatever  riches  of  grace  and  glory  we  have  already 
known,  there  is  an  inexhaustible  fountain  and  an  unsearchable  store  yet  remaining. 
And  now  a  name  more  majestic  still  is  given.     III.  "  The  word  of  God  "  (ver.  13). 
IV.  "King   of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords"  (ver.  16).     {S.  Conway,  B. A.)        The 
armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  Him. — Armies  invisible  and  distant  on  the 
side  of  the  good  : — I.  The  hosts  of  heaven  are  interested  in  the  moral  campaign 
WHICH  Christ  is  preaching  on  this  earth.     They  not  only  know  what  is  going  on 
on  this  little  planet,  but  throb  with  earnest  interest  in  its  history.     They  desire  to 
look  into  its  great  moral  concerns.     No  wonder  some  in  heaven  are  related  to  some 
on  earth ;  they  participate  in  the  same  nature,  sustain  the  same  relation,  and  are 
subject  to  the  same  laws.     Here,  too,  stupendous  events  have  occurred  in  connection 
with  Him  who  is  the  Head  of  all  Principalities,  Powers,  and  that  must  ever  thrall 
the  universe.   H.  The  hosts  of  heaven  lend  their  aid  to  Christ  in  His  tremendous 
battles.    If  you  ask  me  in  what  way  they  can  render  Him  aid,  I  can  suggest  many 
probable  methods.     We  know  that  one  great  thought  struck  into  the  soul  of  an 
exhausted  and  despairing  man,  can  repeat  and  reinvigorate  him.     May  it  not  be 
possible  for  departed  souls  and  unfallen  spirits  to  breathe  such  thoughts  into  the 
breasts  of  feeble  men  on  earth  ?     If  you  ask  me  why  Christ  should  accept  such  aid 
as  theirs,  or  the  aid  of  any  creature  in  His  mighty  struggles,  I  answer,  not  because 
He  requires  their  services,  for  He  could  do  His  work  alone,  but  for  their  own  good. 
By  it  He  gratifies  their  noblest  instincts,  engages  their  highest  faculties,  and  gains 
for  them  their  highest  honours  and  sublimest  joys.     HI.  The  hosts  of  heaven 
are    fully    equipped    for  service    in    this    martial    undertaking    on    earth. 
It  was  customary  in  Oriental  lands  for  soldiers  of  the  highest  rank  to  go  forth 
to  battle  on  steeds.     It  is  a  law  of  Christ's  kingdom  that  those  only  who  are 
holy  and  pure  can  enter   therein:   hence  these  heavenly  soldiers  are  furnished 
with  "  white  horses,"  the  emblem  of  purity,  and   "  white  linen  "  also.     No  one 
in  heaven  or  on  earth  will  Christ  allow  to  fight  under  His  banner  who  are  not 
qualified,  both  in  capacity  and  character,  for  the  work  they  undertake.     (Homilist.) 
He  hath  on  His  vesture  and  on  His  thigh  a  name  written.  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords. — The   kingdom  of  Christ: — I.  The  title  here  given  to  Christ. 
1.  Christ's  Godhead.     2.  His  dominion.     The  kings  and  lords  of  the  earth  exercise 
but  a  contracted  authority.    Not  so  Christ.     His  dominion  is  so  great,  that  it  com- 
prehends all  principalities  and  powers  in  heaven,  as  well  as  all  thrones  and 
dominions  upon  earth.     Yea,  even  the  devils  in  hell  are  subject  to  His  sceptre,  and 
are  compelled  to  obey  His  commands.     II.  The  way  in  which  that  title  is  dis- 
played.    1.  Christ's  past  victories.     The  Lord  Jesus  has   already  displayed  His 
sovereignty  over  the  whole  earth,  executing  vengeance,  whenever  it  was  necessary, 
upon  the  heathen,  and  punishments  upon  the  people,  binding  their  kings  with 
chains  and  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron.     How  often,  when  the  iniquity  of  a 
land  has  become  full,  has  He  sent  one  of  His  four  sore  judgments  upon  that  land, 
the  sword,  or  the  famine,  or  the  noisome  beast,  or  the  pestilence,  to  cut  off  man  and 
beast !     And  then  as  to  individual  transgressors — Adonibezek  and  Goliath,  Haman, 
Judas,  and  Ananias — all  serve  as  so  many  beacons  of  His  righteous  indignation,  and 
show  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  opposition  of  pretended  friends  and  avowed 
enemies,  His  cause  has  prospered  and  triumphed  ;  so  that  in  every  generation  the 
Lord  Jesus  has  been  known  for  the  judgments  He  has  executed,  snaring  the  wicked 
in  the  works  of  their  hands.     2.  His  future  triumphs.     Blessed  be  God,  the  pros- 
perity of  the  ungodly,  and  the  low  estate  of  evangelical  truth,  shall  not  always 
continue   as  we  now  see   them.     We    may  infer    hence — 1.  The  happiness  of 
Christ's  subjects.      2.  The  importance  of  knowing  whether  Christ  is  our  King. 
(C  Clayton,  M.A.)         King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords  : — Let  us  consider  over 
what  the  Christ  is  king — how  many  kings  He  holds  in  submission  to  Himself. 
This  earth  has  been  tyrannised  over  by  usurping  kings,  under  whose  grievous  yoke 
humanity  has  had  to  groan.     It  is  a  sad  history,  that  of  these  kings  of  the  earth. 
The  ancient  Eomans  had  one  dark  page  ia  their  history — it  was  the  annals  of  the 
kings.     The  story  began  very  well,  but  it  ended  very  terribly ;   and  so  deep  and 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

indelible  was  the  impression  left  on  the  national  feelings  by  the  record  of  the  history 
of  the  kings,  that  even  when  in  later  years  the  Commonwealth  and  Kepublic  grad- 
ually developed  into  an  Autocracy,  not  even  Julius  Caesar,  not  even  Augustus,  dared 
to  assume  the  title  of  king.     Caesar  became  an  emperor — a  king  he  dared  not 
become.     But  there  is  a  still  darker  page  in  the  history  of  the  world,  the  annals  of 
its  sins.     "Where  is  the  man  whose  breast  sin  has  not  entered  ?     And  what  a  tyrant 
power  sin  is  !  not  an  abstract  idea,  not  a  mere  name  given  to  a  phase  of  experience, 
but  an  actual  power  exciting  within  us  base  desires,  stimulating  our  neutral  desires 
till  they  become  base,  perverting  our  reason,  silencing  our  conscience,  degrading  our 
whole  manhood,  destroying  our  souls.     We  have  indeed  suffered  many  things  from 
this  king's  tyranny  ;  but  to-night,  as  I  survey  the  wondrous  work  of  the  Conqueror 
who  has  risen  from  His  tomb,  I  rejoice  to  recognise  Him  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords,  and  first  and  foremost  as  King  over  this  fearful  tyrant.     The  rod  of  the 
oppressor  is  broken,  and  the  staff  of  the  shoulder  the  Lord  Himself  has  undertaken 
for  the  hui  :in  family.     "Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you;  for  ye  are  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace."     0  glorious  message  for  those  of  us  who  have 
found  all  our  strugglings  and  toilings  and  efforts  futile !      Now,  when  a  king  has 
asserted  his  supremacy  over  any  conquered  power,  it  is  to  the  credit  of  that  king  that 
he  should  maintain  that  supremacy ;  and  the  practical  thought  I  want  to  press  home 
on  your  minds  is  this  :  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  gained  the  right  to  be  supreme 
over  the  powers  of  evil,  within  and  without ;  if  this  is  one  of  the  royal  crowns  placed 
upon  His  brow ;  let  us  glorify  Him  by  believing  in  His  power,  and  let  us  with 
unwavering  faith  call  upon  Him  to  exercise  His  sovereign  prerogative  on  our  behalf. 
Don't  you  see  what  honour  you  put  on  Jesus  when  you  claim  that  in  virtue  of  His 
resurrection  power  you  shall  be  enabled  to  do  as  He  has  done — put  your  foot  on  the^ 
neck  of  that  which  has  previously  tyrannised  over  you  ?     When  you  approach  sin, 
let  there  be  no  wavering,  no  holding  back.    Let  us  not  approach  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness as  uncertain  of  the  issue  of  the  conflict.     Oh,  children  of  God,  when  you  are 
caUed  to  go  into  the  midst  of  temptation,  do  you  advance  with  palpitating  heart, 
with  inward  misgiving  ?     Very  well ;  then  thanks  to  yourself  if  you  do  fall,  and  fall 
again  and  again  before  the  foe,  if   disaster   follows   disaster,  and  defeat,  defeat. 
What !  shall  we  rob  Jesus  of  His  rights  by  conquest  ?    Is  it  a  fact  that  He  wears 
the  royal  crown  upon  His  brow,  which  He  has  snatched  from  the  head  of  the  fallen 
dragon?     Is  it  true  that  "as  sin  reigned  unto   death,  even   so   grace  reigns  by 
righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "  ?  (Rom.  v.  21).    Is  it  a 
fact  that  He  holds  this  royal  crown  upon  His  brow  ?  is  He  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords  ?     Is  it  true  that  He  has  trampled  down  transgression,  and  made  an  end  of 
sin  ?    Has  this  been  the  glorious  result  of  His  passion  ?    Then  you  are  not  merely 
privileged  to  ask  Him  to  help  you,  but  to  claim  that  sin  shall  not  have  dominion 
over  you,  and  to  look  the  enemy  in  the  face  with  holy  cahn.     Our  blessed  Lord 
before  His  passion  makes  this  statement :     "  Be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the 
world."     Here  is  another  dethroned  monarch — and  a  very  powerful  one.     Very  few 
of  us  have  not  felt  something  of  his  sway.     Very  few  of  us  have  not  bowed  down 
before  his  throne,  and  yet,  thank  God,  he  too  is  conquered !    A  monarch,  but  a 
dethroned  monarch.     He  has  no  longer  the  right  to  lord  it  over  those  whom  Christ 
has  made  free.     The  man  who  is  living  in  fellowship  with  Christ  will  survey  the 
power  of  this  world  with  the  eye  of  holy  jealousy,  just  as  a  loyal  subject  of  Great 
Britain  would  be  jealous  of  any  person  setting  up  his  throne  in  any  part  of  the 
dominions  of  Queen  Victoria.     But  how  much  stronger  would  be  such  feelings  in 
the  heart  of  the  Queen's  own  son,  partaker  as  he  himself  is  of  her  rank  and  great- 
ness !     How  his  jealousy  would  burn  against  any  pretender  or  usurper  who  should 
set  himself  up  as  a  rival  of  the  royal  authority  !     Nor  would  he  rest  without  doing 
all  in  his  power  to  overthrow  the  obnoxious  sway.     Are  we  not  sons  of  God,  and 
heirs  with  Christ  Himself  of  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  ?     Once  again.     He  is 
supreme  over  that  regal  force  within  our  nature  which  we  call  self.     Yes,  He  has  a 
rightful  supremacy  over  every  one  of  us.     He  conquered  Himself  as  the  Son  of  man, 
that  He  might  teach  us  how  to  conquer  ourselves ;  but,  further,  our  wilful  self  has 
been  crucified  in  Him,  that  we  might  be  in  a  position  to  learn  the  lesson  of  self- 
mastery.    He  conquered  for  us,  that  He  may  conquer  in  us ;  He  died  for  all,  that  they 
who  live   should  not  henceforth  live  to  themselves,  but  to  Him  who    died  for 
them,  and  rose  again.      Do  you  want  to  lead  a  happy,  do  you  want  to  lead  a 
powerful,  a  successful,  a  God-like  life  ?     The  greatest  of  all  obstacles  to  this  you 
find  to  be  the  power  of  self.     How  are  you  to  resist  that  power  ?    Fix  your  eyes  on 
the  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord  of  lords,  as  St.  John  did  (chap.  i.  13-18).     It  is  as 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  565 

we  gaze  at  Him,  and  behold  His  glory,  as  one  after  another  His  perfec- 
tions shine  out  on  us,  that  we  begin  to  abhor  ourselves,  to  hate  our  selfishness, 
to  find  out  that  His  will  is  better  than  self-will.  His  character  is  nobler  than  ours, 
and  that  to  yield  ourselves  up  to  His  control  is  better  than  to  fight  our  own  way, 
and  thus  He  who  once  triumphed  over  Himself  will  triumph  over  us,  King  of  kings, 
and  Lord  of  lords  !  Then  when  He  has  asserted  His  royal  rights  as  King  over  sin, 
King  over  the  world,  and  King  over  Self,  there  is  another  force  that  now  we  may 
trust  Him  to  do  battle  with — nay.  He  has  done  battle  with  already ;  and  because  of 
His  victory,  blessed  be  God,  we  need  not  fear  to  face  the  foe.  Death  is  conquered ! 
he  is  only  now  a  tributary  of  Jesus,  only  the  door-keeper  who  stands  at  the  palace 
gate ;  and  it  is  his  duty  to  open  the  door  whenever  the  Master  sends  the  summons. 
There  is  a  kindly  look  on  his  face  now,  and  it  is  a  friendly  hand  that  he  stretches 
out.  If  we  have  proved  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ  to  raise  us  above  sin,  death  has 
lost  all  its  terror  :  the  dying  saint  may  stretch  out  his  hand  to  welcome  that  dread 
janitor,  who  once  seemed  so  stern,  but  is  now  become  so  kind ;  who  smiles  as  one 
after  another  he  gathers  the  children  of  God  into  the  heavenly  houses.  {W.  H.  M. 
H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Supremacy  : — What  would  intimidate  any  loyal  Englishman, 
if  he  were  quite  satisfied  and  sure,  and  that  too  from  personal  interview,  that  the 
monarch  of  the  realm  was  decidedly  and  unalterably  his  friend  ?  Would  he  fear 
poverty?  Would  he  fear  enemies?  Would  he  fear  dangers?  Would  he  fear 
reverses  of  fortune  ?  Oh  !  no,  he  would  say,  "  The  monarch  is  my  friend,  and  he 
has  all  power  to  accomplish  all  I  wish,  and  he  is  quite  as  willing  as  he  is  able." 
Now,  I  think  this  ought  to  rebuke  our  slavish  fears — just  to  bear  in  mind,  that  our 
warmest  friend  is  no  less  a  being  than  '•  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  I. 
It  is  the  supreme  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  of 
whom  it  is  expressly  written,  "  He  doeth  as  seemeth  Him  good  in  the  armies  of 
heaven,"  existing  in  His  own  eternal  self -existence,  dependent  upon  no  being,  but 
making  all  dependent  upon  Himself,  He  holds  all  worlds  at  His  command.  He  is 
the  Maker  of  all  worlds,  and  the  Maker  of  all  kings  and  lords  too ;  therefore.  He 
surely  has  a  right  to  be  King  and  Lord  over  them.  Moreover,  He  is  the  moral 
Governor  of  the  universe,  and,  consequently,  all  things  in  it  are  under  His  control ; 
He  even  giveth  power  to  get  wealth,  and,  if  He  withholds  that  power,  and  lets  us 
sink  into  poverty.  He  still  acts  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords;  and  it  is  your 
business  and  mine  to  say,  "Do  as  thou  wilt  with  mine  and  me  too."  II.  Now  a 
word  or  two,  in  the  second  place,  relative  to  the  exhibition  of  His  name.  It  is  said 
to  be  written  "  upon  His  vesture  and  upon  His  thigh."  You  will  read,  by  looking  a 
little  higher  up  in  the  chapter,  that  His  vesture  was  peculiarly  marked,  yea,  and 
stained — the  name  was  perfectly  legible.  It  is  said  that  He  was  clothed  in  "  a  ves- 
ture dipped  in  blood."  Does  not  this  exactly  agree  with  Isaiah's  predictive 
inquiry,  when  he  says,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments 
from  Bozra?  "  and  gives  as  the  answer,  "  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to 
save  "  ;  and  when  the  question  is  resumed,  "  Why  is  Thine  apparel  red,  and  Thy  gar- 
ments like  one  that  has  trod  the  winepress  ?  "  the  answer  is,  "  I  have  trod  the 
winepress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  Me."  Here  then,  I  discover 
His  ofi&cial  character.  His  vesture  is  dipped  in  blood,  and  He  is  clothed  with  this 
vesture  down  to  His  foot — the  priestly  robe,  for  He  only  is  priest  of  our  profession 
as  Christians.  Moreover,  the  name  is  written  not  only  upon  His  vesture,  but  upon 
His  thigh.  Why  was  this?  Was  not  one  writing  enough?  Just  for  this  express 
purpose,  that  His  power  might  be  held  forth  at  every  step.  Wherever  He  steps, 
whether  in  providence  or  grace,  absolute  power  goes  forth  with  Him.  Now  what 
can  a  man  do,  as  regards  walking,  running,  or  working,  if  the  strength  has  gone  out 
of  his  thighs?  It  is  not  so  with  our  King.  His  strength  is  in  His  thigh — His  name 
is  written  on  His  thigh — so  that  wherever  He  advances  He  is  sure  to  be  known  as 
the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  The  power  of  Christ,  as  the  eternal  God,  is 
conspicuous  in  all  His  movements,  both  in  providence  and  in  grace ;  by  Him  the 
worlds  were  made,  and  by  Him  they  are  sustained ;  yea,  we  are  expressly  told  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  (John  i.  3).  And  this  power  is  constantly  put  forth  on  behalf  of 
His  elect,  blood-bought  Church,  inasmuch  as  He  counts  her  interests  His  own. 
Cheer  up,  then,  ye  timid  saints,  your  cause  is  not  more  yours  than  it  is  Christ's ; 
nay,  nor  so  much,  for  if  He  co:ld  allow  the  injury  or  the  ruin  of  His  Church,  the 
name  which  is  written  upon  His  vesture  and  upon  His  thigh  would  be  tarnished, 
nay,  forfeited,  and  He  would  no  longer  be  owned  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 
But,  "it  shall  endure  for  ever,"  &c.,  (Psa.  Ixxii.  17).  Yea,  more,  His  name, 
emblazoned  in  glory,  shall  be  the  chorus   of  all  the  redeemed  throng  as  long  as 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

eternity  shall  roll  on.  Mark,  I  pray  you,  how,  in  the  exercise  of  His  prerogative, 
He  subjects  all  beings  to  His  will.  He  "  brings  every  thought  into  subjection  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ."  Now,  I  ask,  where  is  the  king  to  be  found  that  can  do  that? 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  He  brings  all  beings  into  subjection,  whether  friends 
or  foes.  The  first  is  by  the  omnipotence  of  His  grace  He  brings  every  elect  vessel  of 
mercy  to  the  knowledge  of  His  will,  to  bow  to  His  sceptre  and  live  for  ever ;  and  of 
those  rebels  that  would  not  that  He  should  reign  over  them,  He  says,  "Bring  them 
hither  and  slay  them  before  Mine  eyes."  HI.  Go  on  to  mark  that  the  highest 
expectations  of  the  Lord's  family  are  encouraged.  His  name  written  on  His  vesture 
and  on  His  thigh  is  legible  to  all  His  saints.  They  see  Him  the  King  and  the  Priest 
upon  His  throne.  They  witness  the  victories  He  has  already  realised — they  mark 
the  sacred  and  cheering  fact,  that  He  has  •'  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,"  and 
has  fulfilled  what  is  said,  "  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plague  ;  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy 
destruction."  The  ancient  promise  has  been  accomplished  by  Him,  and  the  serpent's 
head  is  bruised.  The  grand  victory  was  won  upon  Mount  Calvary,  by  the  glorious 
Captain  of  salvation,  whom  my  text  calls  "King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  And 
now  what  remains  but  that  He  shall  still  go  on  on  His  white  horse  of  pure  gospel 
truth,  from  conquering  to  conquer.  Here  take,  for  a  moment,  a  twofold  view  of 
His  overcomings.  He  is  going  forth  from  conquering  that  sinner's  heart  to  conquer 
another  sinner's  heart — from  conquering  that  corruption  of  the  old  Adam  nature  of 
the  child  of  God,  to  conquer  the  next  that  rises  and  struggles  within  him.  He  will 
go  on  conquering  and  to  conquer,  until  He  has  conquered  every  elect  vessel  of 
mercy,  and  transformed  them  to  His  ovra  image.  Nor  is  this  all.  His  conquests  and 
His  people's  are  one ;  for  it  is  written  concerning  those  that  surround  His  throne, 
and  walk  with  Him  in  white,  that  "  they  overcame  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and 
by  the  word  of  His  testimony."  Well  now,  will  you  not  buckle  on  your  armour  ? 
Will  you  not  furbish  your  sword  ?  Will  you  not  cry  out  for  more  help  from  on 
high  to  wield  it  ?  Will  you  not  look  in  a  menacing  form  at  all  your  enemies  ? 
(J.  Irons.)  Christ's  kingly  office  : — The  ofl&ce  of  king  belongs  to  Him  by  eternal 
right,  inasmuch  as  He  is  the  Son  of  God.  The  Father  constituted  Him  heir  of  all 
things.  Being  the  express  image  of  His  person,  and  the  visible  shining  forth  of  His 
glory,  it  is  He  who  is  to  all  created  being  its  Lord  and  Ruler  and  manifested  King. 
We  are  the  work  of  His  hands :  we,  and  all  our  world.  We  owe  Him  allegiance  by 
the  very  fact  of  our  birth  and  our  being.  And  we  are  the  kings  of  earth ;  in  our 
hand  hath  He  put  all  the  tribes  of  His  creation :  in  our  hands  all  the  wonders  of 
capacity  latent  in  His  inanimate  works.  We,  and  all  this  our  dominion  over  which 
we  reign,  are  His.  And  not  we  and  our  world  only.  There  are  hosts  of  happy 
spirits,  rising  through  all  the  gradations  of  created  glory,  even  to  the  very  presence 
of  God,  and  the  skirts  of  the  brightness  which  flows  round  and  veils  the  eternal 
throne.  These  too,  however  lofty  and  holy,  are  His :  Him  they  acknowledge  as  their 
King  and  Lord,  by  the  very  condition  of  their  angelic  being.  Behold  Him  then,  the 
Head  over  all  things :  the  rightful  and  everlasting  Sovereign  of  the  universe  of  God. 
Such  spectacle  we  might  contemplate  with  adoration ;  with  wonder,  the  more  we 
thought,  at  His  unapproachable  majesty  and  power:  but  it  has  pleased  Him  to 
reveal  to  us  greater  things  than  these.  The  throne  of  majesty  was  not  enough  for 
Him :  He  must  win  a  higher  throne  of  love.  To  stand  by  the  throne  of  God  and 
rule,  satisfied  not  the  yearnings  of  His  heart :  He  must  come  down  among  His  own 
creatures,  and  endure  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself,  and  resist, 
striving  unto  blood :  and  fight  and  fall,  but  conquer  while  He  fell,  with  the  weapons 
of  redeeming  love.  It  was  not  enough  for  Him,  to  have  created  man  in  God's 
image,  after  His  likeness ;  to  be  the  rightful  Head  by  creative  lordship  over  their 
nature,  the  wonder  of  His  universe :  but  when  that  image  was  marred.  He  must 
Himself  descend  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  flesh,  and  gain  for  Himself  another  and 
a  closer  headship  and  kingship — so  that  He  is  now  not  only  the  Son  of  God,  but 
the  Son  of  Man  :  has  not  only  His  supreme  and  undoubted  rights  over  our  nature 
ab  extra,  as  its  God  and  Creator,  but  also  rights  far  more  wonderful  ah  intra,  inas- 
much as  He  is  its  second  head  and  righteous  root,  and  blessed  renewer  in  righteous- 
ness. Let  us  pursue  a  few  of  the  grounds  and  details  of  this  His  sovereignty.  He 
is  King  of  man,  inasmuch  as  He  is  the  only  man  who  has  ever  fulfilled  manhood. 
He  is  our  King  also,  because  He  is  the  Head  of  our  common  nature.  He  has  taken 
unto  His  personal  Godhead  our  whole  and  entire  nature,  as  complete  as  it  was  in 
Adam,  and  as  free  from  taint  as  it  was  when  Adam  was  created  in  it ;  and  on 
account  of  this  His  being  the  second  root  or  head  of  our  common  nature,  and  on  no 
other  account,  it  is,  that  every  man  has  a  part  in  Christ,  that  we  preach  Christ  the 


CHAP.  XEC.]  REVELATION.  567 

Saviour  of  the  world,  and  call  on  all  to  look  unto  Him  and  be  saved.  He  thus  is 
rightful  and  undoubted  King  of  that  nature  of  ours,  and  of  all  that  it  has  and  rules, 
by  virtue  of  His  including  it  all  in  Himself,  and  standing  before  God  as  man ;  all 
we  and  our  world  being  contemplated  by  the  Father  as  existent  solely  in  and  because 
of,  and  as  summed  up  in.  Him.  Advancing  onward  again  with  those  new 
titles  to  kingship  which  He  who  by  His  own  right  was  king,  has  been  in  the  process 
of  redemption  pleased  to  make  for  Himself,  we  come  to  this  one ;  that  He  has,  besides 
His  perfection  in  our  nature,  besides  His  headship  over  it,  purchased  it  to  Himself 
by  the  price  of  His  own  precious  blood.  Not  only  is  He  the  light  of  the  world,  not 
only  is  He  the  second  Adam,  but  He  is  the  Eedeemer.  He  became  our  representative, 
not  in  perfection  only,  not  in  entireness  of  bearing  our  nature  only,  but  inasmuch  as 
He  bore  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows,  and  bowed  under  the  burden  of  the 
world's  guilt  in  His  own  body  on  the  Cross,  and  came  up  out  of  death  triumphant, 
the  firstborn  from  the  dead,  that  in  all  things  He  might  have  the  pre-eminence. 
God  and  evil,  God  and  impurity,  cannot  exist  face  to  face :  nor  can  He  permit  an 
unconquered  antagonist  in  that  universe  which  He  hath  created.  But  because,  in 
the  eternal  verities  of  God,  who  counts  not  time,  but  sees  as  present  all  that  happens 
in  all  time,  Jesus  had  suffered,  had  died,  had  risen  again,  man  was  spared,  nature 
was  spared :  the  sun  was  commanded  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  the 
rain  to  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.  So  that  as  we  are  told,  "  in  Christ  all 
things  consist,"  have  their  being  :  and  to  Him  alone  this  existence  of  ours,  and  of 
things  around  us,  this  life  and  motion,  and  joy,  and  increase,  is  owing  from 
moment  to  moment.  Then,  has  He  not  a  right  to  it  all,  as  His  ?  to  us,  and  to  all 
that  is  ours  ?  to  all  that  would  have  perished  with  us  had  He  not  died,  but  which  is 
now  preserved  to  us  and  to  Him  ?  And  if  He  is  a  King,  He  has  a  kingdom.  And 
what  is  His  kingdom?  In  that  wider  sense  in  which  we  have  treated  of  His 
sovereignty,  it  is  the  universe  of  God  :  all  that  ever  was  and  is  and  shall  be :  but  of 
that  His  kingdom  we  will  not  now  speak.  Let  us  rather  tell  of  the  issues  of  that 
lower  and  more  limited  kingdom,  which  He  hath  won  here  below  among  us,  and  see 
whether  that  have  not  for  us  a  voice  within  our  hearts,  and  a  claim  which  grasps  at 
the  threads  of  our  common  motives  and  affections.  Christ  is  the  King  of  man. 
Who  remembers  this,  who  acts  upon  this,  as  he  ought  ?  Every  man  on  earth  is 
Christ's  subject:  He  is  your  King  and  my  King,  and  the  King  even  of  the  poor 
heathen  who  know  Him  not :  for  He  hath  bought  us  all  for  Himself :  He  is  thus 
our  rightful  King :  and  it  is  a  claim  which  He  will  not  forego.  All  kings  shall  bow 
down  before  Him:  all  nations  shall  do  Him  service.  But  0,  it  was  not  for  this  that 
He  won  for  Himself  a  kingdom ;  not  for  this,  that  the  wheels  of  His  chariot  might 
crush  down  all  that  opposeth,  that  He  might  hear  His  enemies  calling  on  the  rocks 
to  fall  on  them,  and  the  hiUs  to  cover  them  ;  no,  for  He  is,  as  we  have  seen,  not  only 
a  King  of  right,  but  a  King  of  righteousness  to  the  sons  of  men.  When  Pilate  asked 
Him  in  the  hour  of  His  deepest  humiliation,  "  Art  thou  a  King  then  ?  "  in  asserting 
His  Kingship,  He  added,  "  For  this  cause  was  I  bom  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into 
the  world,  that  I  might  bear  witness  unto  the  truth."  There  is  no  truth,  but  in 
Him :  and  whatsoever  is  true  is  His,  part  of  His  kingdom,  and  woven  into  His 
design,  and  blessed  by  His  sanction,  and  matured  by  His  fostering  Spirit.  Here  is 
the  Kedeemer's  more  glorious,  more  heavenly  kingdom  ;  the  kingdom  of  truth,  and 
purity,  and  holiness,  and  love.  But  the  question  arises.  What  is  this  truth  of  which 
He  is  speaking?  Is  it  truth  in  science  merely — is  it  truth  in  art— those  subtle 
powers  of  harmonising  with  God's  creative  laws,  which  seem  as  if  they  might  and 
do  exist  where  there  is  no  deeper  truth  of  heart  and  life?  Is  it,  in  a  word,  any  of 
those  outlying  branches  of  truth,  which  seem  as  if  they  were  rooted  in  earth  for 
themselves,  and  got  no  life  from  the  parent  stem  ?  Let  us  reply  to  this  in  His  own 
words,  "  I  am  the  way  and  the  truth  and  the  life."  It  is  He  who  has  revealed  to  us 
the  truth,  and  He  has  revealed  it  in  Himself.  And  as  He  is  the  revelation  and  the 
fountain  of  truth,  so  in  order  to  be  a  subject  of  His  blessed  kingdom  of  truth  must 
a  man  enter  into  it  by  Him :  by  knowing  Him  and  believing  Him,  and  being  knit 
unto  Him,  and  living  his  common  life  by  virtue  of  faith  in  Him.  This  process  of 
self-renunciation,  this  acceptance  of  Him  as  King,  and  of  His  Spirit  as  guide  of  His 
life,  must  accompany  all  effectual  entrance,  with  the  will  and  the  affection,  into  His 
kingdom  of  grace— all  heirship  of  His  kingdom  of  glory.  Such  a  kingdom  then  is 
God  establishing  on  earth  among  men :  a  kingdom  of  truth  and  mercy  and  love,  of 
which  His  Son  is  the  Head  and  King.  Day  by  day  He  is  calling  its  subjects  out 
from  among  the  falsehood  and  the  strife  which  is  the  rule  of  life  of  this  world. 
Among  the  nations,  He  is  preparing  it ;  in  His  own  way,  not  in  ours.     He  is  still 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xix 

suffering  the  darkness  to  prevail  over  wide  tracts  of  this  earth  :  still  permitting  the 
oppressor  to  oppress,  and  the  truth  to  be  kept  down :  but  it  is  that  that  truth,  by 
trial  and  by  sifting,  may  become  purer  and  surer.  And  we  look  for  a  day  when  that 
His  kingdom,  which  sprung  not  out  of  this  world,  shall  yet  be  manifested  in  thia 
world  and  rule  over  this  world.  But  we  are  called  on  by  our  text  to  look  forward 
further  even  than  this.  Its  words  treat  of  a  time  when  Christ's  kingdom  shall  have 
passed  altogether  out  of  conflict  into  triumph,  out  of  grace  into  glory.  {DeanAlford). 
Christ  a  King : — This  title  is  one  of  very  extensive  meaning.  Other  kings  are 
usually  content  to  wield  the  sceptre  over  an  empire  of  private  individuals.  But 
instead  of  being  king  over  individuals  in  a  private  capacity,  our  Lord  claims  to  be 
the  King  of  kings.  Princes  and  monarchs  of  every  degree  of  power  are  subject  to 
His  control.  Before  Him  they  all  are  required  alike  to  bow,  to  pour  forth  their 
gratitude,  and  to  offer  a  tribute  of  adoration.  I.  Contemplate  Him  as  the  mighty 
God,  the  everlasting  Father ;  as  Him  by  whom  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were 
laid,  and  the  work  of  whose  hands  are  the  heavens.  Contemplate  Him  as  invested 
with  all  the  attributes  and  perfections  of  the  Deity,  and  you  will  see  that  His  control 
is  illimitable,  and  that  His  government  is  without  termination.  II.  What  is  the 
practical  use  of  this  truth  ?  1.  If  Christ  be  the  King  of  kings,  the  almighty  Euler 
of  the  universe,  then  we  have  confidence  that  all  the  dispensations  of  Divine  pro- 
vidence wUl  be  such  as  to  promote  the  general  interests  of  His  people.  2.  If  Christ 
be  the  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord  of  lords,  then  we  have  confidence  that  He  will  so 
direct  whatever  pertains  to  our  spiritual  interests,  as  to  promote  and  secure  our  growth 
in  grace,  and  our  final  salvation.  3.  If  Christ  be  the  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord  of 
lords,  then  the  Church  is  safe.  4.  If  Christ  be  the  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord  of 
lords,  then  individual  Christians  are  safe.  5.  If  Christ  be  the  King  of  kings  and 
the  Lord  of  lords,  then  His  people  have  no  occasion  to  be  ashamed  of  their  Lord,  or 
of  the  principles  of  His  government.  6.  If  Christ  be  so  great  a  King,  He  ought  to 
be  feared.  He  wields  all  the  machinery  of  nature,  and  can  bid  winds,  lightnings, 
tempests,  diseases,  arrest,  scourge,  or  destroy  His  enemies.  He  can  turn  against 
them  the  tide  of  human  passions,  and  thus  overwhelm  them  in  dismay.  Even  our 
breath  is  in  His  hands ;  and  subject  to  His  control  are  all  our  ways.  He  has 
power  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell.  7.  He  ought  to  be  adored.  8.  If 
Christ  be  so  great  a  King,  His  enemies  ought  to  tremble  before  Him.  (J.  Foot,  D.D.) 
The  mark  of  the  beast. — The  mark  of  the  beast : — In  the  eyebrows  of  some  people 
there  are  one  or  two  hairs  that  are  thicker  and  longer  than  the  others,  and  stand 
out  like  the  whiskers  of  a  cat.  A  good  many  persons  have  the  round  fold  in  the 
upper  part  of  their  ears  ending  in  a  blunt  point,  like  the  tip  of  an  animal's  ear  folded 
down.  At  school  I  knew  a  boy  who  had  the  strange  power  of  moving  his  ears  at 
will,  like  a  dog  or  a  rabbit ;  and  there  was  one  big  lad  who  could  contract  the  skin 
of  his  head  so  strongly  that,  by  the  mere  power  of  his  muscles,  without  moving  his 
head,  he  could  throw  off  a  book  laid  upon  it.  Some  people  have  great  canine  teeth, 
and  others  have  their  face  and  body  covered  all  over  with  thick  hair.  These  things 
are  said  by  scientific  men  to  be  the  signs  of  man's  origin  from  the  lower  animals, 
and  remain  as  traces  in  some  persons  of  the  stages  through  which  all  the  human 
race  has  passed.  The  lower  animals  are  our  poor  relations ;  and  it  ought  not  to  be 
considered  strange  if  we  should  retain  many  marks  and  proofs  of  the  relationship. 
Every  human  being  has  the  mark  of  the  beast  in  him,  to  show  that  God  has  made 
all  animal  structures  after  the  same  pattern ;  and  united  together  all  His  creatures, 
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  by  ties  of  mutual  resemblance  and  sympathy,  so  that 
they  all  might  be  able  to  live  harmoniously  together  on  the  earth.  But  there  is  a 
naark  of  the  beast  that  ought  to  make  us  ashamed — that  does  degrade  us.  It  is  the 
mark  of  sin  in  our  souls  which  destroys  the  image  of  God  within  us,  and  reduces  us 
to  the  level,  nay,  below  the  level,  of  the  beasts  that  perish.  For  the  dumb,  irrational 
animals  faithfully  obey  the  instincts  of  their  nature,  and  God  can  say  of  them, 
•'  The  stork  in  the  heavens  knoweth  its  appointed  time  " ;  "  The  ox  knoweth  his 
owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib "  ;  but  of  man  He  says,  "  Israel  doth  not 
know.  My  people  do  not  consider."  The  animals  obey  in  every  respect  the  will  of 
God ;  they  carmot  but  obey  ;  but  we  are  continually  breaking  His  commandments, 
and  doing  things  that  are  contrary  to  His  will  and  to  our  own  welfare.  One  of  the 
marks  of  a  beast  is  impatience  and  hasty  rage  if  it  does  not  get  its  own  way.  The 
reason  is  that  dumb  animals  have  no  other  way  of  expressing  themselves  ;  and  you 
find  that  the  more  limited  the  power  of  utterance,  the  quicker  and  more  violent  is 
the  temper.  And  when  any  of  us  yield  to  the  temptation  of  indulging  in  rage  and 
violence  and  impatience,  we  show  very  distinctly  upon  us  the  mark  of  the  beast, 


CHAP.  XIX.]  REVELATION.  669 

and  forfeit  our  glorious  gift  of  gentle  and  dignified  speech,  and  descend  to  the  level 
of  the  beast.     So,  too,  with  falsehood  and  dishonesty.     Wild  beasts  steal  from  one 
another  and  deceive  one  another  without  compunction,  for  that  is  their  nature,  and 
in  the  stern  struggle  of  life  they  have  to  be  selfish  and  to  take  care  of  themselves  at 
the  expense  of  others.     But  in  us  who  have  a  high  moral  nature,  such  acts  would 
be  wrong.     Such  marks  of  the  beast  in  us  would  degrade  us  in  our  own  esteem  and 
in  the  estimation  of  others.     Wild  beasts  kill  each  other  without  any  mercy  or 
remorse.    And  alas  1  many  human  beings  have  this  wild-beast  nature  in  them.     If 
they  do  not  go  the  length  of  acts  of  bodily  violence,  they  wound  each  other  in  their 
hearts  and  characters.     They  are  guilty  of  many  acts  of  unkindness  and  positive 
cruelty  to  each  other.     Animals  rend  the  sick  or  lame  animal.     Wolves  will  devour 
the  unfortunate  wolf  that  is  wounded  in  the  pack  ;  and,  therefore,  animals  instinc- 
tively avoid  their  fellows  when  they  are  hurt  in  any  way,  and  seek  the  loneliest 
solitude  in  which  to  suffer  or  die  in  peace.    All  human  beings  who  act  in  the  same 
way — who,  when  they  discover  a  weakness  or  a  failing  in  their  friends  and  neigh- 
bours, hasten  to  crush  them  altogether ;  who,  if  they  discern  a  pin-hole,  wish  to 
work  it  into  a  huge  gap,  and,  if  they  can  only  get  their  fingers  in,  long  to  rend  the 
piece  asunder — all  such  persons  have  the  mark  of  the  beast.     It  is  an  awful  truth, 
that  the  more  the  image  of  God  disappears  in  us,  the  more  do  the  marks  of  the 
beast  manifest  themselves.    What  is  it  that  can  remove  the  mark  of  the  beast  in 
man,  and  restore  the  image  of  God  ?     The  brute  elements  cannot  drop  out  of  man's 
character  by  a  natural  process,  however  favourable  may  be  his  environment ;  the 
human  race  of  its  own  accord  cannot  grow  better,  as  surely  as  the  bud  expands  into 
the  perfect  flower.     Scientific  men  themselves  tell  us  that  the  natural  process  is  not 
necessarily  upwards  to  better  things,  but  may,  indeed,  be  downwards  to  worse ; 
especially  if  the  surrounding  circumstances  and  conditions  of  life  be  degrading. 
And  we  might  well  despair  of  the  future  of  our  race,  if  it  were  left  to  the  force  of 
natural  evolution  alone  to  work  out  the  beast  in  man,  and  let  the  ape  and  tiger  die. 
It  is  here  that  the  power  of  spiritual  religion  comes  in.     The  regenerating  forces  of 
living  Christianity  can  be  trusted  to  raise  and  renew  mankind.     You  know  that 
loveliest  and  most  instructive  of  all  the  fairy  tales — the  familiar  story  of  Beauty  and 
the  Beast.     You  remember  how  the  merchant  was  to  be  put  to  death  for  plucking 
the  bunch  of  roses  in  the  garden  of  the  Beast,  and  how  his  youngest  and  fairest 
daughter,  whom  he  loved  the  most,  offered  to  take  his  place  and  suffer  his  doom. 
When  Beauty  first  saw  the  frightful  form  of  the  Beast,  she  was  dreadfully  afraid, 
and  shrank  from  him ;  but  by  and  by,  as  she  got  to  know  him  better,  she  began  to 
feel  pity  for  him,  and  was  touched  with  his  gentleness  and  kindness.    At  last  she 
agreed  to  marry  him ;  and  then  a  wonderful  thing  happened.     Instead  of  the  ugly 
beast,  she  saw  a  handsome  and  graceful  young  prince,  who  thanked  her  with  the 
tenderest  expressions  for  having  delivered  him  from  the  wicked  enchantment  that 
had  transformed  him  into  a  beast.     The  moral  of  this  lovely  story,  which  is  as  old 
as  the  hills  and  as  young  as  each  child  in  our  midst,  is  that  it  is  love  that  changes 
the  beast  in  us  into  the  nobler  human  nature,  that  takes  away  all  the  marks  of  the 
beast  in  us,  and  transforms  us  into  true  men  and  women.     And  so,  in  the  highest 
sense  of  all,  is  it  not  the  pure,  disinterested  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  consented  to 
take  our  nature,  and  die  in  our  room  and  stead,  and  who  unites  us  to  Himself  by 
an  everlasting  union,  that  takes  away  all  the  marks  of  the  beasts  in  us,  the  old, 
sinful,  degraded  nature,  and  transforms  us  into  His  own  likeness  by  the  renewing  of 
our  minds  ?    United  to  Christ,  we  become  new  creatures ;  the  image  of  God  is  restored 
in  us ;  our  faces  shine  as  the  face  of  Moses  shone  when  he  came  down  from  his 
communion  with  God  on  the  mount.     It  is  said  of  the  great  St.  Francis  of  Assisi, 
that  he  prayed  earnestly  on  one  occasion,  that  he  might  realise  in  his  body,  as  well 
as  in  his  soul,  the  sufferings  of  Christ ;  and  immediately  there  appeared  in  his 
hands  the  prints  of  the  nails,  and  in  his  side  the  wound  of  the  spear,  which  he  bore 
all  the  rest  of  his  life,  but  carefully  hid,  for  he  did  not  wish  to  expose  to  the  eyes  of 
cold  curiosity  the  secret  which  made  him  one  with  his  Lord.    But  not  in  visible 
imprint,  not  in  fleshly  wounds,  do  we  bear  the  signs  of  the  cross ;  no,  but  in  holy 
affections,  in  crucified  tempers,  in  heavenly  desires,  in  Christlike  meekness  and 
gentleness.     The  Brahmins  of  India  have  a  mark  upon  their  foreheads  in  honour 
of  the  god  they  worship,  by   which  every  one    can   distinguish  them.     And  so 
those  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  serve  Him  have  a  mark  upon  their  fore- 
heads, by  which  all  men  can  take  knowledge  of  them  that  they  are  keeping  company 
with  Him.     They  have  what  the  high  priest  of  old  had  inscribed  upon  the  gold 
plate  of  his  mitre,  in  a  pure  and  candid  and  heavenly  look,  "Holiness  to  the  Lord." 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

And  as  thej  grow  in  likeness  to  Christ,  so  this  bright  sign  of  their  high  calling  will 
be  more  clearly  seen,  and  their  outward  beauty  will  be  as  their  inward  grace.  In 
the  old  creation  we  see  how  beasts  of  low  type  and  cruel  nature,  that  wallowed  in 
the  mire,  were  swept  away,  and  creatures  of  higher  organisation  and  gentler  mood 
appeared  on  the  earth  in  their  place.  The  wonderful  researches  of  geology  have 
made  us  familiar  with  this  significant  fact,  that  after  forms  that  were  emblems  of 
evil,  there  gradually  rose  others  that  were  emblems  of  good ;  and  the  Bible  tells  us 
that  the  new  creation  will  develop  this  progress  on  a  higher  plane ;  that  eventually 
all  serpent-forms  of  evil  will  be  subdued,  and  the  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb, 
and  the  leopard  shall  lie  'down  with  the  kid,  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  the  most 
ferocious  creatures.  He  who  was  with  the  wild  beasts  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
temptation  will  change  the  wilderness  of  men's  souls,  with  its  wild  beasts  of  evil 
passions  and  tempers,  into  a  fair  and  fertile  garden,  the  home  of  gentle  and  holy 
graces.  And  John  shows  us,  in  his  glorious  vision  in  Revelation,  those  who  had 
gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast,  and  over  his  image,  and  over  his  mark,  standing 
on  the  sea  of  glass  as  the  symbol  of  their  purity,  and  having  the  harps  of  God  as 
the  symbol  of  their  harmony,  and  singing  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  as  the 
token  of  their  triumph.  They  have  obtained  the  final  victory  over  the  beast  in 
man ;  they  have  risen  completely  out  of  the  degradation  of  sin ;  they  have  had 
all  the  marks  of  the  beast  obliterated,  and  all  the  image  of  God  restored  in  their 
glorified  souls  and  bodies.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 


Vers.  1-3.  An  angel  .  .  .  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit.— Safan; — 
1.  Whereas  it  is  said  that  this  Angel  that  caine  down  from  heaven  had  the  key  of 
the  bottomless  pit,  we  see  that  our  Saviour  has  all  power  given  to  Him  in  heaven, 
the  earth,  and  hell  itself.  2.  That  He  had  a  great  chain  in  His  hand,  shows  us  that 
how  mighty  and  malicious  soever  Satan  may  be,  yet  for  our  comfort  Christ  has  him 
in  a  chain,  without  whose  permission  he  can  do  nothing.  3.  Whereas  Satan  is 
called  an  old  serpent,  we  see  to  whom  they  are  like  who  are  habituated  in  wicked- 
ness and  crafty  to  do  evil.  4.  Whereas  he  is  called  the  devil,  or  an  accuser,  we  see 
whose  brood  they  are  who  in  like  manner  are  false  accusers  of  their  brethren, 
slanderers,  (fee.  5.  He  is  also  called  Satan,  that  is,  an  enemy  to  God's  glory  and 
man's  good  of  salvation,  therefore  whoever  by  doctrine  or  practice  impairs  the  one, 
or  opposes  the  means  of  the  other,  they  are  satanical,  and  like  him.  6.  Whereas  it 
is  said  that  Satan  was  shut  up,  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more,  we  see 
that  his  task  from  the  beginning  hath  been  deceiving,  using  fraud  where  he  cannot 
prevail  by  force ;  wherefore  we  should  beware  of  his  deceiving  in  his  subtle  instru- 
ments, and  acknowledge  whose  brood  they  are.  7.  Whereas  it  is  said  that  he  was 
bound  up  so  long  that  he  should  deceive  no  more,  this  shows  that  on  the  contrary, 
therefore,  when  we  see  seducers  arise  and  abound,  that  then  Satan  in  his  instru- 
ments for  the  punishment  of  a  nation  or  Church  is  set  loose  to  be  a  lying  spirit  in 
the  mouth  of  false  prophets.  8.  Whereas  it  is  said  that  after  the  time  of  his 
binding  or  shutting  up  he  is  to  be  loosed  a  little  season,  this  is  greatly  for  the 
comfort  of  the  godly,  that  Satan's  prevailing  in  his  instruments  is  determined  by 
God,  and  shall  be  but  for  a  little  season  ;  therefore  with  patience  let  them  possess 
their  souls.  {Wm.  Guild,  D.D.)  He  laid  hold  on  the  dragon. — The  great  enemy 
of  humanity  : — I.  The  great  enemy  of  humanity  described.  "  Dragon  "  stands 
as  an  emblem  of  power.  His  power  is  seen  in  the  vast  authority  which  he  wields. 
1.  Over  fallen  angels  (Eph.  vi.  11,  12).  He  is  the  leader  of  those  myriads.  2.  The 
authority  he  exercises  over  men.  He  leadeth  the  world  captive  at  his  will.  He 
worketh  in  the  "  children  of  disobedience."  He  opposes  God,  Christ,  the  universe. 
The  existence  of  such  a  being  in  the  universe  as  this  impresses  us  with — (1)  The 
fallibility  of  the  holiest  creature.  (2)  The  independent  force  of  moral  mind.  (3)  The 
mysteriousness  of  the  Divine  government.  H.  The  great  enemy  of  humanity 
IMPRISONED.  1.  His  imprisonment  is  effected  by  a  Divine  messenger.  2.  His  im- 
prisonment is  effected  by  Divine  authority.  3.  His  imprisonment  is  effected  by  a 
Divine  instrument.  What  is  the  chain?  Gospel  truth.  What  is  meant  by 
imprisoning  Satan  ?    Limiting  the  sphere  of  his  agency.    Every  man  who  expels 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  571 

him  from  his  own  heart  helps  to  imprison  him,  and  every  man  who  seeks  to  expel 
him  from  the  heart  of  others  helps  to  imprison  him.  As  liberty  binds  the  influence  of 
slavery,  intelligence  the  influence  of  ignorance,  religion  the  influence  of  infidelity, 
80  Divine  truth  will  bind  the  influence  of  the  devil.  Lesson  :  1.  The  true  sphere  of 
heroic  action.  "  Kesist  the  devil  and  he  will  flee  from  you."  Resist  him  as  he  is 
on  the  arena  of  your  own  soul ;  resist  him  as  you  find  him  on  the  arena  of  society 
in  everyday  life.  2.  The  grandeur  of  the  Christian  character.  "Put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God,"  &c.     (Homilist.)         The  scene  of  moral  struggle  : — I.  Redeemed 

HUMANITY   HAS   A   FEARFUL   ANTAGONIST   TO    CONTEND   WITH.      1.    The   actual   existcnCe 

of  such  an  enemy.  (1)  Universal  belief  of  humanity.  (2)  The  opposite  classes  of 
moral  phenomena.  In  the  world  we  have  error,  selfishness,  infidelity,  misery,  and 
truth,  benevolence,  religion,  happiness.  Can  these  be  branches  from  the  same 
root  ?  (3)  The  general  teaching  of  the  Bible.  2.  The  personality  of  such  an 
enemy.  An  evil  principle  implies  an  evil  person.  3.  The  characteristics  of  such  an 
enemy.  (1)  Mighty.  (2)  Crafty.  (3)  Virulent.  II.  Heaven  has  vouchsafed  an 
AGENCY  which  IS  DESTINED  TO  MASTER  THE  ADVERSARY.  Let  the  word  "  angel "  here 
stand  for  every  true  religious  teacher.  1.  His  authority.  Every  man  who  has  the 
true  spirit  and  power  of  a  teacher  has  the  "key  "  or  the  authority  to  teach.  Hie  has  a 
right  to  do  battle  with  the  enemy  wherever  he  is  found ;  whether  in  literature  or 
commerce,  churches  or  governments,  theories  or  practices.  2.  His  instrumentality. 
"A  chain."  Iron,  brass,  adamant  ?  No.  These  cannot  fetter  intellect  or  manacle 
soul.  Nothing  can  curb  or  restrain  the  influence  of  Satan  but  Christian  truth. 
What  is  meant  by  binding  Satan  ?  It  does  not  mean  the  binding  of  his  being  or 
faculties,  but  the  binding  of  his  influence.  He  is  to  be  bound,  in  the  sense  of  limit- 
ing his  sway,  by  closing  up  human  hearts  against  him.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Bound  him  a  thousand  years. — Satan  hound  for  a  thousand  years:—!.  There  is  in 

THE  WORLD  A  MIGHTY  FORCE  OF  EVIL.  II.  MiGHTIER  FORCES  OF  GOOD,  ALTHOUGH  UN- 
SEEN, ARE  IN  THE  BACKGROUND.  HI.  ThE  EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  MiGHTIER  AGAINST  THE 
MIGHTY  HAS  BEEN  MATTER  OF  ANCIENT  PROMISE  (Gen.  iii.  5).     IV.    ThE  BTBONGEB  FORCE 

OF  GOOD  HAS  EVER  BEEN  AT  WORK.  This  world  has  never  been  given  up  to  the  evil  one. 
V.  Wherever  the  gospel  has  been  preached  there  a  binding  of  Satan  has  been 
AND  IS  being  effected.  VI.  Nevertheless,  the  passage  before  us  leads  us  to 
expect  a  much  greater  restraint  on  Satan's  activity  than  has  as  yet  been 
KNOWN.  Vn.  When  the  binding  op  Satan  is  completely  effected,  there  must 
needs  be  a  period  of  rest,  such  as  neither  the  world  nor  the  Church  has 
enjoyed  since  "  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin."  Note — 1.  Let 
our  faith  embrace  all  that  is  in  the  Word,  and  we  shall  then  find  nothing  in  the 
fiercest  conflicts  of  the  age  to  shock  or  disturb  it.  2.  Let  us.  thank  God  for  the 
restraint  which  we  know  is  even  now  put  upon  Satan.  He  worries,  but  he  cannot 
devour.  3.  Let  us  be  stimulated  by  the  fact  that,  through  the  energy  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  the  power  of  evil  is  being  subdued  within  us  and  around  us.  4.  Let  us, 
with  renewed  faith,  energy,  prayer,  and  hope,  be  found  doing  our  part  towards 
bringing  about  earth's  time  of  rest.     (C.  Clemance,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-6.  The  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus. — 

Martyrdom  a  testimony : — I.  Martyrs  are  sometimes  murdered  men.  All  murders 
are  not  martyrdoms ;  all  martyrdoms  are  murders.  For  a  man  to  spend  his  Ufe 
amidst  social  scorn,  civil  disabilities,  and  religious  intolerance,  on  account  of  his 
conscientious  beliefs,  is  a  martyrdom,  his  life  is  a  protracted  and  painful  dying. 
But  thousands  have  been  murdered,  and  that  by  every  variety  of  method  which 
Satanic  cruelty  could  invent.  II.  Martyrs  are  always  witnessing  men.  1.  To  the 
invincibihty  of  the  human  will.  2.  To  the  force  of  the  religious  sentiment.  3.  To  the 
power  of  the  soul  over  the  body.  IH.  Martyrs  are  often  Christian  men.  Those  whom 
John  saw  were  those  who  were  "witnesses  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  Word  of  God."  1.  They 
bare  witness  to  the  sustaining  grace  of  Christ.  2.  They  bear  witness  against  the 
lukewarmness  of  Uving  Christians.  IV.  Martyrs  who  are  Christians  enter  heaven. 
1.  As  an  encouragement  to  the  persecuted  Christian.  2.  As  a  warning  to  perse- 
cutors. {Homilist.)  Lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years.— T/zg 
millennium  : — It  is  seldom  that  our  sermons  bear  on  the  prophecies,  and  especially 
on  the  unfulfilled  prophecies.  Several  reasons  bind  us  to  this  reserve.  First,  the 
study  of  unfulfilled  prophecies  has  only  a  secondary  importance,  and  is  not  essential 
to  salvation.  Further,  and  just  because  they  are  not  essential  to  salvation,  the 
unfulfilled  prophecies  are  wrapped  up  in  a  considerable  amount  of  obscurity.  This 
fact  proves  that  the  study  of  the  prophecies  is  not  without  dangers,  and  that  is 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

another  reason  which  should  bind  a  person  to  devote  himself  to  it  only  with 
moderation.  Those  who  give  themselves  up  too  exclusively  to  this  study  are  easily 
tempted  to  hand  over  to  the  background  the  great  truths  of  the  faith,  in  order  to 
devote  their  chief  interest  to  speculations,  curious,  perhaps,  and  often  attractive; 
but  nearly  always  without  benefit  to  practical  life,  and  sometimes  even  dangerous. 
Nevertheless,  it  must  not  be  inferred  from  what  precedes  that  we  absolutely  condemn 
the  study  of  the  prophecies.  Far  from  it.  Restrained  within  its  legitimate  bounds, 
the  study  of  the  prophecies  presents  not  only  matter  of  great  interest  but  of  great 
blessing,  and  many  Christians  do  wrong  when  they  lay  aside  completely  that  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  I  desire  particularly  to  call  your  attention 
to  that  glorious  reign  of  Christ  which  is  announced  in  a  great  number  of  prophecies, 
and  more  particularly  in  the  words  of  our  text,  and  which  is  known  in  the  Christian 
Church  under  the  name  of  the  millennium.  What  meaning  should  we  give  to  these 
declarations,  and  in  what  will  that  reign  of  Christ  upon  earth  precisely  consist  ? 
Two  different  systems  divide  on  this  point  those  Christians  who  are  occupied  with 
the  prophecies.  A  certain  number  of  them  take  the  declarations  of  Scripture  in 
their  literal  sense  ;  they  believe  that  the  Saviour  is  really  to  return  to  the  earth,  to 
found  here  a  temporal  kingdom ;  that  He  will  literally  sit  in  His  body  on  the  throne 
of  David ;  that  during  that  reign,  which  will  continue  a  thousand  years,  the 
believing  dead  only  will  rise  to  have  part  in  the  glory  of  their  Head ;  and  that  this 
kingdom  of  Christ  will  be  an  epoch  of  temporal  prosperity.  The  other  class  of 
interpreters  understand  these  prophecies  in  a  figurative  sense.  They  think  that  by 
the  reign  of  Christ  must  be  understood  the  dominion  which  He  exercises  over  souls 
by  the  gospel,  and  that  the  main  point  in  these  magnificent  oracles  is  the  spiritual 
progress  of  the  Church ;  they  think  that  this  resurrection  of  believing  souls  spoken 
of  in  our  text  denotes  nothing  more  than  the  awakening  of  the  spirit  of  faith.  The 
Christian  law  having  become  the  rule,  and  infidelity  the  exception;  the  gospel 
covering  the  whole  earth  with  its  sweet  and  holy  influence;  that  is  what  the 
millennium  would  be.  Of  these  two  interpretations  we  do  not  hesitate  to  prefer 
the  last.  1.  Observe,  first,  that  the  spiritual  or  symbolical  interpretation  is  more 
in  agreement  with  the  modes  of  style  observed  in  general  by  the  prophets,  and  in 
particular  in  the  Apocalypse.  This  style,  from  one  end  of  the  book  to  the  other,  is 
essentially  symbolical  and  figurative  ;  everywhere  moral  ideas  are  concealed  under 
a  veil  of  material  images ;  words  are  incessantly  turned  aside  from  their  proper 
meaning  to  receive  meanings  altogether  novel.  In  this  style,  quite  impregnated 
with  the  symbolical,  a  church  becomes  a  candlestick,  a  minister  becomes  a  star. 
2.  Not  only  is  that  interpretation  legitimate,  in  so  far  as  it  is  in  agreement  with  the 
analogy  of  Scripture,  but  it  is  in  a  manner  required  by  the  very  expressions  of  our 
text.  In  fact,  observe  well  that  St.  John  speaks  only  of  the  "  souls  "  of  those  who 
had  been  put  to  death  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus ;  these  are  the  souls  which  are  to 
revive  again  and  reign  with  Christ.  Now,  souls  cannot  rise  again,  in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  word.  3.  In  the  third  place,  the  literal  interpretation  is  not  in  harmony 
with  the  other  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  which  relate  to  the  resurrection.  Nowhere 
is  the  resurrection  spoken  of  as  to  take  place  twice  or  at  two  different  periods.  This 
great  event  is  always  represented  to  us  as  to  take  place  for  all  men  at  once,  with  this 
only  difference,  that  the  resurrection  of  the  just  will  immediately  precede  that  of 
the  wicked.  The  following  passages  clearly  establish  this  (Dan.  xii.  2  ;  John  v.  28 ; 
1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17).  It  evidently  follows  from  these  statements  that  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  of  the  wicked,  shall  be  immediately  followed 
by  the  judgment  and  eternal  life.  4.  In  the  fourth  place,  it  is  impossible  to 
comprehend  how  a  return  to  the  earth  could  add  anything  to  the  happiness 
of  the  righteous  who  died  in  the  faith,  and  are  gathered  into  the  rest  which 
is  reserved  for  the  people  of  God.  The  error  of  the  Jews  consisted  precisely 
in  representing  the  Messiah  as  a  temporal  King ;  it  is  into  a  similar  error  that  the 
millennarians  of  to-day  fall.  5.  And  then,  what  becomes,  in  the  system  of  Uteral 
interpretation,  of  the  death  of  believers  who  are  born  during  the  millennium  ?  In 
the  actual  state  of  things,  the  death  of  believers  is  a  deliverance  ;  they  die  in  peace, 
because  they  leave  a  life  of  trials  and  an  abode  of  miseiy  to  go  to  the  Lord ;  but  it 
would  not  be  so  during  the  period  of  the  millennium,  if  the  literal  interpretation 
were  true.  6.  If  the  literal  interpretation  were  true,  there  would  then  be  three 
comings  of  Christ — one  to  save  the  world,  another  to  judge  it,  and  a  third  and 
intermediate  one  to  occupy  the  throne  of  the  millennium.  Now  Scripture  con- 
stantly presents  to  us  the  last  judgment  as  the  Lord's  second  coming  ;  and  nowhere 
is  an  intermediate  coming  admitted.     7.  Finally  the  text  is  the  only  passage  of  Holy 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  573 

Scripture  where  a  resurrection  is  spoken  of  to  take  place  before  the  end  of  the 
world  ;  whilst  a  great  number  of  other  prophecies  with  regard  to  the  millennium 
announce  clearly  the  progress  and  general  triumph  of  the  gospel.  Now,  which  is 
more  rational :  to  explain  numerous  and  clear  prophecies  by  one  single  and  enig- 
matical passage  in  the  Apocalypse,  or  rather  to  explain  the  single  and  obscure 
passage  by  the  clear  and  numerous  prophecies  ?  To  put  such  a  question  is  to  answer 
it.  It  appears  then  established,  as  far  as  we  can  be  positive  in  such  a  matter,  that 
the  reign  of  Christ,  known  under  the  name  of  the  millennium,  is  to  be  understood 
in  a  spiritual  sense,  and  that  the  subject  is  the  authority  which  He  will  exercise  over 
souls  by  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  The  doctrine  of  the  millennium,  as  we  have 
presented  it  to  you,  has  important  consequences  as  regards  conversion  and  as  regards 
salvation.  Indeed,  since  that  glorious  reign  of  Christ  is  a  spiritual  reign,  since  it 
will  essentially  consist  in  the  submission  of  hearts  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ, 
it  depends  upon  each  of  us  as  to  whether  the  millennium  should  commence  in  our 
case  from  the  present :  in  order  to  that,  no  more  is  necessary  than  that  we  submit 
our  heart  to  the  gospel  and  give  ourselves  to  Christ.  May  God  grant  that  a 
great  number  of  souls  may  know  in  this  church  of  themselves  this  reign  of 
Christ,  at  once  so  powerful  and  so  tender,  so  sweet  and  so  glorious  1  {H.  3Ionod.) 
The  millennium  : — Scripture  reveals  to  us,  in  a  great  many  prophecies,  that  a  time 
will  come  when  the  whole  earth  shall  know  God  our  Saviour  :  that  is  what  it  calls, 
in  its  figurative  style,  the  reign  of  Christ.  It  does  not  foUow  from  this,  however, 
that  all  men  will  from  the  he^rt  be  converted  to  the  gospel :  the  expressions  of  the 
prophecy  go  not  so  far ;  they  speak  only  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  about  to 
cover  the  whole  earth  ;  and  we  know  that  knowledge  may  co-exist  with  an  uncon- 
verted heart.  One  of  the  features  characteristic  of  that  glorious  period  is  that  the 
gospel,  by  that  very  means  through  which  it  will  have  become  dominant,  will  have 
penetrated  to  the  most  elevated  classes  and  to  the  rulers  of  the  nations.  Govem- 
'ments  will  be  inspired  by  the  gospel,  administrations  will  be  Christian  (Psa.  cxxxviii. 
4,  5).  Jesus  Christ  shall  then  continue  to  reign  in  this  sense,  that  His  gospel  will 
be  seated  on  the  throne  in  the  person  of  sovereigns  converted  to  the  Christian  faith. 
Then  the  religion  of  Christ  will  no  longer  be  a  mere  political  instrument  in  the 
hand  of  governments  ;  it  will  no  longer  cover,  as  with  a  sacred  mantle,  the  views 
of  a  profane  ambition  ;  it  will  be  the  sincere  expression  of  the  moral  life  of  states. 
Among  the  blessed  results  which  the  gospel  will  necessarily  produce  in  the  world 
when  submissive  to  its  laws,  one  of  those  which  Scripture  puts  in  the  first  class,  and 
to  which  it  reverts  most  readily,  is  the  abolishment  of  war  and  the  establishment 
of  a  universal  peace.  Just  as  in  consequence  of  the  progress  of  civilisation  and  the 
softening  of  manners  we  no  longer  comprehend  legal  torture,  just  as  we  no  longer 
comprehend  slavery,  so  a  time  will  come  when  men  will  no  longer  comprehend  that 
there  could  ever  have  existed  a  thing  so  odious,  so  horrible,  so  absurd  as  war.  At 
the  same  time  that  enmities  will  be  appeased  among  nations,  they  shall  also  cease 
among  individuals.  Hatred,  vengeance,  personal  violence,  will  come  to  an  end ; 
the  most  unyielding  characters  will  be  softened ;  concord,  charity,  sincerity  will 
preside  over  all  the  relations  existing  among  men ;  natures  the  most  opposed  to  one 
another  will  learn  to  draw  near  and  love  one  another.  At  the  same  time  that  the 
gospel  having  become  dominant,  it  will  produce  quite  naturally  another  blessed 
consequence,  which  at  first  view  does  not  seem  to  depend  on  its  influence.  I  mean 
a  considerable  diminution  of  physical  and  moral  suffering.  Without  doubt  there 
will  still  be  trials,  but  every  person  wiU  then  make  an  effort  to  alleviate  the  suffer- 
ings of  those  who  surround  him.  In  a  word,  the  temporal  happiness  of  mankind 
will  increase  beyond  calculation,  and  will  realise  the  most  characteristic  descrip- 
tions of  prophecy  (Isa.  Ixv.  18,  19).  At  the  same  time  that  suffering  will  decrease, 
and  always  by  a  natural  consequence  of  the  benefits  attached  to  the  gospel,  the 
duration  of  human  life  will  be  increased ;  it  will  reach  the  utmost  limit  which 
nature  assigns  it ;  neither  vice,  nor  despair,  nor  violence,  will  any  longer  abridge 
the  days  of  man  (Isa.  Ixv.  20-22).  The  extension  of  human  life  in  duration  wiU 
necessarily  be  accompanied  by  an  extraordinary  increase  of  the  population.  It  is 
easy  to  understand  how  much  more  rapid  that  increase  would  be  if  wars,  vice, 
intemperance,  selfishness,  poverty,  and  the  want  of  confidence  in  God,  did  not  come 
and  put  obstacles  in  the  way.  We  may  conclude  that  the  number  of  men  who  will  live 
on  the  earth  during  the  millennium  will  go  beyond  that  of  the  men  who  will  have  lived 
during  all  the  preceding  ages ;  so  that  the  portion  of  mankind  which  shall  be  saved 
will  be  infinitely  more  numerous,  taken  altogether,  than  those  who  shall  be  lost ; 
and  that  thus  •'  grace  will  abound  over  sin  "  (Kom.  v.  20,  21).     That  extraordinary 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

increase  of  population  is  moreover  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  prophecies  relating 
to  the  millennium  (Psa.  Ixxii,  16 ;  Isa.  Ix.  22).  Another  feature  of  the  glorious 
period  when  the  gospel  which  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  as  well  as  of 
that  which  is  to  come,  shall  prevail,  is  an  unprecedented  scope  being  given  to 
industry  and  to  the  arts  and  sciences.  Commerce  will  no  more  have  for  its  spring 
selfishness,  nor  for  its  means  fraud :  consecrated  to  the  general  good  of  humanity, 
it  will  freely  exchange  the  produce  of  all  nations,  and  enrich  them,  the  one  by  the 
other  (Isa.  Ix.  17,  18).  However  marvellous  the  prospects  which  we  have  unfolded 
may  appear,  all  these  blessings  are  the  natural  and  necessary  consequences  of  the 
gospel  having  become  dominant  in  the  earth.  Let  the  time  only  come  when  the 
whole  earth  shall  be  covered  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  and  all  the  wonders  of 
the  millennium  are  not  only  possible,  but  they  are  in  some  sort  unavoidable.  The 
whole  question  then  reduces  itself  to  knowing  if  it  is  really  possible  that  a  time 
should  come  when  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  will  be  converted  to  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  gospel,  from  that  very  considera- 
tion that  it  is  the  truth,  ought  of  necessity  to  make  progress  in  the  world,  and  gain 
little  by  little  upon  error.  In  its  struggle  against  paganism  the  gospel  cannot  be 
overcome  :  it  never  has  been,  it  never  will  be.  The  conversion  of  the  heathen  world 
can  then  be  only  a  question  of  time.  Observe,  in  the  second  place,  that,  in  the  very 
nature  of  things,  the  progress  of  the  gospel  in  the  world  proceeds  of  necessity  with 
a  perpetually  increasing  rapidity.  The  result  of  each  new  year  is  not  the  same  as 
that  of  the  preceding  one  ;  but  it  is  double,  treble,  or  fourfold.  The  conversion  of 
the  heathen  world  is  therefore  sure  after  a  given  time,  and  everything  announces 
that  this  time  need  not  be  very  considerable.  Let  them  come  then  after  all,  and 
tell  us  that  the  work  of  missions  is  useless ;  that  the  evangelisation  of  the  world  is 
a  chimera  ;  that  the  sacrifices  made  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  are  lost ;  that 
all  these  efforts  are  but  a  drop  of  water  which  loses  itself  in  an  ocean.  We  know 
on  what  to  depend.  We  know  that  missions  are  a  work,  not  only  appointed  by  God, 
but  reasonable,  productive,  and  full  of  prospect ;  we  know  that  the  millennium  is  not 
only  a  brilliant  ideal  created  by  prophecy,  but  that  it  will  be  the  natural,  regular, 
unfailing  consequence  of  what  passes  now  and  henceforth  under  our  eyes.  A  last 
question  might  remain  for  examination  on  the  subject  of  the  millennium  :  we  do 
not  attach  great  importance  to  it,  for  it  is  more  curious  than  useful.  .  What  con- 
jectures may  we  form  as  to  the  period  in  the  future  when  the  millennium  should 
commence  ?  Let  us  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  from  the  present  state  of  the 
world,  and  the  progress  which  the  gospel  has  made  since  the  commencement  of  our 
century,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  millennium  ought  not  to  be  very  far  distant. 
A  century  and  a  half  ought  to  sufl&ce,  according  to  all  human  probabilities,  to  bring 
about  the  conversion  of  the  world.  It  is  thus  that  the  creation  of  the  world  was 
accomplished  in  six  days,  or  rather  in  six  periods ;  the  seventh  day,  or  seventh 
period,  is  a  sabbath  or  rest.  The  ceremonial  purifications  ordained  by  Moses  were 
continued  during  six  days,  and  were  terminated  on  the  seventh.  In  the  sacrifices 
offered  for  grievous  sins,  the  sprinkling  of  blood  was  made  seven  times,  on  the 
seventh  sprinkling  the  atonement  was  accomplished.  In  the  visions  of  the  Apoca- 
lypse, the  Apostle  St.  John  sees  a  book  sealed  with  seven  seals,  each  of  these  seals 
represents  a  period  in  the  future  of  the  Church.  Since  then  it  is  a  character,  which 
seems  essential  to  the  dispensations  of  God,  that  they  should  continue  during  seven 
periods,  and  never  beyond  the  seventh,  we  may  suppose,  by  analogy,  that  the  present 
world  is  to  continue  during  seven  periods  of  a  thousand  years,  the  last  of  which 
would  be  the  millennium.  That  supposition  acquires  especially  a  high  degree  of 
probability  when  we  compare  the  present  dispensation,  considered  in  its  successive 
phases,  with  the  account  of  creation.  According  to  a  very  ancient  tradition,  and 
one  found  already  among  the  Jews,  the  six  days  of  Genesis  would  be  six  periods  of 
a  thousand  years — a  supposition  which  is  confirmed  by  two  passages  of  Scripture, 
where  it  is  said,  in  speaking  particularly  of  the  creation,  •'  That  one  day  is  with  the 
Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  This  moral  creation, 
like  the  physical  creation,  is  to  be  accomplished  in  six  days,  or  in  six  thousand 
years.  In  the  physical  creation  there  is  a  progressive  gradation  from  beings  less  per- 
fect to  beings  more  perfect ;  there  is  the  same  in  the  moral  creation,  where  humanity 
goes  on  perfecting  itself  from  age  to  age,  and  from  one  thousand  years  to  another. 
The  end  of  the  millennium  will  be  the  signal  of  the  events  which  are  to  mark  the 
end  of  the  world.  *'  When  the  thousand  years  shall  be  accomplished,"  the  prophet 
has  told  us,  •'  Satan  will  be  loosed  from  his  prison,  and  he  will  afresh  seduce  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth."    But  that  last  seduction  will  continue  but  a  moment,  and 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  675 

will  bring  with  it  the  final  defeat  of  all  the  powers  of  darkness  ;  the  dead  shall  rise  to 
appear  in  judgment,  and  the  economy  of  time  will  give  place  to  that  of  eternity.  [Ibid.) 
Christ's  millennial  reign : — I.  The  witnesses  of  Jesus  shall  keign  in  conjunction 
WITH  Himself,  as  theib  head.  As  the  Church  is  the  spouse  of  Christ,  she  cheer- 
fully acknowledges  His  supreme  authority  in  everything,  and  reverently  honours 
Him  as  her  glorious  head ;  yet  she  shares  the  felicity  of  His  victories,  and,  on  the 
full  establishment  of  His  kingdom,  she  will  be  advanced,  to  reign  together  with 
Him  and  partake  of  His  dominion.  II.  The  witnesses  of  Jesus  shall  reign  with 
Him  on  the  eabth,  and  exercise  positive  power  over  the  nations.  The  kingdom 
of  Christ  is  heavenly  and  spiritual.  It  is  the  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness, 
liberty  and  peace,  love  and  joy.  But,  notwithstanding  the  peculiar  nature  of  the 
reign  of  Jesus,  the  earth  is  clearly  represented  as  the  scene  of  His  dominion.  He 
was  encouraged  to  ask  of  the  Father,  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance  and  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  His  possession.  On  the  earth.  He  will  divide  the 
spoil  with  the  strong ;  judge  among  the  nations ;  rebuke  many  people ;  break  in 
pieces  the  oppressor.  Can  it  be  a  low  or  carnal  thing  for  Christ  to  reign  on  the 
earth  ?  Does  it  become  them  who  are  spiritual  to  despise  that  dominion  as  mean 
and  carnal  which  God  the  Father  promised  to  confer  on  His  beloved  Son,  as  the 
meet  reward  of  His  matchless  humiliation  and  obedience  ?  Can  that  be  unworthy 
of  the  esteem  of  His  spouse  which  is  not  below  the  dignity  of  Christ  Himself  ? 
in.  The  saints  shall  reign  personally  with  Christ  on  the  earth.  The  honourable 
privilege  is  not  promised  to  His  saints  during  their  imperfect  and  militant  state, 
which  is  the  proper  period  of  that  course  of  humble  obedience  and  discipline,  by 
which  they  are  prepared  for  their  future  exaltation.  It  constitutes  an  important 
part  of  that  gracious  reward  which  shall  be  conferred  on  the  faithful  soldiers  of 
Jesus,  after  they  overcome  their  spiritual  adversaries  and  finish  their  good  warfare. 
John  saw  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  advanced  to  reign  with 
Him  as  kings  and  priests  of  God.  Nor  shall  this  high  privilege  be  exclusively 
confined  to  those  who  were  beheaded,  or  in  any  other  way  put  to  death,  for  the 
sake  of  the  gospel.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  that  Hved  in  former  ages  shall  share  it 
generally ;  and  that  not  merely  in  a  figurative  sense,  by  the  revival  of  the  cause  of 
reUgion,  which  they  promoted  during  their  lives,  but  by  being  put  in  the  personal 
possession  of  positive  power  and  dominion  along  with  their  glorious  Kedeemer. 
Those  who  share  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  must  certainly  reign  while  He  reigns. 
Their  dominion,  in  conjunction  with  Him,  must  be  enjoyed  during  the  proper 
period  of  His  mediatorial  kingdom,  and  not  after  the  termination  of  it.     IV.  The 

SAINTS  shall  reign  WITH  ChRIST  IN  AN  INCORPOREAL  AND  INVISIBLE  MANNER.      It  is  HOt 

said  that  the  bodies  of  the  slain  witnesses  shall  be  raised  from  the  grave  to  sit  on 
thrones  with  Christ.  The  resurrection  of  their  bodies  could  indeed  add  nothing  to 
their  influence  and  happiness  in  reigning  on  the  earth  amongst  imperfect  creatures. 
The  visible  and  bodily  reign  of  Jesus  and  His  immortal  saints,  among  sinful  men, 
would  cut  off  all  occasion  for  living  by  faith,  and  interfere  with  the  performance  of 
almost  every  part  of  gospel  duty.  We  are  accordingly  informed  in  our  text  that,  at  the 
first  resurrection,  the  souls  of  them  who  were  beheaded  for  the  witnesses  of  Jesus 
shall  live  and  reign  with  Him.  The  souls  of  the  martyrs  are  represented  as  living, 
and  experiencing  a  kind  of  resurrection,  at  the  commencement  of  the  millennium, 
as  they  shall  then  be  exalted  from  a  state  of  rest  and  expectation  to  a  state  of 
activity  and  dominion.  Materialists  and  sceptics  may  refuse  to  believe  what 
cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses,  and  scoff  at  the  doctrine  of  a  future  state ;  but, 
if  we  confess  the  seli-conscious  existence  of  spirits  and  angels  both  good  and 
bad,  and  aUow  that  the  angels  are  indefatigably  employed  in  doing  good  or  evil, 
according  to  their  nature,  why  should  we  hesitate  to  admit  the  future  activity  of 
those  holy  spirits  that  shall  live  and  reign  with  Jesus  Christ  ?      V.  The  souls  op 

THE  SAINTS  SHALL  REIGN  WITH  VARIOUS  DIFFERENT  DEGREES  OF  AUTHORITY,  in  propor- 
tion to  their  religious  attainments  and  sufferings  while  in  the  body.  This  may  be 
considered  highly  probable,  on  the  ground  of  analogy.  All  those  works  of  God 
with  which  we  are  acquainted  show  that  He  delights  in  order  and  subordination. 
But  Jesus  has  not  left  this  important  matter  to  be  determined  by  human  con- 
jecture or  remote  inference.  He  has  promised  to  reward  His  servants  according 
to  their  works.  The  parable  of  the  ten  servants  contains  a  striking  example  of 
this  (Luke  xix.  11-19).      VI.  The  saints  or  Jesus  shall  all  reign  with  Him  in  a 

YERY  GLORIOUS  MANNER,  FAR  SURPASSING  OUB  PRESENT   COMPREHENSION.      The  reign  of 

the  saints  will  be  glorious,  because  all  their  former  prayers  shall  be  answered,  their 
ardent  desires  shall  be  granted,  and  their  long  continued  expectation  exceeded. 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

They  shall  obtain  their  dominion  from  Christ  Himself,  as  a  token  of  His  high 
approbation,  and  the  gracious  reward  of  their  faithful  services  and  patient  suffer- 
ings while  in  the  body.      If  the  tokens  of    personal  regard  with  which  earthly 
sovereigns  reward  their    principal   servants  be  honourable,  who  can   sufficiently 
estimate  the  glory  of  that  reward  which  the  King  of  kings  will  confer  when  He 
shall  say,  "  WeU  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant,"  &o.     The  saints  shall 
reign  together  in  a  state  of  glorious  harmony  and  perfect  love.     There  will  be  no 
misunderstanding,  contradiction,  or  bitter  passions,  among  the  spirits  of  the  just 
made  perfect.     Their  love  shall  be  pure  without  dissimulation :  its  ardour  shall 
admit  of  no  decrease ;  and  their  felicity  shall  be  mutually  augmented  by  behold- 
ing the  dignity  and  happiness  of  each  other.     They  shall  enjoy  the  most  intimate 
and  delightful  fellowship  with  Christ  Himself.     They  shall  see  Him  ruling  His 
enemies  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  subduing  the  hearts  of  sinners  to  Himself  by  the 
word  of  His  grace ;  the  progressive  accomplishment  of  His  promises  to  the  gospel 
church  will  fill  them  with  admiration  and  delight ;  and,  whilst  they  share  Hia 
victories  and  dominion,  they  shall  cordially  unite,  with  adoring  angels,  in  ascrib- 
ing the  highest  glory  and    praise  to  Himself    (chap.  v.  8-12  ;   xix.  1-7).      The 
extent  and  efficacy  of  their  dominion  shall  be  glorious.    None  of  their  adversaries 
shall  be  able  either  to  defeat  or  resist  them.     The  beneficial  effects  of  their  reign 
shall  be  glorious.    Kighteousness,  goodness,  and  happiness  shall  be  as  general  and 
abundant  among  mankind  as  wickedness  and  misery  have  hitherto  been.      All  the 
joyful  predictions  of  Scripture  respecting  the  prosperity  and  glory  of  the  Church  in 
the  last  days  shall  be  accomplished.     The  posterity  of  Israel  shall  be  converted, 
with  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles.    VII.  The  saints  shall  keion  together  with  Jesus 
DUBiNO  A  VERY  LONG  PERIOD.    The  Lord  frequently  pours  contempt  upon  the  princes 
of  the  earth  by  causing  their  great  power  to  terminate  in  sudden  defeat  and  debase- 
ment.    The  dominion  of  the  saints  shall  not  be  of  this  transient  kind.     Perhaps 
the  round  number  of  years  mentioned  in  the  text  ought  to  be  understood  in  an 
indefinite  sense,  as  denoting  a  very  large  space  of  time  in  a  general  way,  the  precise 
extent  of  which  is  not  fixed.     Conclusion :  1.  The  view  of  the  text  which  is  now 
presented  ought  to  be  examined  with  much  candour  and  deliberation  before  it  be 
altogether  rejected.    2.  The  text  sets  before  us  an  object  of  the  most  laudable  and 
hopeful  ambition.     Compared  with  this  dignity,  all  human  distinctions  are  insig- 
nificant and  vain ;  yet  it  is  accessible  to  all  the  servants  of  Jesus,  small  and  great. 
3.  This  shows  how  reasonable  and  advantageous  it  is  for  ijien  to  forsake  all  that 
they  have  for  Christ,  in  order  to  win  Him  and  be  found  in  Him.    In  forsaking  all 
for  Christ,  we  renounce  only  those  things  that  are  vain,  ensnaring,  and  perishing, 
to  obtain  the  righteousness  of  faith,  conformity  to  His  perfect  image,  and  fellowship 
with  Him  in  the  enjoyment  of  His  heavenly  kingdom.    4.  This  subject  furnishes  a 
powerful  incitement  to  faithfulness  and  perseverance  in  the  service  of  Christ.    5. 
The  hope  of  reigning  with  Jesus  should  induce  His  disciples  to  show  all  meekness 
and  patience  while  suffering  for  His  sake.     The  cross  is  the  way  to  the  crown. 
The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth.     Those  who  suffer  with  Jesus  shall  reign  with 
Him.      6.  This  subject  affords  strong  consolation  to  believers  in  the  prospect  of 
putting  off  their  earthly  tabernacle.     They  know  that  their  soul  shall  not  sleep  in 
a  state  of  dark  insensibility,  while  their  body  is  in  the  dust.    Death  to  them  will  be 
gain.      [J.  Gibb.)         The  age  of  moral  triumph: — I.  The  entire  overthrow  of 
MORAL  EVIL.     1.  The  great  enemy  will  have  lost  his  stand-place  in  the  world. 
Error,  prejudice,  selfishness,  evil  passions,  &c.,  will  have  gone.     He  will  have  no 
fulcrum  for  his  lever.     2.  The  fall  of  the  great  enemy  will  be  complete  for  a  time. 
The  more  humanity  progresses  in  intelligence,  rectitude,  and  holiness,  the  more 
hopeless  his  condition  becomes.    II.  The  universal  sovereignty  op  Christ.     1. 
The  only  true  sovereignty  is  spiritual.     2.  A  religious  spiritual  sovereignty  over 
man  is  the  great  want  of  the  race.     He  who  rules  the  human  mind — directs  its 
faculties,  energies,  and  feelings  rightly — is  man's  greatest  benefactor.     This  Christ 
does  in  the  highest  and  most  perfect  manner.    III.     The  general  ascendancy  of 
great  souls.     1.  They  will  be  men  who  have  passed  through  a  spiritual  resurrec- 
tion.   2.  They  will  be  men  of  martyr-mould.     3.  They  will    be  men  possessing 
exclusive  ascendancy.     4.  They  will  be  men  raised  for  ever  beyond  the  reach  of 
all   future    evil.     IV.  The    extensive    duration  of  the  whole.     1.  This  long 
period  of  holiness  is  a  glorious  set-off  against  all  the  preceding  ages  of  depravity 
and  sin.     2.  This  long  period  of  holiness  serves  wonderfully  to  heighten  our  ideas 
of  the  grandeur  of  Christ's  work.      (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  blessed  dead  living 
and  reigning  with  Christ  during  the  thousand  yean : — I.  Here  is  a  vision  of  ueh 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  677 

FROM  EABTH — Dot  of  men  on  it.  "  The  souls."  (So  in  chap.  vi.  11.)  That  the 
expression  refers  here  to  men  in  what  is  called  the  disembodied  state,  scarcely 
admits  of  question.  They  are  clear  and  distinct  words,  fitting  in  with  other  state- 
ments of  God's  Word,  teaching  us  that  the  souls  of  the  blessed  dead  have  already 
passed  into  a  higher  life :  that  there  is  no  lapse  in  their  blessed  relationship  to 
Jesus.  II.  The  blessed  saints  are  seen  in  a  more  elevated  sphere  of  holy 
SERVICE.  They  are  "  living  and  reigning  with  Christ."  They  share  with  Him  the 
government  of  the  world.  Here  they  were  "  kings  and  priests  "  unto  God.  But  in 
the  higher  state  of  being  the  meaning  of  these  names,  and  the  glorious  dignity  they 
include,  become  far  more  manifest  than  when  here  below.     III.  Their  passing 

UPWARD,  IN  DEATH,  TO   THIS  HIGHER  STATE  IS  CALLED   THE   FIRST  RESURRECTION.      And 

most  intelligibly  so.  "  Surely,"  says  the  Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice,  "  if  one  takes  the 
words  as  they  stand,  they  do  not  describe  a  descent  of  Christ  to  earth,  but  an 
ascent  of  '  the  saints '  to  reign  with  Him."  The  thought  of  a  real  resurrection 
without  a  bodily  rising  from  the  grave  ought  to  be  no  difficulty  to  those  accustomed 
to  scriptural  phraseology.  If,  when  a  man  passes  from  death  to  life,  the  phrase 
"  risen  with  Christ,"  is  not  inappropriate,  neither  can  it  be  so  when  he  makes  the 
transition  from  earth  to  heaven  to  be  "at  home  "  with  Jesus.     IV.  Blessed  even 

IN  THIS  FIRST  RESURRECTION,  THE   SAINTS  AWAIT  IN  HOPE   THE    CONSUMMATION  OF  THEIB 

BLISS.  The  blessedness  indicated  here  extends  over  the  thousand  years.  While 
the  Church  on  earth  is  enjoying  its  millennial  calm,  believers  above  are  reigning  in 
life  with  Jesus  Christ.  Knowing  the  blessedness  of  their  first  resurrection,  they 
can  look  forward  with  joyful  hope  to  their  second.  V.  Their  glory  will  be  con- 
summated AT  THE  resurrection  OF  THE  BODY.  "  FoT  this,  as  the  ultimate  outlook, 
the  apostle  says,  believers  are  waiting  (Rom.  viii.  23).  The  first  resurrection  is  that 
to  a  higher  state  of  spiritual  being.  The  second  will  be  to  the  completed  state  of 
glorified  life  of  both  body  and  spirit.  VI.  For  the  wicked  there  is  no  such  first 
resurrection.  "  The  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  (avs^T/o-av)  till  the  thousand 
years  were  expired."  For  the  wicked,  death  brings  nothing  which  can  be  called  a 
resurrection  at  all.  "  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness."  After  death 
they  are  not  extinct.  They  exist.  They  are  in  Hades.  But  their  life  in  the 
invisible  realm  is  no  "resurrection."  No  such  reward  is  theirs.  They  chose  the 
paths  of  sin  and  selfishness,  and  they  can  but  reap  as  they  have  sown.  The  state- 
ment of  the  text  is,  however,  only  negative.  "  They  lived  not  again  till,"  &c. 
What  their  state  is,  positively,  we  are  not  told.  (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  The  reign 
of  the  martyrs  with  Christ : — Instead  of  looking  forward  to  some  future  age  for 
the  thousand  years,  is  it  not  more  reasonable  and  helpful  to  say  that  we  ourselves 
are  living  in  them  ?  From  the  time  when  the  Catholic  Church  was  set  up  in  the 
world  and  its  principles  exhibited,  all  that  is  noble  and  intelligent  in  man,  all  that 
he  recognises  in  himself  as  immortal  and  made  for  a  higher  life,  refuses  to  listen  to 
the  beast  and  to  be  deceived  by  him,  but  acknowledges  the  Lamb  as  its  true  King. 
The  thousand  years,  i.e.,  the  long  period  which  elapses  after  the  setting  up  of  the 
Church — and  surely  this  interpretation  is  more  in  accord  with  what  we  get  from 
the  Bible  than  an  arbitrary  fixture  of  just  one  thousand  years  of  365  days  each — 
these  thousand  years,  up  to  this  hour,  have  been  marked  by  evidences  that  Christ 
has  chained  the  devil,  has  proved  Himself  stronger  than  the  devil,  not  merely  when 
He  resisted  his  temptations,  but  ever  since.  The  earth  has  gone  on  acquiring  new 
life  and  strength  and  capacity,  just  so  far  as  it  has  recognised  the  Lamb  for  its 
true  Lord,  and  thus  purity  has  been  exalted  above  lust,  thus  slavery  has  been 
abolished,  hospitals  have  been  built,  the  poor  have  been  educated,  prisons  have 
been  reformed,  criminals  have  been  appealed  to  by  nobler  motives  than  self-interest. 
There  is  enough  to  do  yet,  God  knows;  but  what  has  been  done  has  all  been  done  on 
principles  which  Christ  laid  down,  and  what  is  still  to  be  achieved  will  be  done  on 
the  same  basis,  namely,  that  self-sacrifice  is  the  true  life  of  God's  earth.  And  what 
does  it  all  mean  but  that  Christ  has  chained  the  dragon?  Then  St.  John  says  that 
he  saw  the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  and  for  the 
Word  of  God — the  early  Christian  martyrs,  in  fact — and  they  lived  and  reigned  with 
Christ  for  a  thousand  years.  They  were  killed  :  the  world  saw  no  more  of  them ;  but 
St.  John  says  that  he  did.  To  him  it  was  revealed  what  their  subsequent  lot  was — 
they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  in  the  thousand  years.  They  live  and  reign  with 
Him  now,  therefore.  Where  ?  That  we  cannot  tell.  We  know  that  they  have  not 
yet  their  perfect  consummation  and  bliss.  But  see  what  we  do  know.  Christ  is 
reigning  now.  But  is  that  reigning  merely  resting  on  His  throne  as  a  glorious 
spectacle  to  look  upon  ?    Which  of  as  seriously  supposes  that  reigning  with  Christ 

37 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

means  sitting  with  a  golden  crown  on,  holding  a  sceptre  ?  The  reign  of  Christ  is  a 
more  real  thing — a  very  active  thing — and  the  martyrs  who  died  for  His  sake, 
because  they  would  not  worship  the  beast,  reign  even  as  He  does.  There  is  to  me 
wonderful  help  and  consolation  in  all  which  this  involves.  The  witnesses  of  Christ, 
who  cared  so  much  for  their  fellow  men  whilst  they  lived  on  the  earth,  who  had 
laboured  to  do  it  good,  and  seemed  to  have  laboured  in  vain,  who  had  told  their 
fellow  men  who  their  true  King  was ;  they,  after  they  were  no  more  seen,  reigned 
with  Christ,  i.e.,  they  exercised  a  greater  influence,  had  a  greater  power,  than  ever 
they  had  before,  and  became  from  the  unseen  world  efificient  servants  of  Him  who 
had  given  up  His  life  for  the  salvation  of  men.  This  is  their  high  reward,  exactly 
that  reward  which  their  Lord  promised  in  His  parable.  He  whose  pound  had  gained 
five  pounds  was  to  be  ruler  over  five  cities.  They  are  not  offered  idleness  or  luxurious 
indulgence,  they  are  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord,  to  have  the  delight  of  knowing 
more  and  more  of  His  purposes,  and  of  working  in  conformity  with  them.  They 
die  and  are  seen  no  more,  but  any  good  deed  which  they  have  ever  done  goes  forth 
conquering  and  to  conquer.  And,  the  apostle  declares,  this  is  the  first  resurrection, 
which  they  who  have  lived  evil  hves  and  followed  the  beast  have  no  part  in.  How 
often  we  see  good  and  faithful  men,  whose  career  is  altogether  useful  and 
beneficial,  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  their  work!  We  think  to  ourselves,  "How 
much  good  this  man  would  have  done  if  he  had  lived!  What  a  loss  to  the 
Church ! "  So  it  seems  to  us,  and  so  it  seemed  to  the  first  Christians,  for  we 
are  told  "  they  made  great  lamentation  over  him."  But  God  knew  better  than 
they.  He  took  His  martyr  away  that  he  might  reign  with  Christ.  Well,  was 
there  any  evidence  of  his  so  reigning  ?  Were  any  victories  of  his  ever  seen  any 
more?  Many,  no  doubt,  which  we  know  nothing  about.  {W.  Benham,  B.D.) 
This  is  the  first  resurrection. — The  first  resurrection  : — I.  Three  privileges.  1. 
Priority  of  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  20 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13 ;  Phil,  iii.  8-11 ;  Luke  xx. 
35 ;  John  vi.  39,  40,  44,  54).  "  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  Now,  is  there 
any  joy  or  beauty  in  this,  to  the  people  of  God  in  particular,  unless  there  be  a 
speciality  in  it  for  them  ?  It  is  the  lot  of  all  to  rise,  and  yet  we  have  here  a  privilege 
for  the  elect!  Surely  there  is  a  different  resurrection.  Besides,  there  is  yet  a 
passage  in  the  Hebrews  where  the  apostle,  speaking  of  the  trials  of  the  godly,  and 
their  noble  endurance,  speaks  of  them  as,  "  not  accepting  deliverance  that  they 
might  obtain  a  better  resurrection."  The  betterness  was  not  in  the  after  results  of 
resurrection,  but  in  the  resurrection  itself.  How,  then,  could  it  be  a  better  resur- 
rection, unless  there  be  some  distinction  between  the  resurrection  of  the  saint  and 
the  resurrection  of  the  sinner  ?  Pass  on  to  the  second  privilege  here  promised  to 
the  godly.  2.  The  second  death  on  them  hath  no  power.  This,  too,  is  a  literal 
death ;  none  the  less  literal  because  its  main  terror  is  spiritual,  for  a  spiritual  death 
is  as  literal  as  a  carnal  death.  The  death  which  shall  come  upon  the  ungodly 
without  exception  can  never  touch  the  righteous.  Oh,  this  is  the  best  of  all.  As 
for  the  first  resurrection,  if  Christ  hath  granted  that  to  His  people  there  must  be 
something  glorious  in  it  if  we  cannot  perceive  it.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 
shall  be,  but  we  know  when  He  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like  Him."  I  think  the 
glories  of  the  first  resurrection  belong  to  the  glories  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us 
rather  than  the  glories  that  are  revealed  to  us.  3.  "  They  shall  reign  with  Him  a 
thousand  years."  I  believe  this  reign  of  the  saints  with  Christ  is  to  be  upon  earth 
(Psa.  xxxvii.  10,  11;  Kev.  v.  9,  10  ;  Matt.  xix.  28).  You  find  such  passages  as  these 
in  the  Word  of  God,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  Mount  Zion,  and  in  Jerusalem, 
and  before  His  ancients  gloriously."  You  find  another  like  this  in  Zechariah,  "  My 
God  shall  come  with  the  multitude  of  His  saints."  II.  To  the  ungodly  three 
THINGS  IN  SIMPLICITY.  1.  Sinner,  you  have  heard  us  speak  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
righteous.  To  you  the  word  "  resurrection"  has  no  music.  There  is  no  flash  oi 
joy  in  your  spirit  when  you  hear  that  the  dead  shall  rise  again.  But  oh,  I  pray 
thee  lend  me  thine  ear  while  I  assure  thee  in  God's  name  that  thou  shalt  rise.  Not 
only  shall  your  soul  live — you  have  perhaps  become  so  brutish  that  you  forget  you 
have  a  soul — but  your  body  itself  shall  live.  Go  thou  thy  way,  eat,  drink,  and  be 
merry ;  but  for  all  these  the  Lord  shall  bring  thee  into  judgment.  2.  But  after 
the  resurrection,  according  to  the  text,  comes  the  judgment.  3.  After  judg- 
ment, the  damnation.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  first  resurrection  : — My  conviction 
is  clear  that  the  resurrection  here  spoken  of  is  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  from 
their  graves,  in  the  sense  of  the  Nicene  Creed,  where  it  is  confessed :  "  I  look  for 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  life  of  the  world  to  come."  The  placing  of  it 
as  the  first  in  a  category  of  two  resurrections,  the  second  of  which  is  specifically 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  579 

stated  to  be  the  literal  rising  again  of  such  as  were  not  raised  in  the  first,  fixes  the 
sense  to  be  a  literal  resurrection.  1.  It  is  a  resurrection  of  saints  only.  They  that 
have  part  in  it  are  "  blessed  and  holy."  It  is  true  that  "  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even 
so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  22).  But  it  is  immediately  added, 
"  every  man  in  his  own  order."  It  is  not  a  summary  thing,  all  at  once,  and  the 
same  in  all  cases.  The  resurrection  of  the  wicked  is  in  no  respect  identical  with 
that  of  the  saints,  except  that  it  will  be  a  recall  to  some  sort  of  corporeal  life. 
There  is  a  "  resurrection  of  life,"  and  there  is  a  "  resurrection  of  damnation  " 
(John  V.  29) ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  these  should  be  one  and  the  same.  There 
is  a  "resurrection  of  the  just" — "a  better  resurrection" — a  resurrection  out  from 
among  the  dead,  for  which  great  zeal  and  devotion  are  requisite  (Luke  xiv.  14 ; 
Heb.  xi.  35  ;  Phil.  iii.  10,  11) — which  is  everywhere  emphasised  and  distinguished 
from  another,  more  general,  and  less  desirable.  As  it  is  "  the  resurrection  of  the 
just,"  the  unjust  have  no  share  in  it.  As  it  is  a  resurrection  from  among  the  dead 
ones,  it  is  necessarily  eclectic,  raising  some  and  leaving  others,  and  so  interposing  a 
difference  as  to  time,  which  distinguishes  the  resurrection  of  some  as  in  advance  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  rest.  2.  It  is  a  resurrection  which  takes  place  in  different 
stages,  and  not  all  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Paul  tells  us  expressly  that  there  is 
an  "  order  "  in  it,  which  brings  up  some  at  one  time,  and  others  at  other  times.  It 
starts  with  "  Christ  the  first-fruits  " ;  afterwards  they  th^t  are  Christ's  at  His  coming ; 
then  (still  later)  the  end,  "completion,  or  last"(l  Cor.  xv.  23,  24).  Christ's 
resurrection  was  also  attended  with  the  resurrection  of  others  (Matt,  xxvii.  52,  53). 
3.  It  is  a  resurrection  which  as  a  whole  is  nowhere  pictoriaUy  described.  The 
reason  is,  that  the  subject  is  not  capable  of  it.  4.  The  completion  of  this  resurrec- 
tion introduces  a  wonderful  change  in  the  earth's  history.  It  is  the  breaking  through 
of  an  immortal  power ; — a  power  which  sweeps  away,  as  chaff  before  the  wind,  the 
whole  economy  of  mortal  and  dragon  rule,  and  thrusts  to  death  and  Hades  every 
one  found  rising  up  or  stiffening  himself  against  it ; — a  power  which  gives  to  the 
nations  new,  just,  and  righteous  laws,  in  the  administration  of  immortal  rulers, 
whose  good  and  holy  commands  men  must  obey  or  die.  I  think  of  the  coming  in 
of  that  power — of  the  havoc  it  must  needs  make  in  the  whole  order  of  things — of 
the  confusion  it  will  cause  in  the  depraved  cabinets  and  courts  and  legislatures  of 
the  world — of  the  revolution  it  must  work  in  business  customs,  in  corporation 
managements — of  the  changes  it  must  bring  into  churches,  into  pulpits,  into  pews, 
into  worship,  into  schools,  into  the  newspapers,  into  book-making  and  book-reading, 
into  thinking  and  philosophy,  and  into  all  the  schemes,  enterprises,  judgments, 
pursuits,  and  doings  of  men.  And  a  good  thing  it  wiU  be  for  the  nations  when  that 
day  comes.  There  can  be  nothing  better  than  God's  law.  There  can  be  nothing 
more  just,  more  reasonable,  more  thoroughly  or  wisely  adapted  to  all  the  well-being 
of  man  and  the  highest  wholesomeness  of  human  society.  All  the  blessedness  in 
the  universe  is  built  upon  it.  All  that  is  needed  for  the  establishment  of  a  holy 
and  happy  order  is  for  men  to  obey  that  law,  for  it  to  be  put  in  living  force,  for  it  to 
be  incarnated  in  the  feelings,  actions,  and  lives  of  men.  And  this  is  what  is  to  be 
effected  when  "the  children  of  the  resurrection"  get  their  crowns,  and  go  into 
power,  with  Christ  the  All-Euler  at  their  head.  5.  The  completion  of  this  resurrec- 
tion promotes  the  subjects  of  it  to  a  transcendent  glory.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D,D.)  The 
first  resurrection : — I.  When  is  it  to  be  ?  "When  the  Lord  comes  the  second  time. 
In  the  preceding  chapter  He  is  described  as  coming  with  the  hosts  of  heaven  for  the 
destruction  of  His  enemies  (1  Cor.  xv.  23 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  1).  He 
comes  as  the  resurrection  and  the  life ;  the  abolisher  of  death,  the  spoiler  of  the 
grave,  the  raiser  of  His  saints.  II.  Who  it  is  to  consist  of.  This  passage  speaks 
only  of  the  martyrs  and  the  non-worshippers  of  the  beast ;  but  other  passages  show 
that  all  His  saints  are  to  be  partakers  of  this  reward.  They  have  suffered  with  Him 
here,  and  they  shall  reign  with  Him  here.  HI.  What  it  does  for  those  who  share 
it.  It  brings  to  them  such  things  as  the  following: — 1.  Blessedness.  God  only 
knoweth  how  much  that  word  implies,  as  spoken  by  Him  who  cannot  lie,  who 
exaggerates  nothing,  and  whose  simplest  words  are  His  greatest.  2.  HoHness. 
They  are  pre-eminently  "  the  saints  of  God  "  ;  set  apart  for  Him ;  consecrated  and 
purified,  both  outwardly  and  inwardly  ;  dwelt  in  by  Him  whose  name  is  the  "  Holy 
Ghost"  ;  and  called  to  special  service  in  virtue  of  their  consecration.  Priestly-royal 
service  is  to  be  theirs  throughout  the  eternal  ages.  3.  Preservation  from  the  second 
death.  They  rise  to  an  immortality  which  shall  never  be  recalled.  No  dying  again, 
in  any  sense  of  the  word ;  not  a  fragment  of  mortality  about  them,  nothing  of  this 
vile  body,  and  nothing  of  that  corruption  or  darkness  or  anguish  which  shall  be  the 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

portion  of  those  who  rise  at  the  close  of  the  thousand  years.  4.  The  possession  of 
a  heavenly  priesthood.  They  are  made  priests  unto  God  and  Christ — both  to  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  Priestly  nearness  and  access ;  priestly  power  and  honour  and 
service ;  priestly  glory  and  dignity  ; — this  is  their  recompense.  5.  The  possession 
of  the  kingdom.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  first  resurrection : — Of  these  words  of 
this  first  resurrection  there  are  three  expositions  authorised  by  persons  of  good  note 
in  the  Church.  First,  that  this  first  resurrection  is  a  resurrection  from  that  low 
estate  to  which  persecution  had  brought  the  Church.  Secondly,  that  it  is  a  resur- 
rection from  the  death  of  sin,  of  actual  and  habitual  sin  ;  so  it  belongs  to  every 
particular  penitent  soul.  And  thirdly,  because  after  this  resurrection,  it  is  said  that 
we  shall  reign  with  Christ  a  thousand  years,  it  hath  also  been  taken  for  the  state  of 
the  soul  in  heaven  after  it  is  parted  from  the  body  by  death  ;  and  so  it  belongs  to 
all  them  who  are  departed  in  the  Lord.  And  then  the  occasion  of  the  day,  which 
we  celebrate  now,  being  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ  Jesus, 
invites  me  to  propose  a  fourth  sense,  or  rather  use  of  the  words ;  not  indeed 
as  an  exposition  of  the  words,  but  as  a  convenient  exaltation  of  our  devotion ; 
which  is,  that  this  first  resurrection  should  be  the  first-fruits  of  the  dead ;  the 
first  rising  is  the  first  riser,  Christ  Jesus  :  for  as  Christ  says  of  Himself,  that 
He  is  the  resurrection,  so  He  is  the  first  resurrection,  the  root  of  the  resurrection. 
He  upon  whom  our  resurrection,  all  our  kinds  of  resurrections  are  founded. 
{J.  Doune.)  On  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power. — The  happiness  of 
being  saved  from  the  second  death : — I.  What  the  second  death  is.  A  second  sup- 
poses a  first;  and  that  which  universally  we  have  the  clearest  notion  of  is,  that 
death  which  funerals  and  the  mourners  who  go  about  the  streets  convince  us 
of.  For — 1.  Death,  in  the  natural  signification  of  the  word,  is  a  separation  of  the 
soul  from  the  body.  Plants  die,  and  beasts  and  birds  and  fishes  and  insects  die  ; 
and  so  man  dies  (Heb.  ix.  27).  And  this  is  the  first  death,  which  all  men,  both 
good  and  bad,  are  subject  to ;  and  from  which  none  can  plead  exemption,  except 
preserved  from  it  by  the  miraculous  power  of  God ;  as  were  Enoch  and  Elias.  2. 
The  second  death  no  creature  is  capable  of  but  man,  no  inferior  creature  ;  devils 
and  apostate  spirits  are,  but  none  below  the  dignity  of  man ;  for  this  death  is  the 
wages  of  sin,  and  contempt  of  mercy  and  the  grace  of  God.  This  second  death  is  a 
punishment.  It  is  true  the  first  is  so  too ;  but  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  that  punishment  is  softened,  or  rather  turned  into  a  mercy,  exchanged 
for  eternal  life ;  but  from  this  second  death  there  is  no  possibility  of  any  release 
after  it  is  once  inflicted.  And  that  we  may  rightly  understand  the  nature  of  it,  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  chapter  before  us  specifies  what  it  is,  for  so  we  read  (ver.  14), 
"  And  death  and  hell "  ;  i.e.,  wicked  men  who  had  been  dead,  and  the  devil  and  his 
angels, "  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  '•  This  is  the  second  death."  And  again,  chap, 
xxi.  8.  n.  Why  it  is  called  death,  and  the  second  death.  1.  The  common  death  of 
mankind  is  a  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body  ;  and  there  being  in  hell  a  signal 
separation,  either  of  the  soul,  or  of  soul  and  body  after  the  resurrection,  from  the  love 
of  God's  complacency  and  the  society  of  saints,  and  from  all  joy  and  comfort,  the  true 
life  of  the  soul,  it  is  upon  that  account  that  this  future  torment  is  called  death.  2.  The 
unhappy  sufferer  in  the  lake  of  fire  is  always  dying,  and  yet  never  dies  ;  the  anguish 
he  lies  under  puts  him  into  such  agonies  that  one  would  think  he  is  expiring  every 
moment,  and  yet  he  lives  (Mark  ix.  44).  3.  The  sufferer  in  this  lake  wishes  to 
die,  and  yet  doth  not  die.  The  intolerable  torment  forces  him  into  vehement 
desires  after  something  that  may  put  a  period  to  his  anguish.  Common  death 
frees  men  from  the  troubles  and  diseases  of  the  body,  and  puts  an  end  to  the  pain 
we  feel  here.  4.  It  is  called  the  second  death,  i.e.,  a  death  different  from  the 
common  and  natural.  In  this  sense  the  word  "  second "  is  used  sometimes 
(as  Dan.  vii.  5).  And,  indeed,  it  is  a  death  of  another  nature,  attended  with  other 
circumstances  and  with  other  consequences.  It  is,  if  I  may  say  so,  a  death  and  no 
death  ;  a  death  joined  with  sense,  that  breaks  the  man,  but  doth  not  destroy  him  ; 
destroys  his  well-being,  but  not  his  being ;  his  felicity,  but  not  his  substance.  III. 
Who  the  happy  persons  are  on  whom  this  second  death  hath  no  power,  and  why 
THEY  TALL  NOT  UNDER  THAT  DOMINION.  1.  In  this  Very  vcrsc,  whercof  the  text  is  part, 
the  persons  to  whom  this  privilege  belongs  are  said  to  be  "  priests  of  God  and  of 
Christ,"  which  qualification  is  in  other  places  ascribed  to  all  the  living  members  of 
Christ's  Church  (chap  i.  6).  2.  As  by  the  second  death  is  meant  hell  and  the  lake  of  fire, 
so  (ver.  15)  it  is  said,  "  And  whoever  was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire."  From  whence  it  will  naturally  follow,  that  such  as  are  written 
in  the  book  of  life  are  not  subject  to  that  power,  and  over  such  the  second  death 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  581 

hath  no  power.  Now,  it  is  certain  that  all  Christians  who  are  Israelites  indeed, 
they  are  written  in  the  book  of  life.  3.  We  read  (chap.  ii.  11),  "  He  that  overcomes 
shall  not  be  hurt  by  the  second  death."  And  who  knows  not  that  self-conquest 
and  overcoming  evil  with  good  is  the  proper  task  and  employment  of  all  sincere 
Christians  ?  And  how  should  this  death  have  any  power  over  them  ?  As  they  live 
to  the  Lord  so  they  die  to  and  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  "  blessed  are  the  dead,"  (fee. 
(chap.  xiv.  13).  The  Lord  that  bought  them  secures  them  against  that  formidable 
power.  The  Lord  that  died  for  them,  and  hath  abolished  death,  and  triumphed 
over  it,  hath  delivered  them  from  that  power.  *  He  is  a  wall  of  defence  to  them  so 
that  the  power  of  this  death  cannot  reach  them.  La  a  word,  they  are  under  another 
Prince,  and  therefore  not  subject  to  that  power.  Liferences  :  1.  There  being  such 
a  death,  even  the  second  death,  surely  it  deserves  to  be  feared  and  dreaded.  It  is 
true  there  is  none  desires  or  cares  to  feel  it,  and  so  far  all  men  may  be  said  to  fear 
it.  But  to  fear,  is  to  use  the  proper  means  to  escape  the  danger.  It  is  with  fearing 
as  it  is  with  believing :  he  that  takes  no  care  to  secure  himself  and  his  goods  doth 
not  believe  there  is  a  consuming  fire  in  his  house,  and  he  that  doth  not  arm  himself 
against  an  approaching  inundation  doth  not  fear  it.  2.  It  must  needs  be  a  very 
great  privilege  to  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  the  second  death  ;  a  greater  mercy 
than  to  be  delivered  from  the  deluge  of  Noah,  from  the  conflagration  of  Sodom, 
from  David's  bear  and  lion,  and  from  the  most  painful  diseases ;  a  mercy  to  be 
prized  above  being  set  with  princes,  even  with  the  princes  of  God's  people ;  a  mercy 
which  none  can  prize  but  true  believers,  and  the  more  they  believe  it,  the  more  they 
will  prize  it ;  a  mercy  that  will  be  prized  another  day  at  a  very  great  rate,  even  by 
the  sufferers  in  the  burning  lake,  when  it  is  too  late.  {A.  Horneck,  D.D.)  Trium- 
phant:— At  one  of  the  prayer-meetings  in  America  a  person  thus  spoke  : — "A  few 
days  ago  I  was  in  a  church  in  another  city,  and  my  attention  was  attracted  by  a 
large  marble  tablet  at  the  farther  end  of  the  church  from  where  I  was  sitting.  It 
was  so  far  from  me  that  I  could  not  read  it ;  but  casting  my  eye  downward  towards 
the  bottom  of  the  inscription,  I  made  out  one  word,  •  Triumphant.'  As  I  looked  at 
that  tablet  on  the  wall,  I  thought,  '  Well,  that  is  all  I  want  to  know  about  that  man.' 
I  knew  not  whether  he  had  been  pastor  of  the  church,  or  one  of  the  elders,  or  deacons, 
or  trustees,  or  who  he  was  ;  I  knew  not  whether  he  was  a  rich  or  a  poor  man  ;  but 
this  one  thing  I  had  reason  to  believe — that  he  died  '  triumphant '  in  Christ ;  and 
that  was  enough."  They  shaU  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ. — Soul  priest- 
hood : — I.  A  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  THE  DiviNE.  The  very  idea  of  priesthood  implies  the 
practical  recognition  of  God.  God  was  to  be  everything  to  the  priests  of  His 
appointment.  He  had  to  do  with  their  clothing,  their  diet,  their  means  of  support. 
He  was  at  once  the  Author,  Master,  and  Object  of  all  their  ceremonies.  They 
prepared  their  sacrifices  by  His  directions,  and  they  offered  them  to  Him  according 
to  His  will.  Deep  as  may  have  been  the  impression  which  the  high  priest  had  of 
God's  presence  when  he  stood  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  in  the  full  light  of  the  shekinah, 
it  was  not  deeper  than  every  man  should  have  in  passing  through  this  Hfe.  But 
why  should  souls  be  ever  conscious  of  God's  presence?  Why?  1.  Because  it  is 
reasonable.  His  constant  presence  is  a  fact.  Shall  I  recognise,  as  I  am  bound  to 
do,  all  the  little  facts  that  come  under  my  daily  notice,  and  ignore  the  great  fact 
that  God  is  in  all,  ever  present,  never  absent  ?  Shall  men  of  science  give  attention 
to  the  smallest  facts  of  nature  ;  write  treatises  on  an  insect's  wing,  or  on  the  micro- 
scopic dust  that  floats  in  the  atmosphere,  and  ignore  the  fact  that  God  is  present? 
If  it  is  wise  to  take  notice  of  the  facts  of  nature,  and  wise  it  is  beyond  debate,  how 
egregious  and  astounding  the  folly  of  ignoring  the  greatest  of  all  facts — the  presence 
of  the  all-creating,  all-sustaining  God  ?  2.  Because  it  is  obligatory.  Who  is  He  that 
is  present  with  us  ?  Our  Maker,  Sustainer,  Proprietor,  Author  of  all  we  have  and 
are,  and  of  aU  we  hope  to  possess  and  be.  To  disregard  the  presence  of  such  a 
Being  is  a  heinous  crime,  a  crime  which  in  all  worlds  conscience  condemns.  3. 
Because  it  is  necessary.  It  is  indispensable  to  man's  well-being.  You  may  as  well 
endeavour  to  evolve  and  bring  into  perfection  the  seed  the  husbandman  has  scattered 
over  his  tilled  field  without  the  sunbeam,  as  to  talk  about  educating  the  soul  without 
the  consciousness  of  God.  This  alone  can  quicken  and  develop  the  spiritual  facul- 
ties of  man.  Nor  is  there  any  moral  power  without  it.  It  is  only  as  we  feel  that 
God  is  with  us  that  power  comes  to  resist  the  evil  and  do  the  good,  to  brave  peril 
and  face  death.  JI.  A  fellowship  with  the  Divine.  Concerning  the  "  mercy  seat," 
before  which  the  high  priest  stood  in  the  Holy  of  HoUes  in  the  presence  of  God, 
Jehovah  said  to  Moses,  "  There  I  will  meet  with  thee,  and  I  will  commune  with 
the©  from  above  the  mercy  seat,"  <fec.    It  might  be  asked,  how  can  we  hold  fellowship 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

with  One  who  is  invisible — how  does  soul  hold  fellowship  with  soul?  Human 
spirits  are  invisible  to  each  other,  yet  do  they  not  enjoy  fellowship  ?  How  ?  By  symbols 
and  sayings,  works  and  words.  I  hold  fellowship  with  the  distant  and  the  dead 
through  the  works  of  their  hands,  either  as  they  come  directly  under  my  eye  or  are 
reproduced  in  my  memory.  But  words  are  the  media  of  fellowship  as  well  as  works. 
Through  words  we  pour  our  souls  into  another's  and  our  minds  meet  and  mingle  in 
fellowship.  Can  we  not  thus  hold  fellowship  with  God?  Around,  above,  and 
beneath  me.  His  works  are  spread.  All  I  see  in  nature  are  the  embodiment  and 
revelation  of  His  ideas,  and  these  ide'as  He  intends  me  to  study  and  appropriate. 
His  Word,  too,  is  in  my  hand ;  above  all  I  have  that  wonderful  Word  of  His — the 
life  of  Jesus.  This  is  the  great  organ  by  which  He  communicates  His  ideas  to  me. 
But  can  man  receive  the  communication  ?  Has  he  a  capacity  for  it  ?  He  has. 
This  is  the  glory  of  his  nature.  Of  all  the  creatures  on  this  earth  man  alone  is 
able  to  receive  the  thoughts  of  God.  Beyond  all  this — beyond  what  may  be  called 
the  fellowship  arising  from  interpretable  ideas,  there  is  an  unspeakable  and  mystic 
intercourse.  What  devout  soul  in  the  chamber  of  devotion,  the  services  of  the 
temple,  or  in  some  lonely  walk  amidst  the  grand  sceneries  of  nature,  has  not  felt  a 
softening,  hallowing  influence  that  has  lifted  his  soul  into  the  conscious  presence  of 
his  God,  caused  it  to  exclaim  with  Jacob,  "  Surely  God  is  in  this  place  "  ?  HI.  A 
DEVOTION  TO  THE  DiviNE.  The  pricsts  under  the  law  were  consecrated  in  the  most 
solemn  and  impressive  manner  to  the  service  of  God.  They  were  in  an  especial 
sense  God's  servants.  1.  To  offer  sacrifices  for  themselves.  We  must  offer 
ourselves,  nothing  else  will  do.  Whatever  we  present  to  God,  unless  we  have  first 
offered  ourselves,  will  be  worse  than  worthless ;  it  will  be  impious.  The  priests 
were  set  apart — 2.  To  offer  sacrifices  for  others.  True  priesthood  involves  inter- 
cession. All  souls  are  united  by  many  a  subtle  bond ;  "  no  oneliveth  unto  himself," 
and  each  is  bound  to  seek  the  good  of  others.  Intercession  with  God  on  behalf  of 
others  is  a  social  instinct  as  well  as  a  religious  duty  and  high  spiritual  privilege. 
He  who  first  consecrates  himself  is  sure  to  mediate  for  the  redemption  of  others : 
mediate  not  merely  by  presenting  the  needs  of  men  to  God,  but  by  presenting  the 
claims  of  God  to  man.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  7-15.  When  the  thousand  years  are  expired,  Satan  shall  be  loosed. — Satan 
loosed  : — Notice  what  immediately  follows  this  thousand  years.  1.  The  devil  is  let 
loose.  He  who  lets  him  loose  is,  of  course,  the  same  who  bound  him,  and  sealed 
him  in  the  prison  of  the  abyss.  It  seems  like  a  great  pity,  after  the  world  has  rested  for 
a  thousand  years,  that  this  arch-enemy  of  its  peace  should  again  be  let  loose  upon 
it.  But  there  seems  to  be  some  sort  of  necessity  for  it.  The  statement  to  John  was, 
that  "  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  time"  ^ver.  3).  Some  interest  of  righteousness  and 
moral  government  renders  it  proper  tnat  he  should  be  allowed  this  last  limited 
freedom.  If  for  nothing  else,  it  is  not  unimportant  that  he  should  have  this 
opportunity  to  prove  how  little  an  imprisonment  of  a  thousand  years  had  served  to 
change  him,  or  reform  his  malignity.  2.  He  seduces  Gog  and  Magog  into  rebelUon. 
He  does  not  send  forth  this  time  to  "  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  for  there  are  then  no 
mortal  kings  to  be  led  astray,  but  he  goes  direct  to  the  people,  insinuates  his  malice 
against  the  rule  under  which  the  King  of  kings  has  placed  the  nations,  and  seeks  to 
persuade  them  into  an  attempt  to  overthrow  it.  To  those  who  dwell  in  the  outskirts 
and  darker  places  of  the  earth,  he  wends  his  sullen  way.  Who  Gog  and  Magog  are 
we  may  not  be  able  to  tell.  But  the  allusion  to  the  '•  corners  of  the  earth"  as  the 
regions  whence  these  rebels  come,  sufficiently  indicates  that  they  are  among  the 
hindermost  of  peoples  and  the  least  advanced  and  cultured  among  the  millennial 
nations.  Satan  succeeds  in  rendering  them  dissatisfied  with  the  holy  rule  of  God's 
glorified  saints,  and  induces  them  to  believe  that  they  can  successfully  throw  it  off 
and  crush  it  out,  as  the  deluded  kings  under  the  Antichrist  were  persuaded  a  thousand 
years  before.  3.  A  terrible  disaster  ensues.  A  madder  thing  than  Gog  and  Magog's 
attempt  was  never  undertaken  upon  earth.  It  is  simply  a  march  into  the  jaws  of 
death,  for  no  rebellion  against  the  kings  who  then  hold  the  reins  of  government  can 
be  tolerated.  The  insane  war  is  quickly  terminated.  "  There  came  down  fire  out 
of  heaven  and  devoured  them."  Not  a  man  of  them  escapes.  4.  Satan  meets  his  final 
perdition.  He  was  imprisoned  in  the  abyss  before ;  but  he  is  now  "  cast  into  the  lake  of 
fire  and  brimstone,  where  also  the  Beast  and  the  False  Prophet  [are] ."  {J.  A.  Seiss, 
D.D.)  Satan  loosed  from  his  prison  after  the  thousand  years  : — During  the  millennial 
period  on  earth,  while  the  departed  saints  are  living  and  reigning  with  Christ,  evil  will 
be  subdued  and  restrained,  but  by  no  means  will  it  be  extinct.    Had  it  been  extinct  it 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  583 

could  not  have  broken  out  again,  nor  would  there  be  any  need  for  the  irape/jfioXr]  of  the 
saints.  The  new  uprising  of  evil  after  the  thousand  years'  rest  is  certainly  not  what 
we  should  expect  or  desire.  But  doubtless  there  is  a  Divine  reason  for  permitting  it 
so  to  be,  or  it  would  not  be.  Let  us  look  at  this  matter  closely  in  the  light  of  God's 
Word,  and  maybe  we  shall  find  more  to  instruct  us  on  this  theme  than  at  first  sight 
appears  probable.  I.  We  gather  from  this  passage  some  hints  as  to  the  state  of 
THE  Church  on  earth  during  the  millennial  period.  1.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  the  millennium,  owing  to  the  effective  restraint  then  put  upon  evil  through  the 
Word  of  truth  and  the  power  of  God,  will  be  a  period  of  very  great  blessedness. 
Satan  is  the  active  agent  in  so  much  evil,  and  when  he  is  bound  a  large  proportion 
of  evil  will  cease  to  exist,  and  a  far  more  rapid  diffusion  of  good  will  be  the  blessed 
result.  2.  There  is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose,  from  any  of  the  teaching  of 
Scripture,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  then  be  present  on  the  earth  in  any  other 
way  than  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit.  3.  It  is  equally  clear  that  the  millennium  will 
not  be  a  period  of  unmixed  good,  nor  will  it  be  a  time  when  the  saints  can  dispense 
with  the  Trape^jSoXrj.  Compared  with  things  as  they  are  now,  the  earth  will  be  at 
rest ;  but  it  will  not  be  heaven.  Evil  will  be  subdued,  but  far  from  extinct.  The 
possibility  of  an  outbreak  will  exist  still.  4.  There  will  also  still  be  death  in  the  world. 
The  deathless  state  enters  not  in  till  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  appear,  and 
Paradise  is  regained.  Not  till  then  will  there  be  "  no  more  curse."  5.  The  Church 
will  still  have  to  be  prepared  for  war.  Obviously,  if  the  state  of  things  on  earth 
during  the  millennium  were  one  of  universal  righteousness,  there  would  be  no  nations 
to  be  deceived.  Still  less  can  we  suppose  that,  after  the  resurrection  from  the  dead, 
the  glorified  saints  are  to  go  about,  sword  in  hand,  to  the  holy  war.  II.  What  do 
we  gather  from  Scripture  concerning  this  onset  of  ill  after  the  millennium  ? 
1.  It  is  necessary.  There  is  a  little  word  in  the  third  verse  of  this  chapter  of  which 
we  are  too  apt  to  lose  sight.  It  is  the  word  "  must."  "  After  that,  he  must  be  loosed 
a  little  season."  Must !  Why?  We  are  not  told.  2.  It  will  be  a  fierce  onset.  It 
will  be  after  the  old  kind,  by  "  deception  "  (ver.  8).  What  will  be  the  special  form 
of  deceit  he  will  use  we  are  not  told,  and  conjecture  is  useless.  3.  It  will  be  a 
restricted  struggle.  Satan  will  be  bound  by  time  even  when  loosed  as  to  space.  The 
same  hand  that  bound  retains  its  power  even  when  the  evil  one  is  loosed.  Not  even 
at  the  worst  of  times  is  the  world  given  over  to  the  devil.  4.  It  will  be  for  a  little  season. 
Not  only  restricted,  but  within  very  narrow  limits.  The  conflict  may  be  sharp,  but 
it  will  be  short.  5.  It  will  be  suicidal.  Satan  will  overshoot  the  mark,  and  fall  into 
his  own  snare.  6.  The  struggle  will  be  even  serviceable  to  the  Church ;  for  not  only 
wiU  it  reveal  more  and  more  the  majesty  of  God  in  defending  His  own  cause,  but  it 
■will  end  in  the  hurling  of  Satan  to  a  lower  depth  than  before.  In  chap.  xii.  9  we  read 
that  the  devil  was  cast  down  to  earth.  In  chap.  xx.  3  he  is  cast  into  the  abyss.  But  in 
ver.  10  he  is  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  Hence — 7.  The  struggle  will  be — the  last.  If 
the  reader  has  followed  the  plan  of  the  book,  he  will  have  noted  how  one  after  another 
of  the  foes  of  God  and  man  are  destroyed.  They  were  four.  (1)  The  dragon — Satan. 
(2)  The  beast.  (3)  The  false  prophet.  (4)  Babylon  the  great.  UL  Wh.\t  are  the 
related  truths  to  which  this  passage  points  us  ?  1.  In  the  light  of  the  views  of  the 
millennium  and  of  what  is  to  follow,  two  sets  of  apparently  conflicting  passages  fall 
into  place.  There  is  one  set  which  indicates  that,  as  the  result  of  the  first  coming  of 
Christ,  aU  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  ;  there  is  another  set 
which  indicates  that  there  will  be  a  fierce  outbreak  of  evil  before  our  Lord  shall  come. 
It  is  no  small  confirmation  of  the  correctness  of  an  interpretation  of  this  passage  if 
thereby  apparently  conflicting  statements  fall  in  place.  The  binding  of  Satan,  which 
was  and  is  effected  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  has  become  more  and  more  strin- 
gent as  souls  are  plucked  from  his  grasp ;  and  we  are  to  see  a  time  of  peace  and  calm 
when  he  will  be  even  more  completely  bound  than  he  is  now.  But  after  that  there 
is  to  be  the  new  onrush  of  evil,  so  that  before  our  Lord  shall  come  a  fiercer  conflict 
than  has  ever  been  known  will  be  fought,  ere  the  great  struggle  shall  be  completely 
at  an  end,  and  then  the  Lord  shall  come.  2.  We  see  that  there  are  two  ways  in 
which  evil  is  being  dealt  with.  That  of  removal,  when  souls  are  being  renewed  ;  and 
that  of  restraint,  when  evil  beings  are  kept  with  prescribed  limits.  And  both  these 
ways  of  working  are  going  on  now,  and  will  do  during  this  millennial  age.  3.  Be  it 
ours  to  take  heart  as  we  get  a  fresh  glimpse  of  the  Divine  plan,  viz.,  that  however  oft 
the  conflict  with  evil  and  the  evil  one  may  be  renewed,  yet  in  every  case  the  issue  is 
that  of  the  defeat  of  evil,  and  its  banishment  to  a  lower  depth  of  disgrace  than  before. 
"  Who  hath  ever  hardened  himself  against  God  and  prospered? "  4.  Finally,  what 
God  will  ultimately  do  with  evil  and  the  evil  one,  no  one  can  positively  say.      [C, 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

Clemance,  D.D.)  The  age  of  moral  reaction : — I.  The  reaction  is  bkought  about 
IN  the  manner  in  which  mankind  have  ever  degenerated.  1.  Here  is  deception. 
Hell  and  heaven  are  acting  on  our  world  through  thoughts — the  one  through  the 
false,  and  the  other  through  the  true.  2.  Here  is  deception  employed  by  Satan.  "  He 
hath  blinded  the  minds  of  men."  3.  Here  is  deception  employed  by  Satan,  first 
upon  those  who  are  most  assailable,  and  afterwards  through  them  upon  others.  H. 
The  reaction  is  op  a  character  the  most  threatening.  1.  The  vast  number  of  ita 
agents.  2.  The  anti-Christian  aim  of  its  agents.  They  made  efforts  to  assault  the 
most  central  and  vital  part  of  religion.  HI.  The  reaction  terminates  in  the  ever- 
lasting destruction  of  all  its  agents,  1.  There  is  in  the  universe  a  distinct  local 
scene,  where  the  wicked  of  all  classes  are  to  receive  their  righteous  retribution.  2. 
The  retribution  which  the  wicked  will  endure  in  this  scene  will  be  of  a  most  terrible 
description.  "  Fire  "  is  the  emblem  of  suffering  (Zech.  xiii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  13-15 ; 
IPet.i.  7) ;  "brimstone"  is  the  emblem  of  desolation  (Job  xviii.  15).  (D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  CompasBed  the  camp  of  the  saints  about . — The  saints  compassed  by 
evil: — 1.  "Whereas  it  is  said  that  they  compassed  the  camp  of  the  saints  about, 
we  see  that  the  saints  and  Church  of  Christ  is  still,  and  ever  hath  been,  and 
shall  be  to  the  end,  the  butt  of  Satan's  malice,  whereof  she  needs  not  to  expect 
either  intermission  or  mitigation.  2.  We  see  the  extremity  that  she  may  by 
God's  permission  be  brought  unto,  to  be  compassed  about  on  all  sides  without 
any  outget,  as  Israel  was  coming  out  of  Egypt,  or  that  boat  wherein  Christ  was 
(Matt,  viii.) ;  yet  the  Lord  will  never  fail  her,  but  her  extremity  will  be  seen  to  be 
His  opportunity.  3.  Whereas  the  Church  is  called  the  beloved  city,  this  is  a  cordial 
to  all  the  truly  godly,  that  whatever  their  estate  be  here,  hated  of  the  world  and 
persecuted,  yet  they  are  beloved  of  God,  and  shall  be  preserved  by  Him.  4.  Whereas 
it  is  said  that  fire  came  down  from  heaven  and  devoured  them,  we  see  that  full  and 
final  destruction  at  last  shall  be  the  end  of  all  God's  enemies.     {Wm.  Guild,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-15.  I  saw  a  great  white  throne. — The  age  of  retribution : — I.  This 
retributive  period  will  dawn  with  overpowering  splendour  upon  the  world. 
1.  The  character  of  this  manifestation.  A  "  throne  "  is  an  emblem  of  glory.  This 
is  a  "  white  throne."  There  is  not  a  single  stain  upon  it.  It  is  a  "  great  white 
throne."  Great  in  its  occupant :  He  filleth  all  in  all.  Great  in  its  influence : 
toward  it  the  eyes  of  all  intelligences  are  directed ;  to  it  all  beings  are  amenable ; 
from  it  all  laws  that  determine  the  character  and  regulate  the  destiny  of  all 
creatures,  proceed.  2.  The  effect  of  this  manifestation.  Before  its  refulgence  this 
material  universe  could  not  stand :  it  melted — vanished  away.  It  will  pass  away, 
perhaps,  as  the  orbs  of  night  pass  away  in  the  high  noontide  of  the  sun  :  they  are 
still  in  being,  stiU  in  their  orbits,  and  still  move  on  as  ever ;  but  they  are  lost  to  us 
by  reason  of  a  "  glory  that  excelleth."  II.  This  retributive  period  will  witness 
the  resurrection  op  the  dead  and  the  consequent  destruction  op  hades  and 
THE  GRAVE.  1.  In  the  resurrection  there  will  be  a  connection  between  man's  raised 
and  man's  mortal  body.  (1)  The  one  rises  out  of  the  other.  (2)  The  one  retains 
the  same  plan,  or  outline,  as  the  other.  (3)  The  one  fulfils  the  same  functions  as 
the  other.  2.  The  resurrection  will  be  co-extensive  with  the  mortality  of  mankind. 
Not  an  infant  too  young,  nor  a  patriarch  too  old.  Tyrants  and  their  slaves,  sages 
and  their  pupils,  ministers  and  their  people — all  will  appear.  IH.  This  retribu- 
tive  PERIOD  WILL  BRING   HUMANITY  INTO   CONSCIOUS    CONTACT  WITH    GoD.      1.    There 

will  be  no  atheism  after  this.    2.  No  deism.    3.  No  indifferentism.    IV.   This 

RETRIBUTIVE  PERIOD  WILL  SETTLE  FOR  EVER  THE  QUESTION  OP  EVERT  MAN'S  CHA- 
RACTER AND  DESTINY.  1.  The  worth  of  a  man's  character  will  be  determined  by 
his  works.  2.  A  man's  works  will  be  determined  by  recognised  authori- 
ties. God's  moral  and  remedial  laws  are  "  books,"  and  they  will  now  be 
opened — to  memory,  to  conscience,  and  to  the  universe.  3.  According  to  the 
correspondence,  or  non-correspondence,  of  man's  works  with  these  recognised 
authorities  will  be  his  final  destiny.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  great  white 
throne : — I.  A  throne.  Yes,  a  royal  seat,  a  seat  of  judgment,  the  seat  of  the  great 
King  and  Judge  of  all.  H.  A  great  throne.  All  earth's  thrones  have  been  little, 
even  the  greatest — Nebuchadnezzar,  or  Alexander,  or  Caesar,  or  Napoleon ;  but  this 
is  "  great  "  ;  greater  than  the  greatest;  none  like  it  in  magnificence.  HI.  A  whitb 
throne.  White  is  purity,  truth,  justice,  calmness.  Such  is  the  throne  to  be — 
unsoiled,  untainted,  incorruptible ;  no  one-sidedness  nor  imperfection ;  no  bribery 
nor  favour  there.  All  is  **  white  " — transparent  and  spotless  perfection.  IV.  Onb 
SEATED  ON  IT,     It  was  Dot  empty  or  unoccupied,  nor  filled  by  a  usurper,  or  by  one 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  585 

who  could  not  wield  the  power  required  for  executing  its  decrees.  God  was  seated 
there ;  that  very  God  before  whose  face  heaven  and  earth  flee  away ;  that  God 
whose  presence  melts  the  mountains,  and  made  Sinai  to  shake  (Psa.  cii.  26 ;  Isa. 
xxxvi.  4,  li.  6  ;  Jer.  iv.  23,  26  ;  Eev.  vi.  14,  xvi.  20).  How  terrible  to  stand  unready 
before  such  a  Judge  and  such  a  throne !  All  justice,  aU  perfection,  all  holiness  I 
Who  can  abide  His  appearing  ?  But  besides  the  Judge  and  the  throne,  there  are 
the  millions  to  be  judged.     (H.  Bonar,  D.I).)        The  great  white  throne : — I.  When- 

ONCE   THE   GREAT   WHITE    THRONE   IS    ERECTED,    ALL    DISTINCTIONS   OF   THIS   LIFE   WILL 

HAVE  BEEN  FOR  EVER  ABOLISHED.  We  of ten  marvcl  at  the  contrast  exhibited  in  the 
present  life,  between  the  circumstances  or  conditions  in  which  mankind  are  placed. 
From  the  extreme  of  affluence  to  the  extreme  of  destitution  there  are  endless 
varieties  of  condition,  yet,  in  certain  respects,  all  are  equal ;  the  noble  and  the 
mean  ;  the  richest  and  the  poorest.  Surely  it  ought  to  make  the  wealthy  set  loose 
to  their  riches,  and  the  poor  think  lightly  of  their  poverty,  when  it  is  remembered 
how  soon  the  small  and  the  great  will  stand  alike  before  God,  to  be  judged 
according,  not  to  their  respective  conditions  on  earth,  but  each  according  to  his 
works.  II.  The  next  feature  which  calls  for  notice  is  the  opening  op  the  books. 
The  idea  is  that  of  a  faithful  register  to  be  brought  forward  hereafter,  to  decide  the 
everlasting  portion.  Thus,  when  we  hear  of  the  books  to  be  opened  at  the  judg- 
ment, and  of  men  being  judged  out  of  those  things  which  are  written  in  the  books, 
we  are,  in  effect,  reminded  that  the  actions  which  we  day  by  day  commit,  the  very 
words  we  speak  and  the  thoughts  we  indulge,  contribute  the  materials  for  a  final 
reckoning,  upon  the  issue  of  which  will  be  suspended  eternal  joy  or  eternal  shame. 
This  regard  to  the  inevitable  connection  between  conduct  in  this  life  and  our  portion 
in  eternity,  would  serve  alike  to  restrain  from  iniquity  and  impel  to  obedience. 
III.  It  must  not  be  overlooked,  however,  that  while  mention  is  made  of  books — of 
several  volumes  of  account — out  of  which  the  dead  will  be  judged,  allusion  is 
MADE  TO  BUT  ONE  BOOK  OF  LIFE,  Containing  the  names  of  those  who  would  be 
saved.  Possibly  an  intimation  is  hereby  conveyed  as  to  the  comparative  fewness 
of  the  saved.  Yet  another  interpretation  of  the  difference  is,  that,  whereas  there 
are  many  different  methods  by  which  men  may  go  to  perdition,  there  is  but  one 
way  of  life.  It  is  not  alone  the  heathen,  who  never  heard  of  a  Eedeemer ;  nor  the 
infidel,  who  professed  to  disbelieve  the  existence  of  God  or  a  revelation ;  nor  the 
heretic,  who  corrupted  the  truth  and  turned  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness  ; 
not  alone  the  scoffer,  the  profligate,  the  profane,  who  will  be  excluded  from  heaven ; 
but  the  impenitent,  the  unbelieving,  the  unconverted,  the  imgodly — all  who  have 
refused  to  lay  hold  of  the  salvation  which  is  offered  in  the  gospel.    III.  The  dead, 

UNIVERSALLY,   ARE   SAID  TO  BE    JUDGED    ACCORDING   TO    THEIR  WORKS.      This    aCCOrds 

with  the  representation  given  in  other  parts  of  the  Bible.  The  reward  is  of  grace ; 
the  judgment  is  according  to  things  done  in  the  body,    IV.  The  issue  op  the 

JUDGMENT,   AS  DESCRIBED  IN   THE   CLOSING  VERSE   OP   THE   CHAPTER.      No    SOOUer  haS 

the  evangelist  spoken  of  the  judgment  itself,  than  he  tells  us  of  the  extinction, 
thenceforward,  of  death  and  of  hell.  There  will  be  no  more  slumber  in  the  grave. 
Up  to  this  period  the  wicked  will  not  have  entered  upon  the  full  consummation  of 
misery.  The  soul  is  not  the  man.  The  soul,  in  union  with  the  body,  constitutes 
the  nature,  which  Christ  redeemed,  and  which  must,  hereafter,  partake  of  punish- 
ment or  reward.  Hence  the  complete  wretchedness  will  not  overtake  the  wicked 
till  the  final  abolition  of  death  and  the  grave.  "  Whosoever  was  not  found  written 
in  the  book  of  life,  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  This  will  be  the  consummation 
of  the  ruin  of  the  ungodly.  From  this  doom  there  will  be  no  appeal ;  from  this 
sentence  no  reprieve.  We  can  be  earnest  for  time ;  who,  comparatively,  is  earnest 
for  eternity  ?  The  book  is  still  open.  Christ  is  willing  to  write  your  name  there. 
{Bp.  R.  Bickersteth.)  The  great  white  throne  : — I.  What  John  saw.  When  the 
eagle-eyed  seer  of  Patmos,  being  in  the  Spirit,  looked  aloft  into  the  heavens,  he 
saw  a  throne,  from  which  I  gather  there  is  a  throne  of  moral  government  over  the 
sons  of  men,  and  that  He  who  sits  upon  it  presides  over  all  the  inhabitants  of  thiw 
world.  There  is  a  lawgiver  who  looks  down  and  spies  every  action  of  man,  and  wh* 
does  not  suffer  one  single  word  or  deed  to  be  omitted  from  His  note-book.  Now  wo 
know  that  this  moral  governor  is  God  Himself,  who  has  an  undisputed  right  to 
reign  and  rule.  Some  thrones  have  no  right  to  be,  and  to  revolt  from  them  is 
patriotism ;  but  the  best  lover  of  his  race  delights  the  most  in  the  monarchy  of 
heaven.  In  addition  to  this,  His  throne  is  one  from  the  power  of  which  none  can 
escape.  The  sapphire  throne  of  Gk)d,  at  this  moment,  is  revealed  in  heaven,  where 
adoring  angels  cast  their  crowns  before  it ;  and  its  power  is  felt  on  earth,  where  the 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

■works  of  creation  praise  the  Lord.  Even  those  who  acknowledge  not  the  Divine 
government  are  compelled  to  feel  it,  for  He  doeth  as  He  wills,  not  only  among  the 
angels  in  heaven,  but  among  the  inhabitants  of  this  lower  world.  See,  then,  at  the 
very  outset  how  this  throne  should  awe  our  minds  with  terror.  Founded  in  right, 
sustained  by  might,  and  universal  in  its  dominion,  look  ye  and  see  the  throne 
which  John  of  old  beheld.  This,  however,  is  but  the  beginning  of  the  vision.  The 
text  tells  us  that  it  was  a  "  white  throne."  Does  not  this  indicate  its  immaculate 
purity  ?  There  is  no  other  white  throne,  I  fear,  to  be  found.  Why,  then,  is  it 
white  for  purity  ?  Is  it  not  because  the  King  who  sits  on  it  is  pure  ?  Hark  to  the 
thrice  sacred  hymn  of  the  cherubic  band  and  the  seraphic  choir,  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy,  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth."  Creatures  who  are  perfectly  spotless  themselves 
unceasingly  adore  the  yet  superior  holiness  of  the  great  King,  Oh  fairest  of  all 
thrones  !  who  would  not  be  a  willing  subject  of  Thy  peerless  government?  More- 
over, the  throne  is  pure,  because  the  law  the  Judge  dispenses  is  perfect.  There  is 
no  fault  in  the  statute-book  of  God.  When  the  Lord  shall  come  to  judge  the 
earth,  there  will  be  found  no  decree  that  bears  too  hardly  upon  any  one  of  His 
creatures.  "The  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right";  they  are  true  and  righteous 
altogether.  I  have  thought,  too,  that  perhaps  this  throne  is  said  to  be  a  white 
throne  to  indicate  that  it  will  be  eminently  conspicuous.  You  will  have  noticed 
that  a  white  object  can  be  seen  from  a  very  great  distance.  We  must  see  it ;  it 
shall  be  so  striking  a  sight  that  none  of  us  will  be  able  to  prevent  its  coming  before 
us  ;  *'  every  eye  shall  see  Him."  Possibly  it  is  called  a  white  throne  because  of  its 
being  such  a  convincing  contrast  to  all  the  colours  of  this  sinful  human  life. 
There  stand  the  crowd,  and  there  is  the  great  white  throne.  What  can  make  them 
see  their  blackness  more  thoroughly  than  to  stand  there  in  contrast  with  the 
perfections  of  the  law  and  the  Judge  before  whom  they  are  standing  ?  Perhaps 
that  throne,  all  glistening,  will  reflect  each  man's  character.  The  next  word  that 
is  used  by  way  of  adjective  is  "great."  It  was  a  "  great  white  throne."  You 
scarcely  need  me  to  tell  you  that  it  is  called  a  great  white  throne  because  of  the 
greatness  of  Him  who  sits  upon  it.  Speak  of  the  greatness  of  Solomon  ?  He  was 
but  a  petty  prince.  Speak  of  the  thrones  of  Eome  and  Greece  before  which  multi- 
tudes of  beings  assembled  ?  They  are  nothing,  mere  representatives  of  associations 
of  the  grasshoppers  of  the  world,  who  are  as  nothing  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
Jehovah.  A  throne  filled  by  a  mortal  is  but  a  shadow  of  dominion.  This  will  be 
a  great  throne  because  on  it  will  sit  the  great  God  of  earth  and  heaven  and  hell, 
the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  who  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness, 
and  His  people  with  equity.  You  will  see  that  this  will  be  a  "  great  white  throne  " 
when  we  remember  the  culprits  who  will  be  brought  before  it ;  not  a  handful  of 
criminals,  but  millions  upon  millions ;  and  these  not  aU  of  the  lesser  sort,  not  serfs 
and  slaves  alone  whose  miserable  bodies  rested  from  their  oppressors  in  the  silent 
grave  ;  but  the  great  ones  of  the  earth  shall  be  there  ;  not  one  missing.  It  will  be 
a  great  white  throne,  because  of  the  matters  that  will  be  tried  there.  It  wUl  be  no 
mere  quarrel  about  a  suit  in  Chancery,  or  an  estate  in  jeopardy.  Our  souls  will 
have  to  be  tried  there ;  our  future,  not  for  an  age,  not  for  one  single  century,  but 
for  ever  and  for  ever.  Turn  not  away  your  eyes  from  the  magnificent  spectacle  till 
you  have  seen  the  glorious  Person  mentioned  in  the  words,  "  And  Him  that  sat  on 
it."  The  most  fitting  One  in  all  the  world  will  sit  upon  that  throne.  It  will  be 
God,  but  hearken,  it  will  also  be  man.  The  Christ  whom  you  despised  will  judge 
you,  the  Saviour  whose  mercy  you  trampled  on — it  is  He  who  shall  judge  righteous 
judgment  to  you,  and  what  will  He  say  but  this — "  As  for  these  Mine  enemies,  who 
would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them,  cut  them  in  pieces  before  My  eyes !  "  H. 
The  infebences  which  flow  from  such  a  sight  as  this.  1.  Let  me  search 
myself.  2.  Having  spoken  a  word  to  the  Christian,  I  should  like  to  say  to  every 
one  of  you,  in  remembrance  of  this  great  white  throne  shun  hypocrisy.  3.  But 
there  are  some  of  you  who  say,  "  I  do  not  make  any  profession  of  religion."  Still 
my  text  has  a  word  to  you.  Still  I  want  you  to  judge  your  actions  by  that  last 
great  day.  Oh  sir,  how  about  that  night  of  sin?  "No,"  say  you,  "never  mind  it; 
bring  it  not  to  my  remembrance."  It  shall  be  brought  to  thy  remembrance,  and 
that  deed  of  sin  shall  be  published  far  wider  than  upon  the  house-tops.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  great  white  throne,  the  opened  books,  and  the  assembled  dead  : — 
I.  The  supreme  tribunal  :  "  A  great  white  throne."  It  is  a  new  wonder.  St. 
John  saw  other  thrones  in  more  than  one  apocalyptic  disclosure,  but  none  like 
this.  It  is  unique  and  transcendent.  It  is  "great."  It  represents  Divine 
majesty.    It  is  "white."    Its  intolerable  splendour  is  without  a  stain.     It  is  not  p; 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  587 

throne  of  grace.  To  it  no  penitents  are  welcomed.  None  could  bow  before  it. 
No  clemency  is  published  and  no  forgiveness  dispensed.  It  is  the  supreme  and 
final  tribunal.  From  the  decisions  of  this  bar  there  is  no  appeal.  The  sentences 
of  the  King  are  irreversible.  II.  The  intolebable  pubity  of  the  Judge  :  "  Him 
that  sat  on  it,  from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away."  Descriptions 
may  be  indefinite  from  the  lack  of  graphic  abiUty  in  the  narrator,  or  from  the 
impossibility  of  seizing  and  reporting  the  transcendent  and  stupendous  objects 
which  he  has  to  record.  Not  a  single  minute  particular  is  given  in  St  John's 
outline  of  the  dread  vision.  AH  that  we  are  told  of  the  throne  is,  that  it  is  vast, 
and  dazzling  in  its  whiteness.  "  Him  that  sat  upon "  the  throne ;  but  not  a 
syllable  is  there  about  that  sight.  Of  that  face — its  majesty,  brightness,  terror — 
St.  John  could  utter  nothing ;  but  he  has  recorded  what  followed  its  unveiling. 
Earth  and  heaven,  as  conscious  and  guilty  things,  fled  away — just  as  the  stars 
retreat  and  disappear  when  the  sun  darts  forth  at  break  of  day,  or  rather  as 
tow  and  gossamer  fly  and  vanish  when  touched  by  the  flame.  The  face  from 
which  all  nature  shrank  into  instantaneous  invisibility,  and  could  discover  no 
space  to  hide  in,  was  incapable  of  description.  HI.  The  univebsality  of  the 
DBEAD  ASSIZE  :  "  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God."  Earth  and 
heaven  were  permitted  to  vanish  from  the  face,  the  splendour  and  purity  of  which 
they  could  not  endure.  Not  so  men.  The  guiltiest,  though  the  heart  shrink, 
must  encounter  the  sight  and  hear  the  sentence.  St.  John  "  saw  the  earth  and 
heaven  fly";  but  "the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand,"  stand  "  before  the  throne," 
and  await  their  doom.  IV.  The  impabtiality  of  the  solemn  awabds.  The  pro- 
minent truth  in  the  vision  is.  He  will  "  judge  the  people  righteously."  "According 
to  their  works,"  as  good  or  evil,  holy  or  unholy,  the  sentence  wiU  be  given.  Faith 
in  the  blood  of  atonement,  without  a  life  of  reverence,  virtue,  love  of  God,  self- 
sacrifice,  and  Christ-like  nobleness,  is  the  pretence  of  hypocrites  and  traitors. 
"According  to  their  works,"  St.  John  saw  "every  man  judged,"  V.  Gbeat  and 
APPROACHING  CHANGES  IN  THE  SEEN  AND  UNSEEN  woBLDS :  "And  death  and  Hades 
were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  We  cannot  understand  this  statement  without 
recalling  the  peculiarities  of  our  present  life.  To  the  righteous  now  there  exist 
the  earth  and  the  unseen  heaven.  After  the  judgment  the  distinction  between  the 
earth  where  we  are  and  heaven  where  God  is,  will  be  aboUshed.  The  earth  and 
the  visible  skies  are  to  depart ;  the  unseen  heaven  will  alone  remain.  Kesembling 
changes  await  the  wicked.  The  bodies  of  the  unrighteous  are  m  the  graves 
of  this  planet.  Their  souls  are  in  Hades  awaiting  judgment.  The  scene 
of  retribution  is  a  future  and  unseen  world.  After  judgment,  the  earth  and 
the  grave  will  be  no  more.  Hades — the  imseen  world  of  spirits — will  be 
similarly  abrogated.  Death  and  Hades,  and  all  which  they  represent,  wiU 
merge  in  retribution,  of  which  the  lake  of  fire  is  the  symbol.  {H.  Batchelor.) 
The  great  white  throne  : — "  I  saw  a  throne,"  There  is  a  throne  now,  but  men  do 
not  see  it.  There  is  a  real  government  now,  but  it  wiU  be  a  visible  one  then.  You 
know  the  sceptic  has  doubts,  because  he  cannot  see.  He  says,  "  Where  is  God,  and 
where  is  the  throne  ?  I  have  never  seen  it,"  Did  you  ever  see  the  throne  of 
England  ?  I  never  did — but  you  know  there  is  one ;  you  know  there  is  a  govern- 
ment. I  never  saw  the  Queen,  and  I  dare  say  many  of  you  have  not  seen  her,  but 
you  know  there  is  a  Queen,  I  never  saw  the  great  King,  but  He  is  here.  He 
reigns  ;  and  by  and  by  His  throne  will  become  visible,  and  faith  and  doubt  will  be 
lost  in  sight,  and  the  believer  wiU  say,  "  It  is  He  "  ;  and  the  infidel  wiU  say,  "It  is 
He  "  ;  and  there  will  be  no  more  doubting  and  no  more  believing — it  will  be  sight. 
"  I  saw  a  throne,"  It  is  called  a  "  great "  throne.  "  I  saw  a  great  white  throne." 
Now,  of  all  the  seats  in  the  world,  I  believe  thrones  are  the  filthiest,  I  believe  the 
throne  of  England  to  be  one  of  the  purest  in  the  world ;  but  that  throne  has  often- 
times been  stained  with  the  blood  that  tyrants  have  shed.  But  that  is  the  "  great 
white  throne,"  Many  a  time  darkness  has  dimmed  it  round,  for  "  clouds  and 
darkness  are  round  about  him  "  ;  it  has  been  veiled  in  mystery ;  but  behind  the 
cloud  it  was  a  white  throne — a  throne  that  never  was  tarnished  by  injustice,  and 
that  never  was  defiled  by  wrong-doing.  The  infidel  and  the  doubter  have  often 
had  hard  thoughts  of  God  ;  but  when  the  throne  is  set  it  will  be  seen  to  be  without 
a  stain,  "  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  Him  that  sat  on  it."  It  is  the  Man  of 
Calvary;  it  is  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem — but,  oh,  how  changed  1  See  His  eyes 
piercing  and  flashing — pictures  of  His  penetrating  wisdom.  See  His  feet  that  have 
the  glow  of  the  furnace,  that  outshine  the  sun  in  its  glory.  And  then  hear  His 
Yoice.    It  is  louder  than  the  choruses  of  nature.    It  is  "as  the  voice  of  many 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

waters."  And  as  He  says,  "  Kise,  ye  dead,"  they  come  forth  at  His  bidding.  Oh, 
when  that  day  comes,  may  you  find  that  the  blessed  One  who  sits  upon  the  throne 
is  your  friend.  A  minister  was  one  day  travelling  with  a  young  spark,  a  sceptical 
fellow ;  and  as  the  manner  of  such  men  is,  and  probably  liking  a  little  to  annoy 
the  person  with  whom  he  was  travelling,  he  said,  among  other  things,  "  Talk  about 
the  Bible  being  an  inspired  book !  why,  I  tell  you,  those  books  of  the  old  pagans 
were  far  better ;  it  is  not  fit  to  be  named  in  the  same  day  of  the  week  with  Homer." 
"Well,"  said  the  minister,  calmly,  "  since  you  seem  to  be  so  great  an  admirer  of 
Homer,  would  you  give  me  a  specimen—  some  favourite  passage  from  your  beloved 
author?"  "In  a  minute,"  said  the  young  man,  "I  will";  and  very  readily  he 
pointed  to  what  he  thought  a  fair  specimen  of  the  sublimity  and  power  of  Homer, 
where  he  speaks  in  these  words — 

"  Jove  frowned  and  darkened  half  the  sky." 

•*  Now,  there,  sir,"  said  he,  "  just  think  of  the  sublimity  of  that  figure—the  very 
frown  of  the  god  darkened  half  the  face  of  nature."  "  I  grant,"  said  he,  "  you 
have  selected  with  very  good  taste ;  but  before  you  venture  to  pit  your  favourite 
author  against  the  inspired  Word  of  God,  read  it  a  little  more.  What  do  you  say 
to  this  :  *  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  Him  that  sat  upon  it,  from  whose  face 
the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away '  ?  How  much  less  sublime  what  you  have 
repeated  from  Homer  is  than  that  1  "  The  young  man  was  silent.  I  hope  he 
learned  never  again  to  pit  any  book  against  the  Book  of  God.  "  And  the  sea  gave 
up  the  dead  which  were  in  it."  Now,  those  of  you  that  are  at  all  acquainted  with 
the  opinions  of  the  people  that  lived  when  the  Apostle  John  wrote,  will  know  that 
it  was  thought  among  the  most  impossible  of  things  that  anybody  should  ever  be 
recovered  that  was  lost  in  the  waters.  Hence,  in  the  Odyssey  you  will  find  that 
when  Ulysses  was  in  peril  of  drowning  he  moaned  that  he  had  not  fallen  in  the 
fight  before  the  walls  of  Troy,  for  he  speaks  of  himself  as  sinking  in  the  waters, 
and  so  being  for  ever  dead.  And  it  was  a  great  opinion  that  all  who  had  not 
sepulchral  rites  could  never  have  peace  or  happiness  after;  the  body  they  never 
dreamed  could  rise,  but  even  the  spirit  they  thought  was  destroyed.  Blessed  be 
God,  we  have  a  better  view  than  that.  How  many  of  the  bravest  of  Britain's  sons 
and  the  fairest  of  her  daughters  have  gone  forth  and  have  gone  down  with  the 
storm  for  their  requiem,  the  wreck  for  their  coffin,  and  the  waters  for  their  winding- 
sheet.  There  they  are.  Though  you  do  not  know  where  they  are  lying,  Jesus 
knows ;  and  when  the  last  trump  is  heard  they  will  come  forth.  And  not  only  so, 
but  "  death  and  hell  shall  give  up  the  dead  that  are  in  them."  This  is  a  noble 
personification.  Death  and  hell  are  the  twin  giants  that  rule  the  grave  and  the 
spirit-world.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  that  both  will  be  conquered  !  When  the 
trumpet  is  blown,  the  dust  in  the  charnel  will  begin  to  stir  and  creep  and  quiver, 
and  bone  will  come  to  his  bone,  and  the  frame  will  be  built  up  again.  And  when 
the  trumpet  is  blown,  it  will  be  heard  in  the  highest  heaven,  and  the  blessed  spirits 
will  come  down,  and  it  will  be  heard  in  the  deepest  pit,  and  the  lost  souls  will  come 
up,  and  there,  by  some  wondrous  appointment,  body  and  soul  will  be  remarried 
never  to  be  divorced  for  ever.  "  And  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before 
God."  I  saw  them — small  and  great — the  man  of  wealth  and  the  man  of  rank, 
the  prince  and  the  man  of  poverty.  What  a  mighty  host  will  that  be  !  You  and  I 
will  be  among  the  number.  Then  there  is  another  thing.  •'  The  books  were 
opened."  Now  what  are  these  books  ?  1.  First  of  all,  there  will  be  the  books  of 
God's  requirements.  Where  are  these  books?  There  are  many.  First,  God's 
requirements  as  they  are  written  in  nature.  The  poor  pagan  has  had  that  book, 
that  book  whose  syllables  are  constellations  and  whose  letters  are  stars.  The 
firmament  has  declared  the  being  and  power  of  God,  and  the  dew  of  heaven  and 
the  flowers  of  nature  have  shown  His  goodness.  There  is  enough  in  nature  to 
make  a  man  feel  after  God,  if  haply  he  may  find  Him  ;  and  the  heathen  have  had 
that.  2.  Then  there  will  also  be  that  book  of  moral  conscience  which  God  puts 
into  a  man ;  and  He  has  written  something  on  the  page  of  every  heart.  You  may, 
if  you  like,  try  to  be  irresponsible,  but  there  is  something  within  that  won't  let  you 
feel  like  that.  When  Pericles  once  kept  one  of  his  friends  waiting,  when  at  last 
he  got  in  he  said,  "  Pericles,  why  was  I  kept  waiting  so  long  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  was 
preparing  the  accounts  for  the  citizens."  "  Why  take  so  much  trouble?  "  said  his 
friend  ;  "  why  not  declare  yourself  irresponsible  ?  "  Well,  now,  that  is  just  what 
many  silly  infidels  of  this  day  say.    They  cannot  get  their  accounts  quite  clear  for 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  589 

the  throne,  but  I  tell  you  what  they  do — they  declare  that  they  are  not  responsible, 
that  they  are  conquered  by  circumstances,  and  cannot  help  whatever  they  may  be. 
Will  that  do  ?  God  will  open  the  book  of  conscience,  and  He  will  judge  you,  and 
your  own  conscience  will  attest  that  God  is  true.  3.  Well,  then,  there  is  the  book 
of  inspiration.  Every  sceptic  in  this  land  will  be  judged  by  this  book.  Your  not 
believing  it  is  no  reason  ;  if  you  do  not  believe  it,  you  ought.  4.  Well,  the  book  of 
God's  providence  will  be  opened,  and  God  will  be  justified  in  that  day.  You  know 
sometimes  His  providence  seems  dark,  and  we  are  sometimes  inclined  to  grumble, 
and  say  this  is  wrong  and  that  is  wrong  ;  but)  when  that  day  comes,  it  will  all  be 
open,  and  we  shall  say,  **  It  is  all  right,"  and  even  the  sinner  will  be  obliged  to 
bow  his  head  and  say,  "  It  is  all  just."  5.  And  there  is  another  book — the  book 
of  God's  remembrance.  It  is  a  beautiful  figure  that  represents  the  Divine  know- 
ledge as  the  book  of  God's  remembrance.  That  book  will  be  opened,  and  your  very 
secret  sins  will  all  be  there.  6.  Ay,  and  then  the  book  of  memory  will  be  opened. 
There  are  some  strange  facts  that  now  and  then  transpire  with  respect  to  human 
memory.  I  do  not  believe  when  a  thing  has  once  been  in  your  mind  you  ever 
really  lose  it  again.  I  cannot  understand  it  at  all,  but  I  could  tell  you  fact  after 
fact  about  it.  I  remember  coming  home  from  an  appointment  one  very  dark  night, 
and  there  came  on  a  storm,  and  by  and  by  the  lightning  flashed  out,  and  for  an 
infinitesimal  portion  of  time  I  could  see  everything.  There  I  saw  the  church 
steeple,  which  might  be  a  mile  off,  as  plainly  as  could  be,  and  the  whole  of  the 
landscape,  in  that  infinitesimal  portion  of  time.  Have  you  never  had  it  like  that 
in  your  memory  ?  I  believe  there  is  a  key  somewhere  that  would  unlock  every- 
thing you  ever  did,  and  bring  it  up  before  your  mind.  Now,  when  the  books  are 
opened,  the  book  of  memory  will  be  opened,  and  there  will  come  flashing  up  pictures 
of  all  sorts  of  things  you  did ;  and  I  tell  you,  if  you  do  not  get  sin  washed  away  by 
the  blood  of  Christ,  there  is  nothing  for  you  but  horrors — horrors  for  ever.  (S, 
Coley.)  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God. — The  last  judgment : 
— When  Massillon  pronounced  one  of  those  discourses  which  have  placed  him  in 
the  first  class  of  orators,  he  found  himself  surrounded  by  the  trappings  and  pageants 
of  a  royal  funeral.  The  temple  was  not  only  hung  with  sable,  but  shadowed  with 
darkness,  save  the  few  twinkling  lights  of  the  altar.  The  beauty  and  the  chivalry 
of  the  land  were  spread  out  before  him.  There  sat  Majesty,  clothed  in  sackcloth 
and  sunk  in  grief.  All  felt  in  common,  and  as  one.  A  sense  of  the  indescribable 
nothingness  of  man  "  at  his  best  estate,"  of  the  meanness  of  the  highest  human 
grandeur,  now  made  plain  in  the  spectacle  of  that  hearsed  mortal,  overcame  him. 
His  eye  once  more  closed ;  his  action  was  suspended ;  and,  in  a  scarcely  audible 
whisper,  he  broke  the  long-drawn  pause — "  There  is  nothing  great,  but  God."  I 
take  the  sublimely  affecting  sentence  and  mould  it  to  the  present  theme — There  is 
nothing  solemn  but  judgment.  The  thunderstorm  is  solemn  :  when  the  lightnings, 
*'  as  arrows,  shoot  abroad."  But  what  is  it  to  that  far-resounding  crash,  louder 
than  the  roar  and  bellow  of  ten  thousand  thunders,  which  shall  pierce  the  deepest 
charnels,  and  which  all  the  dead  shall  hear  ?  The  ocean-tempest  is  solemn  :  when 
those  huge  billows  lift  up  their  crests ;  when  mighty  armaments  are  wrecked  by 
their  fury.  But  what  is  it  to  that  commotion  of  the  deep,  when  "  its  proud  waves  " 
shall  no  more  "  be  stayed,"  its  ancient  barriers  no  more  be  observed,  the  largest 
channels  be  emptied,  and  the  deepest  abyss  be  dried  ?  The  earthquake  is  solemn  : 
when,  without  a  warning,  cities  totter,  and  kingdoms  rend,  and  islands  flee  away. 
But  what  is  it  to  that  tremour  which  shall  convulse  our  globe,  dissolving  every 
law  of  attraction,  severing  every  principle  of  aggregation,  heaving  all  into  chaos 
and  heaping  all  into  ruin  ?  Great  God  I  must  our  eyes  see — our  ears  hear — these 
desolations  and  distractions  ?  Must  we  look  forth  upon  these  devouring  flames  ? 
Must  we  stand  in  judgment  with  Thee  ?  Penetrate  us  now  with  Thy  fear ;  awaken 
the  attention,  which  Thy  trump  shall  not  fail  to  command ;  surround  our  imagina- 
tion with  the  scenery  of  that  great  and  terrible  day !     I.  Let  us  consider  thk 

SCENERY    WHICH     SHALL    ILLUSTRATE     THIS    AUGUST    ASSIZE.        The    "  thrOUC  "    is     the 

emblem  of  royal  dignity.  It  is  the  symbol  of  Divine  supremacy.  "  The  Lord  hath 
prepared  His  throne  in  the  heavens,  and  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all."  It  is  "  a 
great  white  throne."  It  is  vast,  shadowy,  undefined.  No  rainbow  of  the  covenant 
girdles  it ;  no  suppliants  or  penitents  sue  before  it ;  no  pardons  are  issued  from  it. 
It  is  a  tribunal  throne.  "He  hath  prepared  His  throne  for  judgment."  It  is 
occupied.  There  is  One,  that  "  sitteth  upon  it."  This  is  often  characteristic  and 
distinctive  of  the  Father.  There  is  no  manner  of  similitude.  Nothing  at  first 
appears  to  guide  us  in  the  present  discrimination.     There  is  no  form.     It  seems 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

essential,  and  not  distinguished,  deity.  But  need  we  be  at  loss?  "We  must  all 
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  He  now  "  thinketh  it  no  robbery  to 
be  equal  with  God,"  and  as  God  He  is  "  Judge  Himself."  "  From  the  face  "  of 
Him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  "  the  earth  and  the  heaven  flee  away."  Who 
can  think  of  that  countenance  and  not  associate  with  it  pensive  downcast,  deepest 
affliction,  sweetest  meekness  ?  Into  what  expressions  must  that  countenance  have 
now  kindled!  With  what  terrors  must  it  now  be  clothed!  Things  inanimate, 
insensible,  smitten  with  a  strange  panic  and  with  a  sudden  dismay,  start  back ; 
and  those  refulgent  heavens  and  this  fair  earth  shrink  into  ancient  disorder  and 
anarchy:  they  rush  into  primeval  chaos  and  night.  But  not  so  can  the  sinner 
*'  flee  away  "  ;  rocks — mountains — cannot  cover  him  ;  there  is  no  hiding-place  for 
"the  workers  of  iniquity."  It  makes  little  difference  whether  it  be  the  greater 
catastrophe  or  the  inferior ;  the  larger  could  not  strike  a  deeper  terror — the  smaller 
could  not  induce  a  less.  And  why  do  heaven  and  earth  pass  away  ?  and  why  is  no 
more  place  found  for  them  ?  They  have  realised  their  end.  They  were  but  as  the 
scaffolding  ;  the  erection  is  complete.  They  are  of  no  further  use.  They  may  be 
set  aside.  "  The  mystery  of  God"  is  "  finished."  There  is  "  the  consummation." 
Time,  therefore,  need  "  be  no  longer."  II.  We  now,  then,  turn  to  the  multitude 
THAT  SHALL  BE  SUMMONED  TO  THIS  JUDGMENT.  "Death  delivered  up  the  dead 
which  were  in  it."  This  is  the  power  of  the  grave,  it  is  the  personification  of 
death.  He  who  burst  the  barriers  of  the  tomb  and  made  death  bow  before  Him — 
He  shall  send  forth  His  mandate,  publish  His  behest ;  and  then  the  vaults  and  the 
catacombs  and  the  mummy  pits  and  the  bone-houses  shall  disgorge  their  relics. 
It  was  much  for  the  sea  to  obey  Him  who  sitteth  on  the  throne  ;  it  was  more  for 
inexorable  death— the  grave — the  sepulchre — to  yield  its  victims ;  but  "  hell  " — the 
place  of  departed  spirits,  where  the  disembodied  soul  of  man  is  to  be  found, 
whether  in  happiness  or  in  woe — hades  has  listened  to  a  voice  until  then  unknown 
to  it.  The  gates  of  "  the  shadow  of  death  "  unbar,  and  its  portals  fly  open.  And 
now  there  come — there  come — there  come — clouds  of  spirits  rolling  upon  clouds,  in 
swift  succession,  with  impetuous  rush  ;  sumless,  but  unmixed,  but  individualised ; 
the  consciousness  of  each  distinct,  the  character  of  each  defined,  the  memory  of 
each  unobliterated,  and  the  sentence  of  each  foredoomed.  And  hades  sends  back 
spirits  to  those  bodies,  which  the  sea  and  the  grave  may  no  more  retain.  "  The 
small  and  the  great  stand  before  God."  All  who  have  been  among  the  mighty,  and 
would  not  "  let  go  their  prisoners,"  and  who  "  destroyed  the  earth,"  and  all  of 
minor  state.  None  are  so  great  that  they  can  intimidate  :  none  so  little  that  they 
can  escape.  And  thinking  of  that  mighty  throng,  there  is  a  distinctive  circum- 
stance which  must  not  be  overlooked :  "  every  man  was  judged."  God  can  say, 
"  All  souls  are  Mine  "  ;  and  all  souls,  on  that  day,  shall  pass  in  review  before  Him. 
Each  of  your  "  idle  words,"  each  of  your  "  vain  thoughts,"  each  of  your  impure 
desires,  every  bias  of  your  spirit,  every  movement  of  your  heart  must  reappear. 
"  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  III.  Let  us  consider  the  process  which 
MUST  determine  THIS  JUDGMENT.  When  Hilkiah  found  the  law,  and  read  it  to  the 
people,  they  rent  their  clothes,  terror-struck,  that  they  had  committed  so  many 
offences  against  a  long -forgotten  law.  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do 
right?"  "  He  is  the  God  of  judgment."  "  He  is  the  God  of  truth."  "  But  we 
are  sure  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth."  But  then  that  book, 
which  is  closed  to  so  many,  shall  "  be  opened  " — shall  be  opened  in  all  its  injunc- 
tions, all  its  penalties,  all  its  sanctions.  You  will  not  then  think  that  its  bands  are 
small ;  you  will  not  then  think  that  its  terrors  are  weak.  If  the  law,  by  one  drop 
of  its  present  fury,  one  flash  of  its  present  power,  causes  the  stoutest  heart  and  the 
most  rebel  conscience  to  quail,  how  will  the  stoutest  heart  be  as  tow  in  the  fire, 
and  the  most  rebel  conscience  be  as  wax  before  the  flame,  when  this  book  shall  be 
opened ! — shall  be  opened  in  all  its  contents,  shall  be  opened  in  all  its  principles, 
shall  be  opened  in  all  its  awards !  But  these  "  books  "  may  refer  to  the  discoveries 
of  the  gospel.  And  these  might  indeed  cheer,  and  these  ought  indeed  to  fortify,  if 
you  have  "  won  Christ  and  are  found  in  Him."  Yet  if  you  are  unbelievers  still,  if 
you  are  "  enemies  in  your  minds  by  wicked  works,"  this  book,  the  word  of  recon- 
ciliation, is  more  portentous  in  its  aspect  against  you,  even  than  the  volume  of  the 
law.  You  will  be  judged  "  according  to  this  gospel."  All  the  beseechings  of 
mercy,  all  the  remonstrances  of  authority,  all  the  pleadings  of  tenderness  1  This 
book  shall  be  opened  only  the  more  terribly  to  convict  and  to  condemn.  Mercy 
will  in  that  day  be  more  terrible  than  justice.  (JR.  TF.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  last 
judgment : — I.  The  majesty  or  the  mnjtJNAL.     II.  The   person  of  this  Jni>aE. 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  591 

Here  is  justice,  we  may  say,  here  is  retribution,  in  the  very  commencement  of  this 
judgment,  the  very  constitution  of  this  court — the  once  abased  but  now  exalted — 
openly  exalted — Jesus,  is  receiving  from  His  Father  a  compensation  for  all  His 
former  degradation  and  shame.  HI.  The  dissolution  of  the  whole  material 
WORLD.  What  is  a  man  advantaged  if  he  gain  the  whole  of  such  a  world  as  this  ? 
The  world  would  be  a  poor  thing  to  make  our  portion,  even  if  it  were  destined  to 
last  for  ever,  but  we  shall  be  alive  ages  and  ages  after  it  has  perished  ;  and  if  the 
world  is  our  all,  where  then  will  our  happiness  be  ?  where  will  our  comfort  and 
support  be  ?  IV.  The  strange,  vast  assembly  gathered  together  in  it.  V. 
The  process  of  this  judgment.  1.  Its  exactness.  "  The  books  were  opened." 
"  The  books  were  opened  " — the  book  of  God's  law  ;  the  law  of  His  universe,  which 
every  creature  is  bound  by  his  very  existence  in  His  universe  to  obey.  The  book 
of  His  gospel — a  book  superadded  in  man's  case  to  the  book  of  the  law,  and  as 
binding  on  man  when  made  known  to  him  as  the  law  itself.  And  then  there  is  a 
book  to  be  opened  within  us,  the  book  of  memory  and  conscience.  There  are  few 
of  us  who  have  not  at  intervals  been  surprised  at  the  power  of  these  two  faculties 
within  us ;  it  is  an  indication  of  their  future  power  when  they  are  called  forth  in 
their  full  energy  before  our  Judge.  2.  The  justice  or  equity  of  this  judgment: 
'•The  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  written  in  the  books." 
False  accusers  can  do  nothing  against  us  now.  Friends  and  flatterers  can  do 
nothing  for  us.  They  will  not  be  listened  to.  The  books — the  true  and  faithful 
books  only — will  be  regarded,  and  by  their  testimony  wiU  our  sentence  be  deter- 
mined. 3.  The  wonderful  grace  that  will  be  manifested  by  Him  in  this  judgment. 
There  is  another  book  mentioned.  "  Another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book 
of  life."  "He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved,"  it  says.  "Now  bring  forward  that 
book  of  life.  It  is  My  once  secret  register  of  all  that  are  Mine.  Open  it.  There 
stands  that  man's  name  written  ;  I  with  My  own  hand  wrote  it  there ;  and  though 
My  law  condemns  him,  and  record  upon  record  condemns  him,  yet  he  believed  in 
Me  for  salvation,  and  that  is  enough — I  will  never  condemn  him.  I  will  not  blot 
out  his  name  out  of  that  book  of  life,  but  I  will  confess  his  name,  declare  and 
proclaim  it  here  as  a  name  dear  to  Me,  before  My  Father  and  before  His  angels." 
(C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  great  assize : — There  are  three  great  days  connected 
with  the  history  of  our  race.  1.  The  day  the  world  was  made.  2.  The  day  the 
world  was  redeemed.  3.  The  day  the  world  will  be  judged.  It  is  to  the  last 
of  these  days  our  text  invites  attention.  Come  forth  with  me  and  view  the 
scene.  Every  prophecy  is  fulfilled,  the  last  hour  arrived  ;  the  funeral  day 
of  the  world  has  come.  For  the  first  and  last  time  are  found  in  one  great 
assembly  every  angel,  every  saint,  and  every  devil.  The  books  are  opened,  I. 
The  preliminaries  of  the  judgment.  1.  The  day  will  be  ushered  in  with 
sound  of  trumpet  and  the  voice  of  God.  The  debaucher  will  be  revelhng 
in  obscenity — the  prodigal  rioting  in  prodigality  and  wantonness — the  self- 
righteous  wrapped  up  in  his  own  carnal  security — the  robber  on  his  errand  of 
sin — the  whisperer  slandering  his  neighbour — the  infidel  glorying  in  his  shame — 
the  miser  counting  over  his  gold — the  soldier  in  the  tented  field — the  sailor  on  the 
briny  deep — the  careless  sitting  at  ease — the  hypocrite  practising  deceit.  When 
the  shrill  blast  of  the  archangel's  trump,  waxing  louder  than  ten  thousand 
thunders,  shall  shake  the  earth,  and  the  angel  shall  swear  by  Him  that  liveth  for 
ever  and  ever  that  time  shall  be  no  more.  2.  The  Judge  will  appear.  Every  eye 
shall  see  Him,  for  like  the  sun  He  will  appear  equally  near  to  all  who  shaJl  be 
placed  at  His  dread  tribunal.  All  our  previous  ideas  of  grandeur  will  be  infinitely 
surpassed  by  the  realities  of  this  solemn  scene.  3.  The  dead  shall  be  raised,  and 
all  created  intelligences  shall  stand  arraigned  before  the  judgment-seat.  People  of 
every  age  and  condition,  rank  and  degree.  Populous  assemblies  !  Not  one  missing 
of  past,  present,  or  future  generations.  II.  Proceedings  of  the  judgment.  "  And 
the  books  were  opened."  1.  There  will  be  the  book  of  God's  omniscience.  Every 
thought,  feeling,  desire,  motive,  and  purpose  of  every  heart  are  fully  recorded  ;  and 
every  act  of  every  life.  2.  The  book  of  conscience.  The  one  will  be  found  to  tally 
exactly  with  the  other.  Oh,  trifle  not  with  your  conscience,  for  it  will  wake  up  in 
the  judgment  and  echo  the  truthfulness  of  God's  omniscience.  3.  The  book  of 
life.  The  Divine  wisdom  or  remembrance,  whereby  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  His.  III.  Its  final  and  irreversible  results.  1.  The  whole  will  be  divided, 
and  there  shall  be  no  mistake.  Not  one  sinner  shall  stand  in  this  vast  congregation 
of  the  righteous.  2.  Sentence  will  be  pronounced.  If  we  have  not  on  the  wedding 
garment,  we  must  hear  that  awfully  tremendous  voice  saying  unto  us,  "Depart,  ye 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

cursed."  3.  Execution  of  the  sentence.  {J.D.Carey.)  The  last  judgment : — I. 
The  seat  of  judgment — a  great  white  throne.  1.  Its  dignity.  A  throne  is  the 
seat  of  royalty  (1  Kings  x.  18,  19  ;  Isa.  vi.  1).  2.  Its  purity.  White  is  an  emblem 
of  purity.  As  from  the  majesty  of  this  throne  there  can  be  no  appeal,  so  with 
respect  to  the  equity  of  it  there  can  be  no  just  cause  of  complaint.  II.  The  author 
OF  JUDGMENT.  1.  Who  is  the  Judge?  Jehovah  in  the  person  of  Christ.  The 
Father  judgeth  no  man  (John  v.  22).  2.  His  qualification  for  His  work.  (1) 
Infinite  knowledge.  (2)  Unspotted  justice.  (3)  Unlimited  power.  III.  The 
supjECTS  OF  JUDGMENT.  "  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,"  <feo.  1.  The  appear- 
ance will  be  universal.  2.  The  appearance  will  be  inevitable.  IV.  The  rule  of 
JUDGMENT.  Conclusion :  1.  Flee  to  the  Cross  of  Christ.  2,  Ever  associate 
that  day  with  feelings  of  the  deepest  solemnity.     {J.  O.  Breay,  B.A.)  The 

last  judgment : — I.  The  subjects  of  the  judgment.  1.  The  dead,  small  and 
great.  (1)  Young  and  old.  (2)  Kich  and  poor.  (3)  Illiterate  and  learned.  2. 
These  shall  stand  together  before  God.  (1)  Social  distinctions  are  not  accounted 
at  that  tribunal.  (2)  Ethnic  distinctions  cease.  (3)  Distinctions  of  time  also  are 
at  an  end.  All  generations  mingle  in  one  grand  congregation.  3.  The  value  of 
character  will  then  appear.  (1)  When  conventional,  accidental  distinctions  vanish, 
the  real,  permanent  distinctions  of  character  come  out  in  the  boldest  relief,  (2)  The 
interval  of  the  disembodied  and  millennial  states  will  afford  the  best  opportunities 
for  reflection  upon  that  conduct  which  is  now  crystallised  into  character.  (3)  If 
anything  further  is  needed  to  force  home  this  lesson  upon  the  spirit,  here  it  is  in  the 
excitements  of  the  judgment — the  prodigies — the  Judge — the  witnesses — the 
impending  doom.  II.  The  character  of  the  Judge.  1.  Christ  appears  not  now 
as  Mediator.  (1)  Death  ends  probation.  (2)  The  shadows  of  the  great  judgment 
are  felt  here  in  the  court  of  conscience.  Works,  words,  thoughts,  motives,  should 
be  ever  examined  here  in  anticipation  of  the  more  imposing  court.  (3)  The 
preparation  of  holiness  we  must  have.  2.  He  now  appears  as  King.  (1)  He  comes 
"  in  the  glory  of  His  Father  " — the  glory  of  His  Divinity.  The  dead  *'  stand  before 
God."  (2)  He  comes  in  "  His  own  glory" — the  glory  of  His  exalted  and  beatified 
manhood.  Here  is  the  only  universal  Monarch.  "  On  His  head  are  many  crowns." 
(3)  He  comes  with  His  retinue  of  holy  angels.  3.  His  resources  are  equal  to  the 
occasion.  (1)  See  the  effect  of  His  glance.  The  world  kindles  into  conflagration 
(ver.  11;  2  Pet.  iii.  7-12).  (2)  The  eye  of  flame  can  discriminate  as  it  can  search. 
(3)  What  impiety  can  dare  that  throne  ?  III.  The  standards  of  the  judgment. 
1.  The  book  of  God's  works.  (1)  This  volume  treats  of  His  power.  The  forces  of 
Nature  assert  His  sovereignty.  How  has  that  been  respected  ?  (2)  It  treats  also 
of  His  wisdom.  The  exquisite  dovetailing  of  things,  nice  adjustments,  wonderful 
adaptations,  assert  His  adorableness.  How  has  that  been  respected  ?  (3)  It  treats 
further  of  His  goodness.  What  contrivances  to  give  pleasure  to  His  creatures ! 
Every  voice  of  beneficence  calls  for  gratitude.  How  have  we  responded  ?  2.  The 
book  of  God's  Word.  (1)  In  this  we  have  His  law.  (2)  In  this  also  we  have  His 
gospel.  3.  The  book  of  memory.  (1)  God's  memory  forgets  nothing.  (2)  Man's 
memory  will  be  prodigiously  quickened.  4.  The  book  of  condemnation.  (1)  The 
names  of  the  doomed  are  written  there.  The  character  of  the  writing  is  legible  and 
black.  (2)  How  many  millions  will  find  their  names  there  !  Is  yours  amongst  the 
number  ?  (3)  What  does  it  mean  to  be  written  there  ?  Exclusion  from  heaven. 
6.  "  And  another  book  was  opened  which  is  the  book  of  life."  {J.  A.  Macdonald.) 
The  last  assize  : — Though  the  Book  of  Revelation  contains  much  that  is  mysterious, 
and  even  inexplicable,  passages  such  as  this  are  as  instructive  as  magnificent.  The 
delineation  is  that  of  transactions  in  which  we  must  all  bear  a  part  in  the  last 
general  assize.  It  was  before  the  Redeemer  that  the  mighty  multitude  of  those 
whom  the  grave  had  surrendered  were  arraigned,  the  title  of  absolute  divinity  being 
justly  assigned  to  Him  who  is  evidently  the  Son  of  Man,  seeing  that  the  two  natures 
coalesced  indissolubly  in  His  person.  Our  text  then  proceeds  to  give  some  account 
of  the  principles  upon  which  judgment  will  be  conducted,  showing  that  an  accurate 
register  has  been  kept  of  human  actions,  and  that  men  will  be  judged  according  to 
their  works,  and  therefore  judged  in  righteousness.  We  know  not  whether  the 
principles  of  God's  moral  government  are  insisted  on  with  sufficient  frequency  and 
urgency  from  our  pulpits,  but  we  are  sure  that  they  produce  not  their  due  influence 
on  the  great  mass  of  men.  Here  and  there,  indeed,  you  may  meet  with  an  individual 
whose  thoughts  are  set  on  the  account  which  he  must  one  day  render,  and  whose 
habitual  endeavour  it  is  to  preserve  an  habitual  sense  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  But 
even  individuals  such  as  these  will  confess  to  you  that  their  endeavours  are  but 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION. 


partially  successful ;  that  they  have  great  cause  of  humiliation  before  God,  on 
account  of  their  forgetfulness  of  the  day  of  trial.  So  that  there  can  be  no  class  of 
hearers  to  whom  the  subject  of  discourse  presented  by  our  text  is  not  appropriate. 
We  shall  premise  a  few  remarks  on  the  necessity  of  a  general  judgment,  in  order  to 
vindicate  God's  moral  government,  and  then  proceed  to  examine  the  several  asser- 
tions made  in  our  text  in  regard  to  this  fact.  Now,  in  every  age  of  the  world,  men 
have  been  perplexed  by  what  seemed  opposite  evidences  as  to  the  superintending  care 
of  a  wise  and  beneficent  Being.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  no  doubt  thr.t  we  live 
under  a  retributive  government,  and  that  cognisance  is  taken  of  our  actions  by  an 
invisible  but  ever-present  Being  whose  attributes  render  Him  the  determined  foe 
of  vice  and  the  steadfast  upholder  of  righteousness.  On  the  other  hand,  there  has 
been  an  irresistible  demonstration,  from  the  experience  of  all  ages,  that  no  accurate 
proportion  is  at  present  maintained  between  conduct  and  condition,  but  that  vice 
has  most  frequently  the  upper  hand,  while  righteousness  is  depressed  and  over- 
whelmed. There  has  been  no  reconciling  of  these  apparent  contradictions,  except 
by  supposing  that  human  existence  would  not  terminate  with  death,  but  that  in 
another,  though  yet  unknown  state,  vice  would  receive  its  due  meed  of  vengeance, 
and  righteousness  of  reward.  Thus  you  see  how  reason  concurs  with  revelation  in 
directing  your  thoughts  to  a  state  of  retribution.  We  next  remark  that  the  season 
of  judgment  is  not  to  arrive  until  the  end  of  all  things,  when  the  dead  shall  be 
raised.  Once  admit  that  all  men  are  to  be  put  upon  trial,  and  you  also  admit,  so 
far  as  we  can  see,  that  their  final  portion  is  not  entered  upon  ere  that  trial  is  past ; 
for  what  could  be  more  contrary  to  all  show  of  justice  than  the  sentencing  after 
execution?  But  when  men  would  curiously  inquire  into  the  particulars  of  the 
intermediate  state,  we  are  not  at  all  able  to  answer  their  questions.  We  doubt  not 
that  the  justified  soul  is  immediately  assured  of  its  acceptance  with  God,  and  con- 
signed to  the  peace  and  repose  in  the  blessed  certainty  that  heaven  will  be  its 
portion.  We  doubt  as  little  that  the  soul  of  him  who  dies  in  his  impenitence  is 
immediately  conscious  that  its  doom  is  determined,  and  given  over  to  anguish  and 
remorse  because  allowed  no  hope  that  lost  time  may  be  redeemed  and  hell  yet 
avoided.  It  is  the  whole  man,  the  compound  of  spirit  and  flesh,  which  has  obeyed 
or  transgressed ;  it  must  be  therefore  the  whole  man  which  is  put  upon  trial,  and 
which  receives  the  portion  whether  of  promise  or  threatening.  Thus,  whatever  our 
thoughts  of  the  intermediate  state,  we  know  that  the  allotments  of  eternity  cannot 
be  fully  dealt  out  unless  the  vision  of  our  text  shall  have  been  first  accomplished, 
•'  and  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  their  God."  We  pass  now  to  the 
contemplation  of  the  person  of  the  Judge.  We  wish  to  set  before  you  the  combined 
wisdom  and  mercy  of  the  appointment,  that  He  who  is  to  decide  our  portion  for 
eternity,  is  the  very  Being  who  died  as  our  surety.  We  cannot  dispense  with  the 
omniscience  of  Deity ;  we  see  clearly  enough  that  no  finite  intelligence  can  be 
adequate  to  that  decision  which  will  ensure  the  thorough  justice  of  future  retribu- 
tion. But  then  neither  can  we  dispense  with  the  feelings  of  humanity ;  at  least 
we  can  have  no  confidence  in  approaching  His  tribunal  if  we  are  sure  that  the 
difference  in  nature  incapacitates  Him  from  sympathy  with  those  whose  sentence 
He  is  about  to  pronounce,  and  precludes  the  possibility  of  His  so  making  our  case 
His  own  as  to  allow  of  His  deciding  with  due  allowance  for  our  feebleness  and 
temptations.  It  is  thus  we  are  assured  that  mercy  and  justice  will  alike  have  full 
scope  in  the  transactions  of  the  judgment,  and  that  in  appointing  that  the  Mediator 
who  died  as  our  substitute  will  preside  at  our  trial,  God  hath  equally  provided  that 
every  decision  shall  be  impartial,  and  yet  every  man  be  dealt  with  as  brother  to 
Him  who  must  determine  our  fate.  It  would  have  been  an  encouragement  to 
wickedness  had  the  Judge  been  mere  man,  and  therefore  liable  to  be  deceived.  It 
would  have  filled  humble  piety  with  dread  had  the  Judge  been  only  God,  and  there- 
fore not  "  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  This  leads  us  to  our  conclud- 
ing point,  the  thorough  righteousness  of  the  whole  procedure  of  the  judgment. 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  judgment: — It  is  related  of  Daniel  Webster,  the  reality 
of  whose  moral  endowments  no  one  disputes,  that  when  once  asked  what  was  the 
greatest  thought  that  had  ever  occupied  his  mind,  he  replied,  "  The  fact  of  my 
personal  accountability  to  God."  Eliminate  accountability,  and  man  drops  into 
the  category  of  instinct  and  natural  desire ;  if  he  is  a  savage,  he  becomes  a  beast ; 
if  he  is  civilised,  he  becomes  virtually  a  criminal.  Freedom  and  conscience  imply 
accountability ;  accountability  implies  rendering  account,  and  this  implies  a  judg- 
ment ;  such  is  the  logic  that  covers  human  life,  few  and  simple  in  its  hnks,  but 
strong  as  adamant  and  inexorable  as  fate.    It  underlies  and  binds  together  the 

38 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

twofold  kingdom  of  time  and  eternity — one  chain,  whether  it  binds  things  in  heaven 
or  things  on  the  earth.  It  is  the  weakness  of  formulated  theology  that  it  arbitrarily 
transfers  the  most  august  and  moving  features  of  God's  moral  government  to  a 
future  world,  thus  placing  the  wide  and  mysterious  gulf  of  time  and  death  between 
actions  and  their  motives.  All  broken  law  begins  at  once  to  incur  judgment ;  the 
quick  pang  of  conscience  that  follows  sin  is  the  first  stroke  of  judgment;  while 
undergoing  it  the  soul  is  passing  a  crisis,  and  turns  to  the  right  or  the  left  hand  of 
eternal  righteousness.  Thus  we  are  all  the  while  rendering  account  to  the  laws 
without  and  within;  we  are  all  the  while  undergoing  judgment  and  receiving 
sentence  of  acquittal  or  condemnation.  Conduct  is  always  reaching  crises  and 
entering  upon  its  consequences.  It  may  be  cumulative  in  degree,  and  reach  crises 
more  and  more  marked ;  it  may  at  last  reach  a  special  crisis  which  shall  be  the 
judgment  when  the  soul  shall  turn  to  the  right  or  left  of  eternal  destiny.  A  pro- 
found view  of  judgment  as  a  test  or  crisis  entailing  separation,  shows  us  that  it 
attends  change ;  for  it  is  through  change  that  the  moral  nature  is  aroused  to  special 
action.  It  is  a  law  that  catastrophes  awaken  conscience.  It  is  also  a  peculiarity 
of  the  action  of  the  moral  nature  under  great  outward  changes  that  man  is  dis- 
closed to  himself.  Recall  the  most  joyful  event  of  your  lives,  and  you  will  find  it 
to  have  been  also  a  period  of  great  self-knowledge.  Recall  your  deepest  sorrow  and 
you  will  still  more  vividly  recognise  it  as  an  experience  in  which  there  was  a  deep, 
interior  measurement  of  yourself.  If  change  has  this  reveaUng  and  judging  power, 
the  change  of  worlds  must  have  it  in  a  superlative  degree.  It  is  appointed  unto  men 
once  to  die,  and  after  that  cometh  judgment;  the  testing  and  unveiling  of  character 
and  conduct.  Pre-eminently,  far  beyond  anything  that  has  preceded,  man  is  then 
judged  and  assigned  his  true  place  and  direction.  I  think  the  central  truth  of  the 
judgment  can  nowhere  more  easily  be  got  at  than  in  the  passage  before  us.  No 
other  symbol  than  that  of  "  books  "  could  so  vividly  convey  the  fact  that  the  whole 
life  comes  into  judgment.  Nothing  is  left  out  or  forgotten  ;  there  can  be  no  mistake. 
The  books  are  the  unerring  transcript  of  the  life.  The  simplicity  of  the  symbol  is 
marred  by  the  introduction  of  "  another  book"  than  those  recording  the  works. 
Why  is  there  "  another  book  which  is  the  book  of  Ufe" — and  what  does  it  mean? 
Mankind  do  not  go  up  to  the  throne  of  God  to  be  judged  simply  by  their  works. 
Parallel  with  humanity  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Parallel  with  men's  deeds  are 
the  purposes  of  God.  Over  and  above  what  humanity  does  of  itself  is  a  plan  of 
redemption,  the  working  out  of  which  enters  into  human  destiny.  It  may  be  that 
the  other  book  represents  that  other  power,  and  the  influences  that  flow  out  of  the 
life  of  Christ.  It  is  a  book  of  life,  and  He  is  the  life  of  the  world.  Men  are  judged 
by  the  records  of  their  works,  but  it  may  be  that  the  sentence  pronounced  is  affected 
by  what  is  written  in  the  book  of  life.  I  am  aware  that  this  complicates  the  thought, 
but  we  must  remember  that  the  problem  of  spiritual  destiny  is  not  absolutely  simple. 
But  we  will  leave  this  side  issue  and  turn  to  the  main  thought — the  books  out  of 
which  men  are  judged.  The  books  must  be  found  in  God,  or  nature,  or  man.  The 
mind  of  God  must  indeed  be  a  tablet  whereon  are  written  all  the  works  of  men,  but  let 
us  not  touch  that  ineffable  mystery  without  warrant.  Science,  in  the  person  of  some 
of  its  high  priests,  has  suggested  that  all  the  deeds  of  men  are  conserved  as  distinct 
forces  in  the  ether  that  fills  the  spaces  of  heaven,  and  may  be  brought  together 
again  in  true  form,  in  some  new  cosmos,  as  light  traversing  space  as  motion  is 
turned  to  heat  when  arrested  by  the  earth.  But  we  can  find  no  link  between  such 
a  fact,  if  it  be  a  fact,  and  the  moral  process  of  judgment.  We  must  search  man 
himself  for  the  elements  of  his  great  account.  Take  the  mind :  at  first  it  is  merely 
a  bet  of  faculties,  without  even  self-consciousness,  but  contact  with  the  world  brings 
them  into  action — first  observation,  then  memory ;  soon  the  imagination  spreads 
its  folded  wings ;  then  comes  the  process  of  comparison  and  combination,  and  thus 
the  full  process  of  thinking  is  developed — a  process  to  which  there  is  no  end,  and 
the  capacities  of  which  are  immeasurable.  When  we  reach  the  limit  of  our  own 
powers,  we  open  the  pages  of  some  great  master  of  thought,  and  there  find  new 
realms  that  reveal  corresponding  powers.  Take  the  soul :  there  are  faculties  that 
exist  only  in  germ  till  certain  periods  of  life  arise.  The  child  knows  nothing  of  the 
love  that  breaks  in  upon  the  youth  with  its  rapturous  pain  and  yearning  of  insatiable 
desire,  flooding  the  heights  of  his  being,  but  the  capacity  was  in  the  child.  The 
soft  touch  of  a  babe's  hand  unlocks  new  rooms  in  the  heart  of  the  mother.  New 
relations,  new  stages  of  life,  disclose  new  powers  and  reveal  the  mysteries  of  our 
being.  We  are  all  the  while  finding  out  new  agencies  in  nature ;  even  its  com- 
ponent parts  are  not  yet  all  discovered,  while  the  forces  developed  by  combination 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  595 

are  doubtless  immeasurable  in  number  and  degree.  Take  the  memory,  the  faculty 
through  which  the  consciousness  of  identity  is  preserved.  With  so  important  a 
function  to  fulfil,  it  is  altogether  probable  that  its  action  is  absolute,  that  is,  it  never 
forgets.  We  cannot  understand  its  action,  but  probably  we  speak  accurately  when 
we  say  that  an  impression  is  made  upon  the  mind.  The  theory  that  memory  is  a 
physical  act,  and  therefore  cannot  outlast  death,  is  untenable.  Matter,  having  no 
real  identity,  cannot  uphold  a  sense  of  identity,  which  is  the  real  office  of  memory. 
The  impression  of  what  we  do,  say,  hear,  see,  feel,  and  think,  is  stamped  upon  the 
mind.  An  enduring  matrix  receives  the  impression ;  is  it  probable  that  it  is  ever 
lost  ?  We  think  we  forget,  but  our  thought  is  corrected  by  everyday  experience. 
The  mind  wearied  by  toil  forgets  at  night,  but  remembers  when  sleep  has  refreshed 
the  body.  The  body  forgot ;  the  mind  retained  its  knowledge.  We  forget  the  faces 
we  have  seen,  but  on  the  first  fresh  glimpse  we  remember  them.  We  revisit  scenes 
that  long  since  had  faded  from  memory,  but  the  new  sight  uncovers  the  old  impres- 
sion. Even  so  slight  a  thing  as  a  note  of  music,  or  a  perfume,  will  bring  up  scenes 
long  ago  forgotten ;  a  strain  of  music,  and  a  face  that  had  grown  dim  to  memory, 
comes  back  from  the  dead  in  all  its  freshness.  De  Quincey,  a  profound  observer 
upon  the  subject,  says  that  when  under  the  influence  of  opium,  the  most  trifling 
incidents  of  his  early  life  would  pass  again  and  again  before  his  distempered  vision, 
varying  their  form,  but  the  same  in  substance.  These  incidents,  which  were 
originally  somewhat  painful,  would  swell  into  vast  proportions  of  agony,  and  rise 
into  the  most  appalling  catastrophes.  This  was  the  action  of  a  diseased  nature, 
but  it  indicates  what  shape  our  lives  may  assume  if  viewed  at  last  through  the 
medium  of  a  sin-diseased  soul.  Not  only  does  the  memory  retain  conduct,  but  all 
impressions  upon  the  soul  remain  imbedded  within  it.  Nothing  is  lost  that  has 
once  happened  to  it.  We  are  taking  into  ourselves  the  world  about  us,  the  society 
in  which  we  move,  the  impress  of  every  sympathetic  contact  with  good  or  evil,  and 
we  shall  carry  them  with  us  for  ever.  We  do  not  pass  through  a  world  for  nought 
— it  follows  us  because  it  has  become  a  part  of  us.  It  may  be  said  that  these 
impressions  are  so  numerous  and  conflicting  that  they  can  yield  no  distinct  picture 
hereafter.  But  we  must  not  limit  the  capacity  of  the  soul  in  this  respect,  in  the 
presence  of  greater  mysteries.  In  some  sense,  it  may  present,  as  it  were,  a  con- 
tinually fresh  surface.  A  most  apt  illustration  waits  upon  our  thought  drawn  from 
the  palimpsests  found  in  the  monasteries  of  Italy  ;  parchments  that,  centuries  ago, 
were  inscribed  with  the  history  or  laws  of  heathen  Kome,  the  edicts  of  persecuting 
emperors,  or  the  annals  of  conquest.  When  the  Church  arose,  the  same  parch- 
ments were  used  again  to  record  the  legends  and  prayers  of  the  saints.  Later  still, 
they  were  put  to  further  use  in  rehearsing  the  speculations  of  the  schoolmen,  or  the 
revival  of  letters,  yet  presenting  but  one  written  surface.  But  modern  science  has 
learned  to  uncover  these  overlaid  writings  one  after  another,  finding  upon  one 
surface  the  speculations  of  learning,  the  prayers  of  the  Church,  and  the  blasphemies 
of  paganism.  And  so  it  may  be  with  the  tablets  of  the  soul,  written  over  and  over 
again,  but  no  writing  ever  effaced,  they  wait  for  the  master-hand  that  shall  uncover 
them  to  be  read  of  all.  What  are  these  apocalyptic  books  but  records  of  our  works 
printed  upon  our  hearts  ?  What  are  the  books  opened  but  man  opened  to  himself  ? 
This  is  a  view  of  the  judgment  that  men  cannot  scoff  at.  Its  elements  are  pro- 
vided ;  its  forces  are  at  work  ;  it  lies  within  the  scope  of  every  man's  knowledge. 
It  is  but  the  whole  of  what  we  already  know  in  part.  As  there  are  powers  in  man 
that  render  judgment  possible,  so  there  are  conditions  on  the  other  side  that  co- 
operate. One  cannot  be  judged  except  there  be  one  who  judges.  Man  is  judged 
by  man ;  nothing  else  were  fit.  The  deflections  from  perfect  humanity  cannot  be 
measured  except  by  the  standard  of  perfect  humanity.  Hence  it  is  the  Son  of  Man, 
the  humanity  of  God,  who  judges.  When  man  meets  Him,  all  is  plain.  His 
perfection  is  the  test ;  He  furnishes  the  contrast  that  repels,  or  the  likeness  that 
draws.  This  then  is  judgment :  man  revealed  by  the  unveiling  of  his  life,  and 
tested  by  the  Son  of  Man.  (T.  T.  Hunger.)  The  judgment: — I.  Its  place  in 
Christian  belief.  1.  It  is  an  essential  part  in  the  creed  of  a  Christian.  2.  Its 
importance  may  be  gathered  from  its  prominence  in  the  Scriptures.  It  is  foretold 
in  the  Old  Testament — the  Psalms,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  Malachi,  all  reveal  it.  Our 
Lord,  in  His  parables,  especially  in  those  called  "  eschatological,"  because  of  their 
reference  to  the  "  last  things."  The  scene  in  Matt.  xxv.  is  in  line  with  the  text. 
The  day  of  judgment  is  pointed  to  both  in  the  Epistles  and  Apocalypse.  3.  Yet 
belief  in  the  general  judgment  is  difficult.  The  mystery  is  so  transcendental,  so 
vast,  so  seemingly  unlikely,  that  the  inability  of  the  imagination  to  bring  home  to 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

itself  this  stupendous  truth  is  apt  to  lead  the  understanding  astray  and  to  obscure 
the  light  of  faith.  II.  Why  there  should  be  a  general  judgment  ?  The  ques- 
tion was  debated  of  old,  why  the  particular  judgment  of  the  soul  in  the  hour  of 
death  should  not  suffice.  It  was  urged  that  the  Lord  judged  the  penitent  thief  and 
rewarded  him  with  Paradise  on  the  day  of  his  death  ;  Nah.  i.  9  was  quoted ;  and  the 
fact  that  desert  appertains  only  to  the  deeds  of  this  life.  Yet  one  verse  demolished 
all  this  (John  xii.  48).  The  reasons  for  the  general  judgment  may  be  found  in  this 
— that  the  issue  of  our  actions  do  not  stop  with  the  actions  themselves.  Not  only 
actions,  but  their  far-reaching  effects,  will  form  the  subject-matter  of  that  tribunal. 
The  complete  being,  body  and  soul,  must  also  be  arraigned  before  judgment  is 
complete.  III.  The  procedure.  1.  The  persons :  "  the  dead,"  the  living  being 
numerically  inconsiderable  when  compared  with  the  generations  of  mankind  who 
had  departed.  2.  "  Small  and  great "  stand  before  God — that  is,  all  earthly  dis- 
tinctions no  longer  are  of  any  account ;  as  we  should  say,  "  all  sorts  and  conditions 
of  men,"  The  only  surviving  difference  is  that  of  goodness  or  badness.  3.  They 
stand  before  the  throne.  They  are  not  merely  spirits,  but  men  and  women  in  bodily 
form.  4.  He  who  sits  upon  the  throne  is  the  Son  of  man.  5.  "  The  books  were 
opened,"  &c. ;  that  is,  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  are  made  manifest  (Psa.  1.  3 ; 
1  Cor.  iv.  5).  "  Another  book,"  Ac,  has  been  differently  explained,  as  that  which 
pours  light  upon  what  is  written  in  •'  the  books,"  declaring  what  is  good  and  what 
is  bad  in  reality ;  or  again,  it  is  taken  to  be  the  book  of  Divine  predestination  ;  or 
again,  as  by  St.  Anselm,  as  "  the  life  of  Jesus,"  which  is  to  test  the  life  of  His 
followers,  which,  perhaps,  is  the  best  exposition,  for  the  issues  are  decided  by  the 
lives  of  those  judged — by  their  "  works. "  IV.  Lessons.  1.  Test  our  belief  in  the 
Second  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ :  is  our  faith  in  the  mystery  clear  and  vigorous, 
resting  upon  Divine  revelation  and  the  teaching  of  Christ's  Church  ?  2.  Has  the 
mystery  an  effect  upon  our  lives,  knowing  it  is  one  in  which  we  must  take  part  ? 
Does  it  impress  upon  us  the  seriousness  of  life,  and  how  we  shall  have  to  answer 
for  all  our  actions  ?  3.  Are  we  becoming  more  familiar  with  that  other  "  book," 
the  life  of  Christ,  as  written  in  the  Gospels  and  made  manifest  in  the  lives  of  His 
saints  ?  and  seeking  to  bring  our  lives  into  more  accord  with  it  ?  4.  Do  I  live  as 
one  who  really  believes  in  the  day  of  judgment?  {Canon  Hutchings,  M.A.) 
Standing  before  God : — Do  you  not  see  what  that  means  ?  Out  of  all  the  lower 
presences  with  which  they  have  made  themselves  contented  ;  out  of  all  the  chambers 
where  the  little  easy  judges  sit  with  their  compromising  codes  of  conduct,  with  their 
ideas  worked  over  and  worked  down  to  suit  the  conditions  of  this  earthly  life  ;  out 
of  all  these  partial  and  imperfect  judgment  chambers,  when  men  die  they  are  all 
carried  up  into  the  presence  of  the  perfect  righteousness,  and  are  judged  by  that. 
All  previous  judgments  go  for  nothing,  unless  they  find  their  confirmations  there. 
Men  who  have  been  the  pets  and  favourites  of  society,  and  of  the  populace,  and  of 
their  own  self-esteem,  the  change  that  death  has  made  to  them  is  that  they  have 
been  compelled  to  face  another  standard,  and  to  feel  its  unfamiliar  awf ulness.  Just 
think  of  it.  A  man  who,  all  his  life  on  earth  since  he  was  a  child,  has  never  once 
asked  himself  about  any  action,  about  any  plan  of  his.  Is  this  right  ?  Suddenly, 
when  he  is  dead,  behold  he  finds  himself  in  a  new  world,  where  that  is  the  only 
question  about  everything.  His  old  questions  as  to  whether  a  thing  was  comfort- 
able, or  was  popular,  or  was  profitable,  are  all  gone.  The  very  atmosphere  of  this 
new  world  kills  them.  And  upon  the  amazed  soul,  from  every  side,  there  pours 
this  new,  strange,  searching  question,  "Is  it  right?"  That  is  what  it  is  for  the 
dead  man  to  "  stand  before  God."  But,  then,  there  is  another  soul  which,  before 
it  passed  through  death,  while  it  was  in  this  world,  had  always  been  struggling 
after  higher  presences.  Refusing  to  ask  whether  acts  were  popular  or  profitable, 
refusing  even  to  care  much  whether  they  were  comfortable  or  beautiful,  it  had 
insisted  upon  asking  whether  each  act  was  right.  It  had  always  struggled  to  keep 
its  moral  vision  clear.  It  had  climbed  to  heights  of  self-sacrifice  that  it  might  get 
above  the  miasma  of  low  standards  which  lay  upon  the  earth.  In  every  darkness 
about  what  was  right,  it  had  been  true  to  the  best  light  it  could  see.  It  grows  into 
a  greater  and  greater  incapacity  to  live  in  any  other  presence,  as  it  had  struggled 
longer  and  longer  for  this  highest  company.  Think  what  it  must  be  for  that  soul, 
when  for  it,  too,  death  sweeps  every  other  chamber  back  and  lifts  the  nature  into 
the  pure  light  of  the  unclouded  righteousness.  Now  for  it,  too,  the  question,  "  Is  it 
right  ?  "  rings  from  every  side  ;  but  in  that  question  this  soul  hears  the  echo  of  its 
own  best-loved  standard.  That  is  what  it  is  for  that  soul  to  "  stand  before  God."  God 
opens  His  own  heart  to  thatsoul,  and  is  both  judgment  and  love.  (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.) 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  597 

The  books  were  opened. — The  open  books : — By  this  imagery  it  is  clear  we  are  meant 
to  understand  that  there  is  a  record  before  God  of  all  that  we  do  here.  Words  and 
acts  of  ours  which  may  have  escaped  our  own  memory  are  not  lost  sight  of  by  Him. 
In  one  of  the  Bridgewater  treatises,  published  some  fifty  years  ago,  Babbage  pointed 
out  what  is  in  a  certain  sense  true,  however  overstrained  the  speculation  may  have 
been,  that  there  exist  at  this  moment  traces  of  every  word  ever  spoken  upon  earth. 
We  are  all  familiar  with  the  facts  that  sound  takes  time  to  travel  and  that 
the  further  it  travels  the  fainter  it  becomes.  We  know  also  that  the  air  pulsations 
set  in  motion  by  our  words  do  not  cease  to  propagate  themselves  when  they  become 
inaudible  to  our  ears,  but  that  they  travel  on  in  fainter  pulsations  capable  of  being 
discerned  by  organs  more  sensitive  than  ours,  Babbage's  remark  was  that  no  limit 
can  be  assigned  to  this  propagation ;  that  the  waves  of  air  raised  by  any  spoken 
word  within  some  twenty  hours  have  communicated  to  every  atom  of  the  atmosphere 
an  altered  motion  due  to  the  infinitesimal  portion  of  the  primitive  motion  conveyed 
to  it  through  countless  channels,  which  altered  movement  must  continue  to 
influence  its  path  through  its  future  existence.  "  Those  aerial  pulses,  unseen  by 
the  keenest  eye,  unheard  by  the  acutest  ear,  unperceived  by  human  senses,  are  yet 
demonstrated  to  exist  by  human  reason."  True  they  may  be  infinitely  small ;  but 
modern  science  concerns  itself  much  with  the  infinitely  little.  Babbage's  specula- 
tion, then,  was  that  if  a  man  possessed  imbounded  knowledge  of  mathematical 
analysis  he  would  be  able  to  calculate  the  minutest  consequence  of  any  primary 
impulse  given  to  our  atmosphere ;  or  conversely  from  every  slightest  deviation  from 
its  orderly  motions  to  detect  the  operation  of  a  new  cause,  to  trace  the  time  of  its 
commencement  and  the  point  of  space  at  which  it  originated.  Thus,  he  says,  "  the 
air  itself  may  be  regarded  as  a  vast  library  on  whose  pages  are  for  ever  written  all 
that  man  has  ever  said  or  even  whispered.  If  we  could  imagine  the  soul  in  an  after 
state  of  existence  connected  with  a  bodily  organ  of  hearing  so  sensitive  as  to  vibrate 
with  motions  of  the  air  even  of  infinitesimal  force,  all  the  accumulated  words  pro- 
nounced from  the  creation  of  the  world  would  fall  at  once  upon  the  ear.  Imagine 
in  addition  a  power  of  directing  attention  entirely  to  any  one  class  of  vibrations ; 
the  apparent  confusion  would  vanish,  and  the  punished  offender  might  hear  still 
vibrating  on  his  ear  the  very  words  uttered  perhaps  centuries  before,  which  at  once 
caused  and  registered  his  condemnation."  And  so  in  like  manner  he  contends, 
"  the  earth,  air,  and  ocean  are  eternal  witnesses  of  the  acts  we  have  done.  No 
motion  impressed  by  natural  causes  or  by  human  agency  is  ever  obliterated.  The 
track  of  every  vessel  which  has  yet  disturbed  the  surface  of  the  ocean  remains  for 
ever  registered  in  the  future  movements  of  all  succeeding  particles  which  may 
occupy  its  place.  The  sohd  substance  of  the  globe  itself,  whether  we  regard  the 
minutest  movement  of  the  soft  clay  which  receives  its  impression  from  the  foot  of 
animals  or  the  concussion  produced  from  fallen  mountains  rent  by  earthquakes, 
equally  retains  and  communicates  through  all  its  countless  atoms  their  apportioned 
share  of  the  motions  so  impressed.  Thus  while  the  atmosphere  we  breathe  is  the 
ever  living  witness  of  the  sentiments  we  have  uttered,  the  waters  and  the  more  solid 
materials  of  the  globe  bear  equally  enduring  testimony  to  the  acts  we  have 
committed."  Fanciful  as  this  speculation  of  Babbage's  may  be,  I  could  not  help 
being  reminded  of  it  by  the  invention  of  the  phonograph,  an  invention  which  seems 
destined  to  advance  to  greater  perfection,  through  which  what  might  seem  to  be  the 
most  transient  thing  in  nature,  the  utterances  of  the  human  voice,  are  permanently 
fixed,  so  that  words  spoken  in  America  have  been  heard  in  our  islands,  and  it  seems 
likely  that  men  of  future  generations  will  be  enabled  to  compare  the  very  tones  of 
the  voice  of  actors  or  orators  of  our  day.  These  things  are  only  worth  mentioning 
just  as  enabling  the  imagination  to  familiarise  itself  with  the  fact  that  words  and 
actions  of  ours,  transient  as  they  are,  can  write  themselves  in  permanent  record. 
But  there  are  ways  in  which  they  do  so  which  come  more  practically  home  to 
us  than  those  I  have  mentioned,  which  one  is  tempted  to  dismiss  as  a  mere  scientific 
fancy.  In  the  first  place,  our  words  and  actions  are  written  in  the  book  of  our  own 
memories.  In  fading  characters,  no  doubt.  Yet  we  know  that  many  things  which 
we  seem  to  have  long  forgotten  are  not  really  blotted  out  of  our  recollections.  Some 
accident  often  brings  up  to  our  remembrance  events  or  conversations  of  times  long 
gone  by,  which  had  been  absent  from  our  minds  for  years.  A  statement  made  by 
the  late  Admiral  Beaufort  has  been  often  quoted.  He  was  rescued  from  drowning, 
and  reanimated  after  he  had  for  some  time  lost  consciousness.  He  stated  that  in 
the  last  few  moments  of  consciousness  a  host  of  long  buried  memories  had  suddenly 
started  into  life,  and  that  he  seemed  in  these  few  moments  to  peruse  the  history  of 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

his  whole  past  life.  But  this  writing  on  the  book  of  your  memory  is  a  trivial  thing 
in  comparison  of  what  I  wish  next  to  speak  of  :  the  writing  on  the  book  of  your 
character.  I  had  better  explain  what  I  mean  by  this  word  character.  Mr.  Mill  long 
ago  asserted  that  you  could  with  certainty  predict  any  man's  actions  on  any 
occasion  if  you  knew  his  character  and  knew  the  motives  that  were  influencing  him. 
The  assertion  is  not  true  if  you  use  the  word  character  in  its  ordinary  sense.  A 
man  may  have  deservedly  got  the  character  of  being  miserly,  and  yet  you  cannot  be 
certain  that  he  will  not  act  generously  on  some  particular  occasion,  and  vice  versa. 
The  sense  in  which  the  proposition  is  true  is,  if  you  understand  by  "character"  the 
degree  of  susceptibility  to  aiiferent  motives  at  any  particular  instant.  So  under- 
stood, the  proposition  is  true,  but  it  is  one  of  those  identical  propositions  which 
convey  no  information.  You  can  tell  with  certainty  whether  or  not  a  man  will  be 
impelled  to  action  by  a  certain  motive  if  you  know  what  is  at  the  moment  the 
amount  of  his  susceptibility  in  respect  of  that  motive.  But  what  I  want  now  to 
remark  is  that  character  (in  this,  which  may  be  called  the  scientific  sense  of 
the  word)  is  in  a  state  of  continual  change.  Not  to  speak  of  changes  of  disposition 
resulting  from  changes  of  bodily  health,  every  one  of  our  words  and  acts  in  some 
degree  influences  our  character,  which  results  as  the  integral  of  a  number  of  very 
small  influences.  The  amount  of  change  at  any  moment  is  imperceptible.  The 
friend  whom  we  meet  day  by  day  seems  to  us  in  bodily  form  the  same  to-day  as  he 
had  been  yesterday ;  until  one  day  perchance  it  strikes  us  how  much  altered  he  is 
from  what  we  can  remember  hina,  and  in  any  case  one  who  has  not  seen  him 
for  some  time  is  struck  at  once  with  the  change,  perhaps  finds  it  difficult  to  recognise 
him.  In  like  manner  it  occurs  to  us  from  time  to  time  to  take  notice  of  changes  in 
a  friend's  character.  We  may  take  notice,  for  example,  that  he  is  less  easy  to  deal 
with,  more  snappish  in  temper  than  he  used  to  be.  The  topic  does  not  need  to  be 
enlarged  upon,  what  enormous  alteration  can  be  made  by  the  accumulated  effect  of 
minute  changes,  each  separately,  it  may  be,  absolutely  undiscernible.  But  what, 
though  obviously  true,  much  needs  to  be  borne  in  mind  is  that  none  of  these  minute 
changes  takes  place  without  a  cause.  If  changes  in  character  take  place,  it 
is  because  every  incautious  word  that  falls  from  our  lips,  every  thoughtless  action, 
though  our  own  attention  may  have  been  scarce  conscious  of  it,  is  writing  itself  on 
our  nature  in  characters  far  more  deep  and  more  practically  important  than  in 
those  traces  on  inanimate  nature  which  formed  the  subject  of  Babbage's  speculation. 
But  there  is  yet  another  larger  book  on  which  our  words  and  actions  write 
themselves ;  for  they  influence  not  only  ourselves,  but  others.  Babbage  spoke  of 
the  traces  spoken  words  leave  on  the  physical  atmosphere.  There  is  a  moral 
atmosphere  which  presses  on  us  all,  though  as  in  the  case  of  the  physical 
atmosphere  we  feel  not  the  pressure,  and  scarce  take  note  of  its  existence  unless 
when  its  motions  are  unusually  violent.  I  mean,  as  of  course  you  understand,  the 
public  opinion  of  the  community  in  which  we  live,  which  is  practically  the  law  that 
regulates  our  conduct.  On  the  wholesomeness  of  this  atmosphere  our  moral  health 
in  great  measure  depends.  But  it  too  responds  obediently  to  every  impulse  commu- 
nicated to  it  by  those  who  live  in  it.  Public  opinion  is  in  short  nothing  but  the 
aggregate  representation  of  the  moral  sentiments  of  each  individual  of  the 
community ;  and  plainly  each  change  in  the  moral  condition  of  any  individual 
affects  that  of  the  community.  In  an  infinitely  small  degree,  no  doubt,  but  I  have 
been  all  along  pointing  out  that  all  the  great  changes  in  nature  are  the  results  of 
the  accumulation  of  movements  each  infinitesimally  small.  Yet,  however  small  the 
direct  effect  of  the  action  of  one  individual  on  the  whole  community,  it  might 
be  large  enough  in  his  own  immediate  neighbourhood.  Poisonous  miasma  might 
be  enough  to  make  a  whole  house  uninhabitable  which  might  have  no  perceptible 
effect  when  diffused  through  the  whole  atmosphere.  But  no  comparison  with  the 
action  of  completely  inanimate  bodies  gives  an  adequate  illustration.  If  you  insert 
a  little  leaven  into  a  lump  of  dough,  it  would  be  a  delusion  to  imagine  that 
the  amount  to  which  the  character  of  the  mass  had  been  altered  could  be  estimated 
by  comparing  the  weight  of  the  newly  inserted  matter  with  the  weight  of  the  entire. 
Now,  as  in  water  face  answereth  to  face,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man.  The  same 
temptations  which  assail  us  beset  others  too  ;  if  we  are  sensible  of  higher  and  nobler 
motives,  so  are  others.  The  sight  of  a  brave  and  generous  deed  excites  admiration, 
which  soon  leads  to  imitation ;  the  fall  of  one  man  leads  others  to  think  lightly  of  a 
similar  fall  as  natural  and  pardonable.  If  it  be  true  that  every  sound  we  make  seta 
waves  of  air  in  motion  which  spread  in  wide  and  wider  circles,  far  more  is  a  similar 
statement  true  of  the  moral  effect  of  the  waves  we  set  in  motion.     For  the  mere 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  599 

physical  ejffect  is  so  attenuated  as  it  spreads  as  to  become  in  a  moment  or 
two  imperceptible  to  our  senses,  but  as  I  just  pointed  out,  it  is  otherwise  in 
the  moral  atmosphere.  Each  disturbance  brings  new  forces  into  action,  so  that  the 
effect  resulting  from  a  single  impulse  may  be  immensely  greater  than  any  one  could 
have  predicted  as  due  to  the  original  force.  Thus,  though  what  we  have  said  or  done 
be  not  recorded  by  pen,  ink  or  paper,  it  may  be  written  in  more  permanent  form  by 
its  influence  upon  others  or  ourselves.  If  I  have  seemed  to  you  over  subtle  in 
elaborating  the  proof  of  this,  remember  I  am  doing  no  more  than  insisting  that  that 
is  always  taking  place,  instances  of  which  are  perpetually  striking  you.  We  may,  if 
we  look  back  on  our  own  history,  be  able  to  trace  in  some  degree  how  events  were 
linked  together  and  how  trifles  helped  to  bring  us  to  form  important  decisions.  But 
of  the  greater  part  of  this  we  know  little.  And  if  God  could  enable  us  to  read  the 
book  of  our  own  lives  we  should  be  astonished  to  find  how  the  performance  of  some 
petty  act  of  duty  has  been  blessed  by  Him  as  the  means  of  giving  us  strength  for 
higher  service  in  His  cause ;  or  how  some  apparently  trifling  opportunities  neglected 
had  checked  our  own  spiritual  life  or  had  resulted  in  serious  injury  to  others.  When 
the  books  are  opened  God  may  permit  us  to  see,  as  He  can  see,  each  act  written  by 
its  consequences.  Nothing  would  make  us  more  hate  and  dread  sin  than  if 
we  could  see  how  each  act  of  sin  may  not  only  be  written  in  terrible  stains  on  our 
own  hearts  and  consciences,  but  even  on  those  of  persons  dear  to  us,  who  may  have 
drunk  in  poison  from  our  example,  which  cannot  be  neutralised  even  by  our 
repentance.  I  have  not  spoken  of  that  book  which  most  naturally  suggests  itself  to 
a  reader  of  the  text,  the  book  of  God's  omniscience,  but  I  have  shown  that  without 
going  beyond  what  our  own  reason  and  experience  tell  us  of  we  can  see  that  our  own 
words  and  actions  do  permanently  record  themselves.  (G.  Salmon,  D.D.)  The 
revivals  of  memory  a  prophecy  of  judgment : — I.  A  perfect  memory,  tnen,  will 
accompany  judgment.  The  fields  of  memory  at  some  magic  touch  give  back  again 
all  the  lights  and  shadows  which  have  ever  swept  across  their  surface.  The  children 
of  memory  rise  again  from  their  graves,  and  wander  in  without  warning  into 
the  once  familiar  rooms  which  they  have  long  ceased  to  visit.  The  canvas  of 
memory  is  retouched  by  some  artist  whose  skill  restores  the  tints  which  had  faded 
away.  The  colours  of  memory  are  like  those  in  Egyptian  halls,  long  concealed  by 
sand,  but  fresh  as  if  they  had  just  come  from  the  painter's  hand  when  the  drifted 
heaps  are  blown  away.  Is  there  absolute  oblivion  ?  What  destroys  memory  and 
effaces  her  work  finaUy  ?  Not  the  loss  of  a  sense — the  deaf  musician  still  possesses 
the  strain  which  the  outward  ear  has  not  heard  for  years.  Not  old  age — the 
old  man's  memory  is  the  one  thing  more  touching  than  his  forgetfulness.  Not 
madness,  or  the  fever  which  for  a  time  seems  to  calcine  the  images  of  the  mind. 
Memories  retain  in  very  different  degrees,  like  the  sand,  like  the  freestone,  or 
the  marble ;  but  aU  are  gifted  with  this  possibility  of  resurrection.  H.  With  a  fuU 
perception  of  the  reality  of  judgment  accompanied  with  a  revived  memory  we  shall 
most  profitably  enter  upon  a  consideration  of  the  danger  of  evil  thoughts.  Let  us 
suggest  some  simple  rules  of  self-examination.  1.  We  should  then,  really  examine 
ourselves,  if  possible  every  day,  with  this  prayer — "try  me,  0  God,  and  seek 
the  ground  of  my  heart;  prove  me,  and  examine  my  thoughts."  We  should  ask 
ourselves  two  questions  every  night.  First,  have  I  led  any  into  sin  this  day  ? — We 
sin  together — can  we  repent  together?  Second,  have  I  harboured  willingly 
and  knowingly  any  evil  thoughts  ?  Have  I  allowed  the  birds  of  evil  omen  to  settle 
down  upon  the  sacrifice,  and  failed  to  sanctify  Christ  as  Lord  in  my  heart  ?  In  the 
dreadful  chronology  of  sin,  the  actual  fall  is  often  not  the  first,  or  the  hundredth 
sin.  2.  I  now  suggest  some  simple  rules.  When  unholy  thoughts  come,  pray 
quickly — "Spirit  of  evil  1  in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  depart."  "Blessed 
Spirit  of  purity  !  quench  this  sinful  thought."  After  falling  into  sin,  pray — "  God, 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  1  For  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  lay  not  this  sin  to 
my  charge."  Occupy  yourselves  with  business.  Go  into  virtuous  society.  Do  not 
go  about  visibly  brooding.  Take  freely  to  wholesome  literature  and  innocent 
recreations.  III.  Enough,  perhaps,  of  details.  A  word  of  motives.  1.  A  great 
commentator  on  Scripture  advises  us,  if  we  are  tempted  to  unholy  thoughts,  to  look 
through  our  window.  "  Gaze,"  he  says,  "  upon  the  serenity  of  the  sky,  and  be 
possessed  with  a  loathing  of  impurity."  But  what  if  we  have  lost  the  faculty  for 
such  a  sight  ?  what  if  we  are  colour-blind  to  all  the  blue  of  heaven  ?  Seek  for 
a  purer  joy.  2.  Dwell  upon  the  reality  of  judgment.  Without  this  you  will 
be  liable  to  strange  falls.  You  will  be  like  sailors  who  are  lost  because  they  have 
not  calculated  for  the  "send"  of  the  sea.     {Abp.  Wm.  Alexander.)       The  books  of 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

judgment : — It  is  obviously  of  no  importance  whether  we  assume  that  the  terms  thus 
employed  convey  only  an  image  or  an  absolute  and  literal  reality.  If  the  language 
is  metaphorical,  it  is  nevertheless  used  to  convey  to  us  the  ideas  which  we  should 
naturally  conceive  from  the  actual  unfolding  of  a  vast  register.  1.  First,  then, 
there  is  the  book  of  God's  remembrance.  Now,  strictly  speaking,  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  as  forgetfulness  in  relation  to  God.  Memory  implies  previous  forgetful- 
ness.  To  remember,  is  with  an  effort  to  summon  up  the  past.  But  with  God,  who 
is  eternal,  inasmuch  as  time  is  not  to  Him,  there  can  be  no  such  distance  put 
between  one  event  and  another.  All  things  are  uniformly  and  unchangeably 
present  to  Him.  Neither  does  the  multiplicity  of  the  things  recorded  there  cause 
either  mistake  or  confusion.  All  things  are  always  present  to  the  infinite  mind  of 
the  Eternal.  Take  the  old  man  of  fourscore  years ;  God  does  not  call  up  as  by  an 
effort  that  man's  boyhood  and  earlier  manhood,  but  He  looks  upon  all  that  he  then 
did,  or  said,  or  thought,  as  though  it  were  now  going  on :  for  no  past  nor  future  can 
limit  Him  who  is  incomprehensible.  The  history  of  every  one  of  us  is  indelibly 
written  on  the  mind  of  God  Himself.  2.  But  we  believe  that  yet  another  book  will 
then  be  opened.  Each  of  us  carries  his  own  history,  written  and  engraven  on  the 
tablet  of  his  own  spirit.  Conscience  will  then  slumber  no  more.  No  counterfeit 
voices  will  then  drown  its  accents,  or  confuse  its  utterances.  No  burden  of  the  flesh 
shall  make  the  vision  grow  dim,  which  shall  show  us  to  ourselves,  shall  blur 
its  colours,  or  distort  its  lineaments.  Imagine,  as  far  as  you  can,  this  perfect  self- 
knowledge  for  the  first  time  breaking  in  upon  us  by  the  quickening  power 
of  conscience.  We  are  not,  indeed,  left  altogether  without  witness  beforehand  of 
what  this  will  be.  We  have  an  assurance  respecting  it,  amounting  to  all  but 
the  testimony  as  of  some  who  have  risen  from  the  dead,  to  tell  us  what  they  have 
seen  and  known.  What  if  we  go  hence  impenitent  and  unf orgiven  ?  What  will 
it  be  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  in  the  day  when  "the  dead,  small  and  great," 
shall  "stand  before  God"?  The  light  of  God's  countenance  shines  in  on  that 
stricken  soul,  alas!  not  now  to  save  and  bless,  but  to  witness  against,  and  to 
condemn.  The  first  glance  shows  all.  He  knows  as  He  is  known.  It  tallies — that 
witness  of  conscience — with  God's  knowledge  and  revelation  of  him.  Self- convicted, 
self -condemned,  sinner,  depart !  3.  Two  volumes  have  already  been  opened.  A 
third  remains.  "Another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life."  Now  with 
the  idea  of  life  is  intimately  associated  the  presence  and  working  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  is  "  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life."  From  our  baptism  upwards,  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  been  dealing  with  us,  is  dealing  with  us  still,  except  we  be  reprobates. 
Nothing  but  our  own  deliberate  sinfulness,  the  wilfulness  of  our  own  evil  choices, 
can  undo  the  Spirit's  blessed  work  in  our  souls.  The  result  of  this  life-long  process 
of  judgment  will  be  seen  then,  when  the  books  shall  be  opened,  and  that  other  book 
— "  the  Book  of  Life."  The  question  then  wiU  be.  What  can  you  show  of  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  ?  Upon  the  manifold  doings  of  the  earthly  life,  where  is  the  seal  of  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?  What  remains  when  the  sifting  is  over,  when  all  former  judg- 
ments of  the  Spirit  close  in  this  one  final  judgment,  after  which  is  heaven  or 
hell  everlasting?  (Bp.  Morrell.)  The  opening  of  the  books  : — Someone  has  said, 
and  the  saying  has  often  been  applauded,  "  Give  the  past  to  oblivion,  the  present  to 
duty,  and  trust  the  future  to  Providence."  I  fear  that  many  of  us  are  much  more 
ready  to  comply  with  the  first  of  those  three  directions  than  with  the  other  two ; 
indeed,  many  of  us  need  no  persuasion  to  induce  us  to  consign  the  past  to  oblivion, 
or,  at  any  rate,  a  great  portion  of  it.  But  before  we  turn  our  backs  upon  it,  might 
it  not  be  well  to  form  some  sort  of  definite  idea  of  the  record  that  it  contains,  lest 
one  day  we  should  have  to  renew  our  acquaintance  with  it  under  the  most  painful 
possible  circumstances?  Above  all,  before  we  consign  it  to  oblivion,  would  it  not  be 
wise  to  endeavour  to  make  sure  that  God  has  consigned  it  to  oblivion  also,  or,  at  any 
rate,  that  part  of  it  which  tells  against  us  ?  Judge  therefore  yourselves,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  of  the  Lord.  Unfortunately,  however,  this  is  just  what  most  men  are 
exceedingly  reluctant  to  do.  Too  many  resemble  in  this  respect  the  conduct  of  the 
fraudulent  bankrupt,  who  has  a  general  idea  that  he  is  not  solvent,  but  goes  on  from 
day  to  day  counting  upon  the  chapter  of  accidents,  and  hoping  that  some  fortunate 
circumstance  may  set  him  on  his  legs  again ;  but  who  shrinks  from  going  carefuUy 
through  his  books  and  facing  his  actual  commercial  position.  Even  so  men  drift 
on  from  day  to  day  with  a  sort  of  undefined  misgiving  that  all  is  not  right  between 
themselves  and  God,  but  shrink  from  facing  the  true  state  of  the  case ;  never  put  to 
their  hearts  the  question,  "  How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  ?  "  or  probe  their 
consciences  with  an  honest  inquiry,  "  What  hast  thou  done  ?  "     Are  you  prepared 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  601 

to  face  the  record  of  your  life  ?    What !     Would  you  shrink  from  putting  that 
volume  into  my  hands,  and  permitting  me  to  read  its  contents  in  the  ears  of  this 
congregation,  or  of  your  own  friends  ?    Then  reflect,  I  beseech  you,  what  will  be 
your  feelings  when  its  inmost  secrets  are  divulged  in  the  very  presence  of  your  Judge 
and  before  an  assembled  world.     We  must  realise  our  own  individuality  then,  if  we 
fail  to  do  so  now ;  and  indeed  it  must  be  admitted  that  many  of  us  do  fail  to  realise 
it.    Ah,  it  will  avail  us  httle  to  realise  then,  it  may  be  for  the  first  time,  all  that  our 
own  separate  and  distinct  existence  involves !    Nay,  rather,  it  can  only  enhance  our 
terror  then  and  deepen  our  despair.   But  it  is  otherwise  now.    And,  oh,  let  me  urge 
upon  you  the  importance  of  rising  above  the  shallow  unrealities  of  a  merely  conven- 
tional life  !     Surely  it  were  wiser  that  as  such  you  should  live,  not  indeed  ignoring 
your  relations  to  society,  but  neither,  on  the  other  hand,  permitting  your  own 
individuality  to  be  mastered   by  these  relations.     But  there  are  other  thoughts 
suggested  to  our  minds  by  the  words  of  our  text.     No  doubt  some  other  books  may 
be  opened  in  that  last  dread  assize  besides  those  which  contain  the  record  of 
our  earthly  lives.     The  book  of  Nature,  which  contains  so  much  that  seems  perplex- 
ing and  mysterious,  and  which  is  so  often  misread  now,  and  still  more  frequently 
never  read  at  all,  wiU  be  opened  at  last  in  aU  its  wonder.     And  when  the  books  are 
opened  at  last,  how  strong,  how  damning  will  be  the  testimony  of  Nature  against 
those  who  have  deified  her  or  endeavoured  to  content  themselves  with  her.   Will  not 
His  voice  be  heard  upbraiding  those  who  have  thus  abused  her?      "Ye  fools 
and  blind,  I  told  you  that  here  ye  were  strangers  and  sojourners,  that  ye  were  born 
to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upwards.  I  told  you  that  here  moth  and  rust  do  corrupt, 
that  the  grass  withereth  and  the  flower  fadeth,  and  that  the  fashion  of  this  world 
passeth  away.   I  told  you  that  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal.   Why  did  ye 
live  in  contradiction  to  my  teaching,  ever  seeking  in  me  what  ye  should  have  known 
I  could  not  bestow  ?     I  might  have  been  your  handmaiden  or  your  instructress,  but 
ye  insisted  on  making  me  your  substitute  for  God,  and  in  doing  so  ye  abused  the 
gift  God  gave  you  in  me,  and,  lo!  He  hath  done  justly  in  taking  it  away.     Ye 
chose  earth  instead  of  God,  and  now  ye  have  lost  both  for  ever."    Yet  another  book 
will  be  the  book  of  Providence,  which  will  contain  the  record  of  God's  dealings  with 
us,  just  as  the  book  of  our  lives  contains  the  record  of  our  dealings  with  God.   Here 
is  one  who  had  a  pious  father,  whose  life  was  a  constant  example  of  all  that  is 
beautiful  and  attractive  in  true  religion.  That  life  appealed  to  you,  more  eloquently 
than  any  sermon  could ;  but  you  hardened  your  heart  against  it,  and  turned  your 
back  upon  your  father's  God.  You  have  been  the  subject  of  a  mother's  prayer.  Ah  I 
how  often  has  she  watered  her  pillow  with  her  tears  for  you.     You  have  often  been 
stirred  to  the  very  depths  of  your  nature  by  the  appeals  of  that  earnest  servant  of 
God  whose  ministry  you  attend,  and  time  was  when  his  holy  eloquence  so  deeply 
impressed  you  that  you  were  almost  persuaded  to  yield.    Ah !  in  such  cases  as 
these,  how  will  you  face  the  book  of  God's  providence  ?    But  there  is  another  book 
surely  that  will  be  opened  then,  though  to  many  it  is  a  closed  book  now — the  book 
of  Revelation.     "The  words  that  I  speak,"  exclaimed  the  Christ,  "  the  same  shall 
judge  you  at  the  last  day."    Ah!  we  may  close  our  Bibles  now,  and  keep  them 
closed  ;  but  remember  the  glad  tidings  of  deliverance  and  salvation  has  gone  forth, 
and  we  have  heard  it,  and  whether  we  receive  it  and  benefit  by  it  or  not,  we 
can  never  be  as  though  that  sound  had  never  reached  us.    And  closely  connected 
with  this  volume  of  Revelation  there  is  another  which  will  be  opened  then,  though 
men  seldom  think  of  attempting  to  read  it  now — the  record  of  the  inner  revelations 
of  God  to  the  soul,  the  story  of  the  deahngs  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  with  the  heart 
of  man.     It  will  be,  I  am  persuaded,  a  startling  surprise  to  not  a  few  when  this 
"  book  "  is  opened.    How  many  an  inward  desire,  how  many  a  smothered  emotion, 
how  many  a  rising  tear,  that  they  never  thought  of  attributing  to  anything 
but  natural  causes,  will  men  find  to  have  been  due  to  the  secret  influence  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  1    But  there  is  one  "  book  "  more,  and  for  purposes  of  judgment  it 
is  the  most  important  book  of  all ;  and  it  is  spoken  of  here  as  affording  the  criterion 
by  which  men  must  stand  or  fall,  and  its  name  is  the  Book  of  Life.     Of  this 
mysterious  volume  no  less  can  be  said  than  that  Christ  Himself  is  its  Author.     No 
one  else  can  write  a  page  or  a  line  or  a  name  in  the  Book  of  Life.    Are  any  of  you 
saying  to-night.  Would  to  God  my  name  might  be  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of 
Life,  but  how  is  it  to  be  done?    I  have  no  power  to  write  it  there,  and  I  feel 
as  though  it  never  could  be  written  there.  I  have  merited  death  over  and  oyer  again ; 
eternal  life  I  feel,  I  know,  I  never  can  merit.     To  such  let  me  say,  the  kingdom  of 
life,  the  land  of  the  living,  has  been  thrown  open  to  you  by  Him  whom  St.  Peter 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

well  calls  the  Prince  of  Life,  and  he  has  obtained  the  right  to  introduce  you  into  the 
fellowship  to  inscribe  your  name  upon  that  muster-roll.  Put  your  case  into  the  great 
Life-giver's  hands.  Tell  Him  that  you  have  discovered  yourself  to  be  a  citizen  of 
the  City  of  Destruction.  Tell  Him  that  you  feel  you  cannot  by  any  effort  of  your 
own  wUl  quicken  your  own  soul,  and  that  therefore  by  faith  you  cast  yourself  upon 
Him  as  the  "  Kesurrection  and  the  Life,"  and  you  shall  prove  in  your  own  experience 
the  truth  of  His  words :  *'  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall 
he  live :  and  he  that  liveth  and  believeth  on  Me  shall  never  die."  "  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life :  but  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall 
not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  {W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.) 
Life  a  book : — You  are  writing  your  own  history,  your  own  biography,  the 
memoirs  of  yourself.  A  mysterious  and  invisible  agency  is  silently  tracing  the 
records  of  your  life.  The  waves  in  the  sea  write  their  history  in  the  ripple  marks, 
congealed  in  the  sands  ;  and  so,  the  hidden  and  silent  currents  of  our  thoughts  and 
feelings  leave  behind  them  permanent  traces.  What  you  write,  God  reads.  Life 
is  a  history.  We  may  classify  men's  lives  as  we  do  books.  We  have  separate 
series  on  different  subjects.  1.  Life  may  be  the  history  of  mind — its  growth, 
culture,  and  education — its  thoughts,  perplexities,  and  questionings — its  researches 
and  conclusions.  And,  yet,  till  we  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  Great  Teacher,  and  learn  of 
Him,  we  shall  never  find  rest  for  our  souls.  2.  Life  may  be  the  history  of  the 
affections.  Li  some  lives  the  affections  determine  the  character.  They  are  the 
freshness,  the  beauty,  the  strength  and  joy  of  life.  They  may  be  misplaced — they 
may  degenerate  into  passions.  Instead  of  being  the  strength  of  life,  they  may 
become  the  source  of  its  weakness,  A  life  without  love  to  Christ  is  a  life  that  does 
not  know  what  love  is,  that  has  never  read  the  literature  of  the  spiritual  realm,  that 
has  never  found  the  love  that  passeth  knowledge.  3.  Life  may  be  the  history  of  the 
flesh.  It  may  be  a  life  in  the  flesh — the  minding  the  things  of  the  flesh;  a 
life  written  in  the  letter,  not  in  the  spirit ;  a  life  in  sensuous  characters.  If  we  live 
after  the  flesh,  we  shall  die.  Take  another  series  of  the  books.  1.  The  book  may 
contain  the  history  of  a  life  that  has  its  ideal — its  pattern — its  standard.  All  its 
endeavours  are  after  the  higher  life.  He  who  has  seen  the  perfect  will  never  more 
be  satisfied  with  the  imperfect.  He  who  has  looked  on  the  mark  of  the  prize 
of  his  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  will  forget  the  things  that  are  behind, 
and  reach  forth  unto  those  things  that  are  before.  But  the  book  may  contain  the 
history  of  a  life  that  has  no  ideal,  no  standard ;  that  is,  formless,  shapeless, 
purposeless:  a  life  that  proposes  to  itself  no  end,  that  has  no  continuity,  no 
cohesion,  that  is  fragmentary  and  broken ;  a  life,  the  scattered  fragments  of  which 
can  never  answer  any  efficient  purpose.  We  may  look  at  another  series.  2.  In  the 
book  we  may  read  the  history  of  a  brave  life — a  life  that  has  its  foundations  in  the 
everlasting  principles  of  truth;  that  brings  nothing  but  truth  to  the  truth,  and 
BO  builds  up  character ;  that  offers  stem  resistance  to  all  forms  of  evil,  and  does 
battle  with  all  kinds  of  falsehood ;  that  practises  self-denial ;  that  builds  no  cross 
for  itself,  and  yet  never  fears  any  cross  the  world  can  build  ;  that  uses  suffering  as 
a  sharp  instrument  for  fashioning  life,  and  bringing  it  into  conformity  to  Christ. 
It  may  be  a  simple  and  quiet  life  of  which  we  read  the  records — a  life  not  wanting 
in  its  naturalness,  its  beauty,  its  fragrance.  The  true  sons  of  God  often  live  in 
obscurity  ;  the  world  knoweth  them  not,  but  then — it  knew  Him  not.  3.  It  may  be 
the  history  of  a  useful  life — a  life  essentially  practical — the  epitome  of  which  may 
be  found  in  the  words  descriptive  of  the  life  of  Christ,  "Who  went  about  doing 
good."  When  you  die,  it  may  be  said  that  you  "  rest  from  your  labours,  and  that 
your  works  follow  you."  4.  The  book  may  contain  the  history  of  a  Christian  life. 
It  is  the  life  of  one  who  felt  himself  to  be  a  sinner,  and  has  looked  out  of  himself 
for  a  Saviour — who  has  come  with  all  his  guilt  to  the  Cross — whose  trust  is  simply 
in  the  one  Sacrifice  for  sins.  5.  You  may  read  a  book  that  contains  the  history  of 
an  unreal  life — a  life  professing  to  be  Christian,  but  not  a  Christ-like  life ;  a  life 
that  has  "  the  form,  but  not  the  power,"  that  has  "  a  name  to  live,  but  is  dead  "  ; 
a  life  that  adjusts  with  the  greatest  care  the  drapery  of  religion,  that  arranges  all 
its  folds,  so  that  they  may  fall  gracefully  around  it ;  a  life  that  has  the  lamp, 
but  not  the  oil  in  the  vessel.  There  is  another  book  which  you  may  read  every  day 
— it  is  the  history  of  a  life  that  is,  alas,  very  common — a  life  of  indifference  to 
everything  spiritual.  It  does  not  positively  reject,  but  it  offers  indifference  to  the 
Gospel :  indifference  to  God's  love,  to  Christ's  death,  to  the  Spirit's  work,  to 
all  earnest  and  loving  appeals.  It  is  indifference  that  ruins  men.  There  is  only 
one  more  series  which  we  can  find  time  to  glance  at.     6.  It  is  a  worldly  life  which 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  603 

we  are  reading  now.  It  thinks  only  of  buying  and  selling  and  getting  gain.  With 
what  sorrow  we  read  the  history  of  a  life  that  is  perverted  and  abused.  But 
we  cannot  finish  reading  these  books  that  are  open  to  us  without  being  impressed 
with  the  fact  that  many  a  life  is  the  history  of  failure.  There  was  failure  at  the 
beginning,  faUure  in  the  middle,  and  failure  at  the  end.  The  book  may  have  this 
title — "  The  History  of  a  Life  that  was  a  Failure."  Some  of  you  are  young  ;  you 
have  a  fair  page  ;  there  is  as  yet  no  blot,  no  erasure  has  been  made ;  you  have  life 
before  you — it  is  unwritten.  Take  care  what  you  write,  for  what  is  once  written 
"  is  written."  There  can  be  no  new  edition,  with  its  emendations  and  corrections. 
Ask  God's  Spirit  to  teach  you,  to  help  you,  to  guide  you  by  His  counsel.  We  may 
learn  from  the  subject,  "The  Possibilities  of  Life."  We  may  well  be  aroused  from 
our  apathy,  and  be  ashamed  of  our  indolence.  Is  there  no  end  grand  enough  ?  Is 
there  no  prize  sufficiently  attractive?  Why  do  we  not  exercise  ourselves  unto 
godliness  ?  Do  not  confine  all  labour  to  the  wants  of  the  outward  life.  Strive  for 
things  that  are  worth  striving  for.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation,"  &c.  The 
books  will  be  opened.  We  are  to  be  judged  out  of  the  book  which  we  ourselves 
have  written.  We  are  now  framing  the  indictment ;  we  are  collecting  the 
evidence  ;  we  are  preparing  the  materials  of  judgment.  We  shall  judge  ourselves, 
and  God  will  judge  us.  {H.  J.  Bevis.)  The  opened  books : — I.  There  is  no 
power  of  man's  body,  no  faculty  of  his  mind,  no  feature  of  the  world  he  lives  in, 
which  does  not  become  a  book  recording  all  he  does.  1.  Man  has  a  relation  to 
God.  God  is  part  of  his  world.  God's  memory  and  God's  heart  must  become  a 
record  for  or  against  him.  2.  We  stand  in  relation  to  the  Book  in  which  God  has 
recorded  His  will.  It  challenges  our  belief  and  exacts  our  obedience.  It  lays  down 
the  principles  of  holiness,  and  enforces  the  guilt  of  transgression.  Such  a  Book 
surely  must  be  laid  open  at  the  bar  of  Judgment.  Its  mysterious  passages  will  be 
read  in  a  flood  of  hght.  Its  neglected  pages  will  flash  with  the  fire  of  indignation. 
3.  Providence  is  another  book  in  which  man's  character  is  written.  The  mind  of 
man  cannot  disentangle  the  threads  that  are  intermingled  in  the  web  of  life.  But 
there  is  one  Hand  that  can.  He  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning.  11.  Science 
has  its  own  suggestions  on  this  matter.  It  points  us,  for  instance,  to  a  slab  of  sand- 
stone taken  from  the  quarry,  and  bids  us  notice  the  impressions  left  upon  it.  Jn 
the  dim  past  a  reptile  of  monstrous  shape  walked  along  the  shore  of  an  ancient  sea 
seeking  its  prey,  and  left  these  marks  behind  it.  The  next  tide  covered  the  foot- 
prints with  a  layer  of  sand,  and  the  following  tide  did  the  same.  For  centuries  that 
process  was  repeated ;  deeper  and  deeper  sank  the  sandstone,  still  preserving  the 
story  of  the  reptile's  life,  till  a  change  took  place.  The  mass  of  rock,  long  buried, 
was  heaved  up  again  into  the  sunlight.  Man  needed  the  rock  for  his  dwelling: 
the  crowbar  opened  the  leaves  of  the  stone  book,  and  science  interpreted  it.  Yes  I 
and  we  are  told  that  what  the  rock  did  for  that  reptile  the  universe  is  doing  for  us. 
The  air  is  a  vast  hbrary,  on  whose  pages  are  written  for  ever  all  that  we  have  said  or 
even  whispered.  There  is  not  a  thought,  or  a  feeling,  permitted  to  lodge  in  the 
mind  that  does  not  mark  the  face.  We  cannot  by  abstaining  from  action  cease 
from  writing :  work  undone,  duty  unperformed,  responsibility  not  met,  have  their 
record  too.  Every  man  is  "  writing  memoirs  of  himself."  The  character  we  trace 
is  immortal.  It  cannot  be  folded  up  as  a  vesture  and  laid  aside.  The  dead  does 
not  and  cannot  bury  its  dead.  We  cannot  revise  this  book.  Only  once  do  we  take 
a  step  or  decline  to  take  it ;  once  taken  it  cannot  be  recalled.  The  past  closes  up 
like  a  crystal  wall  behind  us,  transparent  but  impervious.  Further,  the  mind  is  a 
book ;  every  faculty  a  volume  by  itself.  Imagination  is  the  divinest  and  most 
regal.  Heaven  comes  to  earth  ;  the  plainest  house  is  turned  into  a  palace.  This 
world,  cursed  as  it  is  by  sin,  seems  a  second  Eden,  and  God  walks  up  and  down  "in 
it.  But  let  the  imagination  pass  under  the  domain  of  an  impure  or  sinful  passion  ; 
it  does  not  cease  to  work,  but  its  bearing  is  changed,  and  what  a  change  !  God  is 
gone  ;  the  light  is  put  out.  The  imagination  has  gone  out  into  foul  places.  It  has 
been  a  hewer  of  wood  and  drawer  of  water  to  Satan.  At  his  bidding  the  eye  sees 
vile  visions,  the  tongue  sings  foul  songs,  the  hand  handles  black  deeds.  What  a 
spectacle  when  that  book  is  opened !  If  imagination  is  the  grander  faculty,  memory 
is  the  more  useful.  It  is  the  mother  of  arts  and  sciences ;  the  parent  of  history 
and  experience.  It  is  an  ocean  which,  if  it  swallows  up  every  jewel,  will  one  day 
bring  all  to  Ught.  A  great  sea  filling,  never  full,  but  from  which  will  come  one 
day  a  perfect  resurrection.  Latimer  tells  us  that,  when  examined  before  Bishop 
Bonner,  he  took  special  care  of  what  he  spoke.  He  heard  a  pen  at  work  in  the 
chimney  behind  the  cloth,  setting  down  all,  and  perhaps  more  than  all,  he  said. 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

Imagine  how  we  should  feel  in  daily  life  if  told  that  some  one  was  writing  our  history, 
that  his  reporters  were  present  when  we  spoke,  that  his  spies  watched  every  move- 
ment when  we  went  abroad,  that  they  dogged  our  footsteps  out  of  doors,  sat  with 
US  at  table,  followed  us  to  our  profoundest  meditations,  watched  us  in  an  hour  of 
prayer.  This  imagination  is  a  fact.  On  the  broad  page  of  memory  every  event  of 
daily  life  is  v^ritten  and  cannot  be  erased.  That  book  will  also  one  day  be  opened. 
Think  of  Felix  and  Nero  confronted  by  Paul,  Pharaoh  by  Moses,  Ahab  by  Elijah, 
the  father  by  the  child  whom  he  has  permitted  to  tread  the  way  to  ruin  ;  the  minister 
by  the  people  to  whom  he  preached  smooth  things  ;  the  murderer  meeting  again  the 
victim  for  whose  blood  he  plotted  ;  the  seducer  compelled  again  to  face  the  poor  girl 
whose  life  he  has  blighted.  The  thought  becomes  more  terrible  when  we  remember 
that  conscience  is  another  book.  Conscience  is  a  sort  of  moral  memory.  It  may  be 
said  to  anticipate  as  weU  as  to  reflect.  Nothing  escapes  its  watchful  eye.  Every 
sin  is  duly  marked,  every  corrupt  imagination,  every  wrong  principle,  indulged  in  or 
professed.  Every  idle  word,  every  unhallowed  thought,  goes  to  swell  the  score. 
Even  if  our  sins  were  as  frequent  as  our  breathing,  the  account  goes  on  day  after 
day  ;  pages  are  filled  tiU  the  last  awful  hour  has  come,  when  the  sinner  beholds  the 
magnitude  of  his  transgressions.  III.  Retribution  is  a  fact  which  the  preacher 
must  declare,  and  which  the  man  must  ponder.  But  retribution  is  not  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  It  is  to  be  used  for  the  levelling  of  the  wall  that  guards  the  mount,  that  the 
King  of  Glory  may  enter  in.  There  is  another  book  in  the  hand  of  the  Judge.  It 
is  the  Book  of  Life.  When  His  children  are  recorded  there  He  gives  them  a  new 
name.  What  beautiful  names  He  gives  !  It  is  worth  becoming  a  child  of  the 
family  to  get  one.  For  Abram  He  writes  Abraham,  the  Father  of  the  faithful  and 
Friend  of  God.  For  Saul  of  Tarsus,  Paul  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Jacob,  the 
supplanter,  becomes  Israel,  Prince  with  God.  {J.  A.  Macfadyen,  D.D.)  The 
hooks  opened  : — I  know  not  how  many  books  there  shall  be,  nor  how  ponderous, 
nor  all  their  titles :  but  I  remark,  first,  that  there  will  be  a  book  of  tears.  Have 
you  ever  thought,  ye  afflicted  ones,  that  God  is  keeping  a  record  of  all  your  woe  ? 
There  have  been  grains  of  corn  found  in  ancient  sepulchres,  three  thousand  years 
old,  but  they  have  been  brought  out  and  recently  planted,  and  have  come  up 
luxuriantly.  So  the  sorrows  of  earth  have  in  them  enough  vitality  to  produce  an 
eternal  fruitage.  "  They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy."  2.  Again,  I  remark 
that  there  will  be  a  book  of  unforgiven  sins.  The  iniquities  of  the  righteous  will  all 
have  been  pardoned,  and  so  wiQ  not  be  mentioned.  But  the  sins  of  the  unpardoned 
will  on  that  day  be  announced.  Sins  of  the  heart :  the  pride  that  would  not  bow  to 
Divine  authority,  the  foolish  choice  of  this  world  to  the  next,  the  impure  thought, 
the  unboly  imaginations.  Sins  of  the  tongue  :  tattling,  base  innuendoes,  backbiting, 
profanity,  hypercriticism  of  the  conduct  of  others.  Sins  of  the  hands,  of  the  eyes, 
of  the  feet :  from  the  smallest  omission  to  the  most  diabolical  commission,  all  of 
which  shall  be  recorded  in  the  book  from  which  the  Judge  shall  read.  Oh,  when  it 
is  opened,  what  cowering !  what  shame !  what  hate !  what  woe !  what  despair  I 
Drunkenness  will  answer  for  all  the  property  it  wasted,  for  all  the  manly  natures  it 
imbruted.  3.  Again,  I  remark,  there  will  be  a  book  of  privileges.  If  you  have 
lived  twenty  years,  you  have  had  more  than  one  thousand  Sabbaths.  If  you  have 
lived  more  than  fifty  years,  you  have  had  more  than  two  thousand  Sabbaths. 
What  will  be  our  sensation  when  those  one,  two,  or  three  thousand  Sabbaths 
confront  us  at  the  judgment.  From  that  book  of  privilege  God  will  read  so  many 
strivings  of  the  spirit,  so  many  sicknesses  when  we  vowed  return,  so  many 
sacraments,  so  many  death-beds,  so  many  accidents,  so  many  escapes,  so  many 
warnings,  so  many  glorious  invitations  of  a  crucified  Jesus.  4.  Again,  there  will 
be  a  book  of  good  deeds.  Then  we  shall  hear  of  the  cup  of  cold  water,  given  in 
the  name  of  a  disciple ;  the  food  left  at  the  wayside  cabin,  the  smile  of  approval, 
the  word  of  encouragement,  the  good  deed  of  which  made  no  record,  blazing  out 
among  the  names  of  those  who  endowed  universities,  and  civilised  nations,  and 
broke  shackles,  and  disenthralled  empires,  and  inspired  generations.  5.  Again, 
there  will  be  a  book  of  death.  When  it  is  opened,  all  the  evil-doers  of  earth  will 
tremble  for  their  fate.  What  a  long  catalogue  of  liars,  drunkards,  thieves,  murder- 
ers, adulterers,  vagabonds,  tricksters,  oppressors,  defrauders,  infidels,  blasphemers  ! 
Glory  to  the  grace  that  ransomed  the  chief  of  sinners.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
The  hook  of  memory : — I  am  assured  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  forgetting 
possible  to  the  mind ;  a  thousand  circumstances  may  and  will  interpose  a  veil 
between  our  present  consciousness  and  the  secret  rascriptions  of  the  mind,  but 
alike,  whether  veiled  or  unveUed,  the  inscription  remains  for  ever.    Just  as  the 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  605 

stars  seem  to  withdraw  from  the  common  light  of  day,  whereas  we  all  know  that 
it  is  the  light  which  is  drawn  over  them  as  a  veil,  and  that  they  are  waiting  to 
be  revealed  when  the  obscuring  daylight  shall  have  withdrawn.  {De  Quincey.) 
The  book  of  life :— I.  It  is  vital  ;  hence  here  called  the  book  of  life.  And  if 
our  names  be  written  in  this  book  of  life,  then  the  law  of  life  is  written  vitally 
in  our  souls.  The  entire  destruction  of  the  adversary  and  all  his  powers.  If  I 
am  identified  with  this  book  of  life,  I  am  brought  to  where  the  adversary,  as 
lar  as  I  am  concerned,  and  all  his  powers,  are  brought  to  nought.  11.  This 
book  is  not  only  vital  but  also  exemptional.  It  is  exemptional  in  a  threefold 
respect.  1.  First,  in  exempting  us  from  the  wrath  to  come  ;  such  shall  not  be  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  globe  shall  be  burned ;  but  what  care  I  for  that  ?  I 
have  a  new  earth.  2.  As  this  book  of  life  exempts  from  the  wrath  to  come,  so  it 
exempts  us  from  the  fear  of  man.  3.  Third,  it  is  exemptional  also  from  delusion  ; 
cannot  deceive  these  people.  III.  But,  lastly,  this  book  of  life  is  admissional.  If  I 
am  identified  thus  with  the  gospel,  if  I  am  an  able  servant  of  the  new  covenant,  it 
I  overcome  the  fear  of  man,  if  I  am  delivered  from  delusion,  and  am  thus  called, 
and  chosen,  and  faithful,  then  I  shall  be  admitted  into  this  city.  "  There  shall  in 
no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth";  and  we  can  enter  there  without 
defilement  only  by  the  perfection  that  is  in  Christ ;  "  nor  worketh  abomination  " ; 
and  we  can  enter  free  from  abomination  only  by  the  same  thing,  the  completeness 
that  is  in  Christ ;  •'  or  maketh  a  lie  " ;  and  we  can  enter  there  only  by  the 
truth ;  "but  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."  {Jas.  Wells.) 
The  book  of  life  .-—Tamerlane  had  always  by  him  a  catalogue  of  his  best  servants, 
and  their  good  deserts,  which  he  daily  perused.  (J.  Trapp.)  The  dead  were 
judged  .  .  .  according  to  their  worla.—The  Day  of  Judgment :— It  belongs  to 
man,  in  which  he  would  seem  to  differ  essentially  from  the  inferior  animals,  to 
make  himself  and  his  own  thoughts  an  object  of  thought ;  not  only  to  know 
what  he  is  doing,  but  to  be  able  to  review  his  conduct  and  compare  it  with  an 
ideal  standard  of  expediency  and  right ;  in  one  word,  to  call  himself  to  account. 
There  is,  therefore,  an  important  sense  in  which  the  whole  of  human  life  is  one 
continued  Day  of  Judgment.  Moreover,  the  self -judgment  here  referred  to  is 
understood  and  felt  to  be  of  an  authority  and  sanction  higher  than  that  of  man. 
We  cannot  shake  off  the  conviction  that  there  is  a  Divine,  as  well  as  a, 
human,  element  in  conscience.  It  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  us  through 
the  human  faculties,  ordained  by  Him  for  that  purpose.  Who  can  believe  that 
God  has  so  made  us,  that  we  cannot  help  judging  ourselves  by  the  law  of 
right,  without  believing,  at  the  same  time,  that  He  intended  us  to  be  judged, 
and  rewarded  or  punished  according  to  that  law  ?  On  looking  round,  however,  we 
see  that  this  law  is  very  far  from  being  universally  applied,  or  fully  carried 
out  in  the  present  life.  If  there  is  ever  to  be  a  perfectly  righteous  retribution,  we 
must  look  for  it  beyond  the  grave.  By  such  natural  intimations  as  these,  almost 
every  people,  with  or  without  the  aid  of  revelation,  have  been  led  to  entertain,  with 
more  or  less  distinctness  and  confidence,  the  presentiment  of  "a  judgment  to 
come."  Even  in  Homer  there  are  unmistakable  traces  of  a  popular  belief  in  a 
future  state  of  existence,  where  the  fate  of  the  individual  is  made  to  turn,  more  or 
less,  on  his  previous  character,  and  especially  on  his  conduct  towards  the  gods. 
The  same  is  also  laid  down  as  a  practical  doctrine  of  great  moment  by  the  best 
among  the  pagan  philosophers  and  moralists ;  and  sometimes,  as  in  the  apologue 
of  Erus  the  Pamphylian,  given  in  Plato's  Kepublic,  in  language  bearing  a 
striking  resemblance  to  that  used  four  hundred  years  afterwards  in  the  New 
Testament.  A  brave  man,  having  fallen  in  battle,  was  permitted  to  return  to  the 
earth  on  the  twelfth  day,  in  order  to  warn  the  living  by  a  revelation  of  what  he 
had  seen.  He  had  seen  the  dead  arraigned,  and  when  the  judges,  to  borrow 
the  words  of  the  apologue,  "  gave  judgment,  they  commanded  the  just  to  go  on  the 
right  hand,  and  upwards  through  the  heaven,  having  fitted  marks  on  the  front 
of  those  that  had  been  judged ;  but  the  unjust  they  commanded  to  the  left,  and 
downwards,  and  these  likewise  had  behind  them  marks  of  all  that  they  had 
done."  From  the  pagans  we  pass  to  the  Jews,  among  whom  Christianity  arose. 
Moses,  their  great  Lawgiver,  aimed  to  establish  what  is  called  a  theocracy,  that  is  a 
government  of  God  upon  earth,  in  which  perfect  righteousness  was  to  be  fulfilled. 
Of  course,  in  such  a  state  of  things,  as  they  had  a  present  Divine  judgment, 
there  was  the  less  occasion  to  appeal  to  a  future  Divine  judgment.  Be  this, 
however,  as  it  may,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  the 
great  body  of   the   Jewish  people  had   become   believers   in  the   doctrine  of  a 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments.  Accordingly,  the  doctrine  of  a  future 
state  of  retrijiution  cannot  be  accounted  a  Christian  doctrine  in  the  sense  of 
being  first  taught  in  Christianity.  It  has  given  us  new  evidence  of  the  facts  in 
the  case ;  it  has  enabled  us  to  see  these  facts  in  new  lights,  and  under  new 
aspects  and  relations :  so  that  the  old  doctrine,  in  itself  considered,  has  become 
substantially  a  new  doctrine.  This  being  the  case,  it  remains  for  me  to  speak  of 
what  may  properly  be  considered  as  peculiar  and  original  in  the  Christian  doctrine 
of  the  judgment  to  come.  On  the  whole,  the  most  natural  and  Christian  view 
would  seem  to  be,  that,  with  every  individual,  as  soon  as  this  life  ends  the 
next  life  begins.  As  regards  everything  pertaining  to  the  form  and  manner — or, 
go  to  speak,  the  outward  appearance — of  the  invisible  world,  what  most  distin- 
guishes Christianity  when  compared  with  other  and  false  religions,  is,  not  the 
fulness  of  the  information  it  conveys,  but  its  discreet  and  solenm  reserve.  One 
thing,  however,  is  put  beyond  question — happiness  to  the  good,  misery  to  the 
bad ;  that  is,  all  that  can  give  moral  effect  to  the  revelation :  not  a  word,  not  a 
syllable,  either  to  stimulate  or  gratify  an  idle  and  impertinent  curiosity.  Nowhere 
but  in  Christianity  will  you  find  it  distinctly  laid  down,  as  of  Divine  authority,  that 
every  man  will  be  judged  at  last  by  what  he  has  himself  done,  whether  it  be  good  or 
bad.  Let  us  now  go  one  step  further,  and  ascertain,  if  we  can,  precisely  what  is  meant 
when  it  is  said  that  men  are  to  be  judged  "  according  to  their  deeds."  If,  therefore, 
there  is  one  thing  clearer  than  any  other  in  Christian  ethics,  it  is  this — that 
every  man  is  to  stand  or  fall  according  to  what  he  is  in  himself ; — not  by  what 
he  does,  except  in  so  far  as  it  expresses  what  he  really  is.  Acts  of  worship 
in  a  hypocrite,  munificent  gifts  merely  for  the  name  of  it,  solemn  make-beliefs 
of  the  would-be  worshipper  of  God  and  the  world  at  the  same  time,  go  for  nothing. 
The  question  continually  returns,  what  is  man  in  himself  ?  There  is  no  occasion 
for  the  nice  balancing  of  accounts,  item  by  item,  referred  to  above;  neither  is 
there  any  occasion  for  a  miraculous  memory  to  enable  us  to  call  to  mind  every 
thought  we  have  indulged,  every  word  we  have  uttered,  and  every  action  we  have 
performed.  It  will  be  enough,  if  we  know  in  what  moral  and  spiritual  state  aU 
these  have  left  us  ;  and  to  know  this  it  will  be  enough,  if  we  are  made  conscious  of 
what  we  are.  It  may  be  said,  that  the  guilty  soul  will  still  be  in  the  hands  of 
a  compassionate  God  ;  and  this  is  true.  Beware,  however,  of  making  compassion  in 
God  what  it  often  is  in  man — a  mere  tenderness,  I  had  almost  said  a  mere 
weakness.  Nor  is  this  all.  We  must  not  expect  in  the  next  world  what  is 
incompatible  with  its  nature  and  purpose.  We  are  placed  here  to  make  a 
beginning.  Are  you  sure  it  will  be  so  in  the  world  to  come  ?  Why  first  a  world  of 
probation  and  then  a  world  of  retribution,  if  after  all  both  are  to  be  equally  and 
alike  probationary?  Let  us  not  run  risks,  where  the  error,  if  it  be  one,  is 
irretrievable,  and  the  stake  infinite.  {James  Walker.)  On  future  happiness  or 
misery  : — I.  There  exists  a  natubal  sense  of  equity  in  the  bond,  which  dictates, 
that  recompense  in  futurity  will  be  apportioned  according  to  our  knowledge  or 
ignorance  of  our  duty,  to  our  exemption  from  temptations,  or  the  magnitude  of  our 
dangers ; — that  flagrant  offences  ought  to  be  more  severely  punished  than  smaller 
errors ;  great  excellences  more  honoured  than  iniferior  good  qualities ;  and,  in 
short,  that  the  number  of  good  or  bad  deeds,  as  ^ell  as  their  nature,  will  be 
estimated  in  our  great  account.  And  these  notions  respecting  the  Divine  adminis- 
tration appear  to  be  sanctioned  by  striking  facts.  In  the  economy  of  the  present 
world,  it  is  most  clearly  perceived  to  be  a  general  law  of  the  Divine  Providence,  that 
different  degrees  of  iniquity  shall  produce,  as  their  natural  consequences,  nearly 
proportionate  measures  of  suffering.  Does  not  the  dissipated  character,  even  after 
his  reformation,  experience  the  result  of  the  waste  he  has  made,  in  fortune, 
in  health,  in  reputation,  or  in  time  ?  Is  he  not  often  deeply  stung  by  self-reproach 
on  account  of  the  past,  though  he  feels  humbly  assured  that,  through  Christ,  it  is 
forgiven  ?  II.  To  these  surmises  of  reason,  let  us  annex  the  surer  information  of 
scripture.  It  is  enjoined  (Deut.  xxv.  2.)  that,  "  if  the  wicked  man  be  worthy  to  be 
beaten,  the  judge  shall  cause  him  to  be  beaten  according  to  his  fault  by  a  certain 
number,"  namely,  of  stripes : — in  allusion  to  which  passage  our  Saviour  declares 
(Luke  xii.  47,  48).  Again,  when  our  Lord  declared  to  the  cities  of  Galilee,  "  It 
shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon,"  <fec.,  it  is  obvious  that  in  this 
very  phrase  more  tolerable,  the  same  diversity  of  future  allotment  is  implied — the 
same  balance  of  disobedience  and  suffering  (James  iii.  1).  III.  An  assent  to  this 
article  of  belief  is  beset  with  several  dangers,  against  which  it  is  of  the  utmost 
moment  that  a  serious  caution  should  be  offered.     1.  Beware,  in  admitting  thia 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  60T 

delicate  doctrine,  of  considering  works  as  in  themselves  worth  anything — as  in  the 
smallest  degree  establishing  a  right  to  remuneration  in  the  sight  of  a  pure  God. 
What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  ?  and,  after  ye  have  done  all,  say,  we 
are  unprofitable  servants.  2.  Another  danger  is  that  of  our  resting  satisfied  with 
inferior  degrees  of  obedience.  "  'Tis  well : — we  are  secure  of  obtaining  some  place 
in  heaven ; — we  may  with  safety,  therefore,  now  leave  something  undone,  or  not 
trouble  ourselves  about  higher  attainments."  But  chiefly  be  it  remembered,  as  the 
most  serious  truth,  that  though  the  gospel  of  Christ  offers  happiness  to  the  penitent, 
no  portion  of  that  happiness  can  be  expected  by  the  presumptuous  transgressor, 
let  him  ofifend  but  even  in  one  point.  3.  A  mercenary  service,  in  opposition 
to  that  holiness  which  results  from  the  love  of  God,  is  likewise  to  be  appre- 
hended as  a  perversion  of  the  doctrine  before  us.  {J.  Grant,  M.A.)  The 
sea  grave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it. — The  sea  giving  up  its  dead : — I.  This 
great  doctrine,  the  besubbection  of  the  body,  seems  yet  better  fitted  than  the  kindred 
truth  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  to  make  a  powerful  impression  on  the  mind  of 
man,  when  receiving  the  gospel  for  the  first  time.  The  heathen  may  have  heard  of 
the  existence  after  death  of  the  immaterial  spirit  within  him ;  but  he  thinks  of  that 
principle  as  something  impalpable  and  unearthly,  that  he  has  never  yet  seen,  and 
that  is  scarce  the  same  with  himself.  Talk  to  ham  of  the  inward  man  of  the  soul, 
and  he  listens  as  if  you  spoke  of  a  stranger.  But  bring  your  statements  home  to 
the  outward  man  of  his  body,  and  he  feels  that  it  is  he  himself  who  is  to  be  happy  or  to 
be  wretched  in  that  eternity  of  which  you  tell  him.  Hence  a  living  missionary,  in 
his  first  religious  instructions  to  the  king  of  a  heathen  tribe  in  South  Africa,  found 
him  indifferent  and  callous  to  all  his  statements  of  the  gospel,  untU  this  truth  was 
announced.  It  aroused  in  the  barbarian  chief  the  wildest  emotions,  and  excited  an 
undisguised  alarm.  He  had  been  a  warrior,  and  had  lifted  up  his  spear  against 
multitudes  slain  in  battle.  He  asked,  in  amazement,  if  these  his  foes  should  aU  live. 
And  the  assurance  that  they  should  arise  filled  him  with  perplexity  and  dismay, 
such  as  he  could  not  conceal.  He  could  not  abide  the  thought.  A  long  slumbering 
conscience  had  been  pierced  through  all  its  coverings.  11.  The  sea  will  be  foxjnd 
THICKLY  peopled  WITH  THE  MOBTAL  BEMAiNS  OF  MANKIND.  In  the  earlier  ages  of  the 
world,  when  the  relations  of  the  various  nations  to  each  other  were  generally  those 
of  bitter  hostility,  and  the  ties  of  a  common  brotherhood  were  little  felt,  the  sea,  in 
consequence  of  their  comparative  ignorance  of  navigation,  served  as  a  barrier,  parting 
the  tribes  of  opposite  shores,  who  might  else  have  met  only  for  mutual  slaughter, 
ending  in  extermination.  Now  that  a  more  peaceful  spirit  prevails,  the  sea,  which 
once  served  to  preserve,  by  dividing  the  nations,  has,  in  the  progress  of  art  and 
discovery,  become  the  channel  of  easier  intercourse  and  the  medium  of  uniting  the 
nations.  It  is  the  great  highway  of  traffic,  a  highway  on  which  the  builder  cannot 
encroach,  and  no  monarch  possesses  the  power  of  closing  the  path  or  engrossing  the 
travel.  Thus  continually  traversed,  the  ocean  has  become,  to  many  of  its  adven- 
turous voyagers,  the  place  of  burial.  But  it  has  been  also  the  scene  of  battle,  as 
well  as  the  highway  of  commerce.  Upon  it  have  been  decided  many  of  those  conflicts 
which  determined  the  dynasty  or  the  race  to  whom  for  a  time  should  be  committed 
the  empire  of  the  world.  All  these  have  served  to  gorge  the  deep  with  the  carcases 
of  men.  It  has  had,  again,  its  shipwrecks.  Though  man  may  talk  of  his  power  to 
bridle  the  elements,  and  of  the  triumphs  of  art  compelling  all  nature  to  do  his  work, 
yet  there  are  scenes  on  the  sea  in  which  he  feels  his  proper  impotence.  The  sea, 
then,  has  its  dead.  III.  The  meeting  of  the  dead  of  the  sea  with  the  dead  of 
THE  LAND.  1.  There  must  be,  then,  in  this  resurrection  from  the  sea,  much  to 
awaken  feeling  in  the  others  of  the  risen  dead,  from  this,  if  from  no  other  cause : 
these,  the  dead  of  the  sea,  will  be  the  kindred  and  near  connections  of  those  who 
died  upon  the  land.  Among  those  whom  the  waters  shall  in  that  day  have  restored, 
will  be  some  who  quitted  home  expecting  a  speedy  return,  and  for  whose  coming 
attached  kindred  and  friends  looked  long,  but  looked  in  vain.  The  exact  mode,  and 
scene,  and  hour  of  their  death  have  remained  until  that  day  unknown  to  the  rest  of 
mankind.  And  can  it  be  without  feeling  that  these  will  be  seen  again  by  those 
who  loved  them,  and  who  through  weary  years  longed  for  their  return,  still  feeding 
"  the  hope  that  keeps  alive  despair  "  ?  The  dead  of  ocean  will  be  the  children  and 
pupils,  again,  of  the  dead  of  the  land.  Their  moral  character  may  have  been  formed, 
and  their  eternal  interests  affected,  less  by  their  later  associates  on  the  deep  than  by 
the  earlier  instructions  they  received  on  shore.  2.  Let  it  be  remembered,  again, 
that  a  very  large  proportion  of  those  who  have  thus  perished  on  the  ocean  wOl 
appear  to  have  perished  in  the  service  of  the  landsman.      Some  in  voyages  of 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 


discovery,  despatched  on  a  mission  to  enlarge  the  bounds  of  human  knowledge,  or 
to  discover  new  routes  for  commercial  enterprise,  and  new  marts  for  trafl&c.      Thus 
perished  the  French  navigator  La  Perouse,  whose  fate  was  to  the  men  of  the  last 
generation  so  long  the  occasion  of  anxious  speculation.     Still  greater  numbers  have 
perished  in  the  service  of  commerce.     As  a  people  we  are  under  special  obligations 
to  the  art  and  enterprise  of  the  navigator.    We  are  a  nation  of  emigrants.    The  land 
we  occupy  was  discovered  and  colonised  by  the  aid  of  the  mariner.      The  seaman 
has,  then,  been  employed  in  our  service.    And  as  far  as  he  was  our  servant  doing  our 
work,  we  were  bound  to  care  for  his  well-being ;  and  if  he  perished  in  our  service,  it 
was  surely  our  duty  to  inquire  whether  he  perished  in  any  degree  by  our  fault.     3. 
Others  of  those  buried  in  the  waters  have  lost  their  lives  in  defence  of  those  upon 
the  shore.     Can  a  nation  claim  the  praise  of  common  honesty  or  gratitude,  who 
neglects  the  moral  and  spiritual  interests  of  these  their  defenders  ?    4.  Let  us  reflect, 
also,  on  the  fact,  that  many  of  those  who  have  perished  on  the  waters  will  be  found 
to  have  perished  through  the  neglect  of  those  living  on  shore.   We  allude  not  merely 
to  negligence  in  providing  the  necessary  helps  for  the  navigator.     May  there  not  be 
other  classes  of  neglect  equally  or  yet  more  fatal?    The  parent  who  has  neglected 
to  govern  and  instruct  his  child,  until  that  child,  impatient  of  all  restraint,  rushes 
away  to  the  sea  as  a  last  refuge,  and  there  sinks,  a  victim  to  the  sailor's  suflferings 
or  the  sailor's  vices,  can  scarce  meet  with  composure  that  child  in  the  day  when  the 
sea  gives  up  its  dead.     Or  if,  as  a  community,  or  as  churches,  we  shut  our  eyes  to 
the  miseries  of  the  sick  and  friendless  seaman,  or  to  the  vices  and  oppressions  by 
which  he  is  often  ruined  for  time  and  eternity,  shall  we  be  clear  in  the  day  when 
inquisition  is  made  for  blood  ?    No,  unless  the  Church  does  her  full  duty,  or,  in 
other  words,  reaches  in  her  efforts  the  measure  of  her  full  ability,  for  the  spiritual 
benefit  of  the  seaman,  her  neglect  must  be  chargeable  upon  her.     5.  Many  of  the 
dead  of  the  sea  wiU  be  found  to  have  been  victims  to  the  sins  of  those  upon  shore. 
Those  who  have  perished  in  unjust  wars  waged  upon  that  element,  will  they  have 
no  quarrel  of  blood  against  the  rulers  that  sent  them  forth  ?     The  statesmen,  the 
blunders  or  the  crimes  of  whose  policy  the  waters  have  long  concealed,  must  one 
day  face  those  who  have  been  slaughtered  by  their  recklessness.    And  so  it  may  be 
said  of  every  other  form  of  wickedness,  of  which  those  that  sail  in  our  ships  are 
rendered  the  instruments  or  the  victims.     The  keeper  of  the  dram-shop,  or  the 
brothel,  where  the  sailor  is  taught  to  forget  God  and  harden  himself  in  iniquity, 
will  not  find  it  a  light  thing,  in  that  great  day  of  retribution,  to  encounter  those 
whom  he  made  his  prey.     The  literature  of  the  shore  will  be  called  to  account  for 
its  influence  on  the  character  and  well-being  of  the  seaman.    The  song-writer,  who, 
perhaps,  a  hungry  and  unprincipled  scribbler,  penned  his  doggrel  lines  in  some 
garret,  little  careful  except  as  to  the  compensation  he  should  earn,  the  dirty  pence 
that  were  to  pay  for  his  rhymes,  will  one  day  be  made  to  answer  for  the  influence 
that  went  forth  from  him  to  those  who  shouted  his  verses  in  the  night  watch,  on 
the  far  sea,  or  perchance  upon  some  heathen  shore.    The  infidel,  who  may  have  sat 
in  elegant  and  lettered  ease,  preparing  his  attacks  upon  the  Bible  and  the  Saviour, 
thought  little,  probably,  but  of  the  fame  and  influence  he  should  win  upon  the 
shore.    But  the  seeds  of  death  which  he  scattered  may  have  been  wafted  whither 
he  never  thought  to  trace  them.    And  in  that  day  of  retribution  he  may  be  made  to 
lament  his  own  influence  on  the  rude  seaman  whom  he  has  hardened  in  blasphemy 
and  impiety,  and  who  has  sported  with  objections  derived  by  him  at  the  second 
hand  or  third  hand  from  such  writers,  whilst  he  figured  amongst  his  illiterate  and 
admiring  companions  as  the  tarred  Voltaire  or  Paine  of  the  forecastle  and  the  round 
top,  the  merriest  and  boldest  scoffer  of  the  crew.    Lessons:  1.  The  dead  shall  rise, 
all  shall  rise,  and  together.    From  the  land  and  from  the  sea,  wherever  the  hand 
of  violence  or  the  rage  of  the  elements  have  scattered  human  dust,  shall  it  be 
reclaimed.     And  we  rise  to  give  account.     Out  of  Christ,  judgment  will  be  dam- 
nation.    2.  If  the  reappearance  from  the  seas  of  the  sinner  who  perished  in  his 
sins  be  a  thought  full  of  terror,  is  there  not,  on  the  other  hand,  joy  in  the  anticipation 
of  greeting  those  who  have  fallen  asleep  in  Christ,  but  whose  bones  found  no  rest 
beneath  the  clods  of  the  valley,  and  whose  remains  have  been  reserved  under  the 
waters  until  that  day,  while,  over  their  undistinguished  resting-place,  old  ocean 
with  all  its  billows  has  for  centuries  pealed  its  stormy  anthem  ?    3.  This  community 
especially  owes  a  debt  to  that  class  of  men  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships,  and  do 
business  in  the  great  waters.    4.  It  is,  again,  by  no  means  the  policy  of  the  Church 
to  overlook  so  influential  a  class  as  is  that  of  our  seafaring  brethren.     They  are  in 
the  path  of  our  missionaries  to  the  heathen.    If  converted,  they  might  be  amongst 


CHAP.  XX.]  RE  VELA  TION. 


their  most  efficient  coadjutors,  as,  whilst  unconverted,  they  are  among  the  most 
embarrassing  hindrances  the  missionary  must  encounter.  5.  While  humbled  in 
the  review  of  her  past  negligence,  and  in  the  sense  of  present  deficiencies,  as  to  her 
labours  for  the  seaman,  the  Church  has  yet  cause  for  devout  thankfulness  in  the 
much  that  has  recently  been  done  for  the  souls  of  those  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in 
ships,  and  in  the  perceptible  change  that  has  already  been  wrought  in  the  character 
of  this  long-neglected  class  of  our  fellow-citizens  and  fellow-immortals.  6.  In  that 
day,  when  earth  and  sea  shall  meet  heaven  in  the  judgment,  where  do  you  propose 
to  stand  ?  Among  the  saved,  or  the  lost — the  holy,  or  the  sinful — at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Judge,  or  at  His  left  ?  {W.  R.  Williams,  D.D.)  On  the  general  resurrection : 
— I.  The  elements  into  which  the  dead  are  dissolved  do  only  receive  them  into 
SAFE  custody.  The  matter  out  of  which  we  are  made  doth  never  perish  ;  the  found- 
ation remains,  though  it  put  on  a  thousand  shapes  and  figures.  The  quantity  and 
quality  indeed  of  many  men's  bodies  is  lost,  by  various  transmutations,  in  the 
several  elements  through  which  they  pass  after  their  dissolution :  yet  for  all  this, 
the  substance  is  kept  entire,  and  wholly  incapable  of  being  destroyed.  II.  These 
elements  are,  at  the  command  of  the  Almighty,  to  give  up  those  pledges  which 
THEY  receive.  The  fish  that  swallowed  up  Jonah,  and  afterwards  threw  him  up 
again  upon  the  dry  land,  when  God  by  His  will  appointed  it  so  to  do,  was  not  more 
obedient  to  that  will  than  each  element  shall  be  in  giving  up  the  dead  upon  the 
authority  of  His  command.  1.  The  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  other  quarters  of  the 
world  to  which  they  retire,  are  in  every  point  known  to  God.  Nor  is  He  ignorant  of 
the  means  which  are  proper  to  unite  them,  how  far  soever  they  may  be  scattered, 
or  how  much  soever  confounded.  2.  Another  argument  why  the  dead  should  be 
given  up  at  His  word  is,  because  the  matter  whereof  they  were  composed  lies  subject 
to  Him,  and  He  can  new-mould  and  repair  it  as  He  pleaseth.  What  work  can  be  too 
hard  for  Him  that  is  above  all  resistance  whatsoever  ?  Could  He  do  the  greater 
work  in  making  us  that  which  we  were  not,  and  shall  we  doubt  of  His  ability  in  the 
less,  which  is  refashioning  us  to  what  we  were?  But  it  may  be  asked,  What 
necessity  is  there  for  such  a  general  delivery  of  the  dead  ?  Cannot  the  sea  and  the 
land  bury  us,  as  it  does  other  creatures,  who  are  dissolved  into  those  elements  and 
perish  ?  Why  must  we  be  reposed  in  them,  as  in  a  treasury ;  preserved  for  a  time, 
in  order  to  be  taken  out  or  given  up  again  ?  At  present  I  would  only  observe,  that 
the  necessity  of  this  dispensation  will  appear  from  the  consideration  of  God,  of 
Christ,  and  of  mankind.  (1)  Of  God,  who  is  necessarily  just ;  and  therefore  is  in 
justice  concerned  in  a  general  giving  up  of  the  dead  to  Him,  that  so  the  whole  man 
may  acknowledge  the  righteousness  and  equity  of  His  government.  (2)  The  necessity 
of  the  rising  again  will  appear  by  a  consideration  of  Christ,  who  has  merited  lord- 
ship and  dominion  over  us.  Now  the  honour  of  that  lordship  would  cease,  except 
the  dead  were  given  up  to  be  subject  to  His  rule.  (3)  The  consideration  of  mankind 
evinces  the  necessity  of  this  dispensation,  who  are  subject  to  His  laws,  and  qualified 
with  natures  to  receive  wages.  These  are  divided  into  good  and  bad,  each  of  which 
have  need  of  a  resurrection.  The  good,  that  so  they  may  silence  their  false 
accusers  and  clear  their  innocence  to  the  world,  and  experimentally  find  by  what 
they  reap  that  their  labour  hath  not  been  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  The  bad,  that  they 
may  receive  a  due  recompense  of  their  deeds,  further,  it  is  to  be  considered,  that 
although  the  personal  acts  of  sin  in  the  wicked  are  transient,  and  die  with  the 
committers ;  yet  the  poison  and  infection  of  those  acts  long  continues.  To  conclude. 
You  hear  there  is  no  retreat,  no  sanctuary  for  your  bodies  to  lodge  in,  neither  in  sea, 
nor  in  land,  nor  fire,  nor  air,  but  they  will  be  everywhere  exposed  to  the  all-seeing 
eye  of  God,  and  ready  to  be  given  up  at  His  command.  (Jos.  Roe,  M.A.)  Deatb 
and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire. — Death  and  the  grave : — It  is  of  His 
two  chief  enemies  that  God  here  speaks — "  death  and  the  grave,"  or  "  place  of  the 
dead."  This  is  not  the  first  time,  nor  the  only  place,  in  which  they  are  thus  classed 
together.  There  is  a  striking  series  of  passages,  running  through  all  Scripture,  in 
which  they  are  named  as  allies — fellow- workers  in  the  perpetration  of  one  great 
deed  of  darkness  from  the  beginning.  Often  are  death  and  the  grave  in  the  lips  of 
Job.  David  speaks  of  them  (Psa.  vi.  5).  Solomon  uses  them  in  figure  (Cant.  viii.  6). 
Hezekiah  refers  to  them  (Isa.  xxxviii.  18).  Isaiah  mentions  them  in  their  connec- 
tion with  Messiah  (liii.  9).  Hosea  proclaims  their  awful  fellowship  in  evil  (xiii.  14). 
Paul  takes  up  the  language  of  the  old  prophets  (1  Cor.  xv.  65J.  And  then,  as  the 
summing  up  of  the  whole,  we  have  these  strange  words  of  tne  text.  This  is  the 
end  of  that  death-power  which  was  let  loose  in  paradise,  and  which  has  continued 
to  exercise  dominion  upon  earth  through  these  two  channels.    The  reign  has  been 

39 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

long  and  sad ;  it  has  been  one  of  dissolution,  and  blight,  and  terror ;  but  it  ends  at 
last.  Death  has  been  the  sword  of  law  for  ages ;  but  when  it  has  done  its  work  on 
earth,  God  takes  this  sword,  red  with  the  blood  of  millions,  snaps  it  in  pieces  before 
the  universe,  and  casts  its  fragments  into  the  flame,  in  the  day  of  the  great  winding- 
up,  in  token  that  never  again  shall  it  be  needed,  either  on  earth  or  throughout  the 
universe.  The  grave  has  been  the  chain  and  the  prison-house  of  justice ;  but  when 
its  purpose  is  served,  and  justice  has  got  all  its  own  in  the  heaven  of  the  saved  and 
the  hell  of  the  lost,  God  gathers  up  each  link  of  the  chain  and  flings  them  into  the 
lake  of  fire  upon  the  head  of  the  great  potentate  of  evil ;  He  razes  the  dungeon  to 
its  foundation,  and  buries  its  ruins  in  a  grave  like  that  of  Sodom,  the  lake  of  the 
everlasting  burnings.  Death  and  the  grave  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  I.  God 
ABHOBS  DEATH.  It  is  to  Him  eveu  more  unlovable  than  it  is  to  us.  He  has  set 
limits  to  its  power;  He  has  made  it  to  His  saints  the  very  gate  of  heaven — for 
blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord ;  He  has  proclaimed  resurrection  and 
incorruption.  But  still,  with  all  these  abatements,  He  loves  it  not,  nor  is  reconciled 
to  it  in  one  act  or  aspect.  It  is,  in  His  eyes,  even  more  than  in  ours,  an  enemy,  a 
destroyer,  a  demon,  a  criminal,  a  robber.  So  thoroughly  does  He  loathe  it,  that  in 
order  to  make  His  displeasure  known.  He  reserves  it  to  the  last  for  doom  ;  He  sets 
it  apart  for  a  great  outstanding  condemnation,  and  then  casts  it  into  the  lake  of 
fire.  II.  God's  reasons  foe  abhobbino  death.  1.  It  is  the  ally  of  sin  (Bom. 
V.  12).  Partners  in  evil,  sin  and  death  have  held  dark  fellowship  together  from  the 
beginning,  the  one  reflecting  and  augmenting  the  odiousness  of  the  other;  like 
night  and  storm,  each  in  itself  terrible,  but  more  terrible  as  companions  in  havoc. 
2.  It  is  Satan's  tool.  To  inflict  disease,  but  not  to  heal ;  to  wound,  but  not  to  bind 
up ;  to  kill,  but  not  to  make  alive — these  are  the  works  of  the  devil  which  God 
abhors,  and  which  the  Son  of  God  came  to  destroy.  3.  It  is  the  undoing  of  His 
work.  God  did  not  mean  creation  to  crumble  down  or  evaporate.  But  death  has 
seized  it.  Man's  body  and  man's  earth  are  falling  to  pieces,  undermined  by  some 
universal  solvent ;  the  beauty,  and  the  order,  and  the  power  giving  way  before  the 
invader.  The  sculptor  does  not  love  the  hand  that  spoUs  his  statue,  nor  the  mother 
the  fever  that  preys  upon  her  darling ;  so  God  has  no  pleasure  in  that  enemy  that 
has  been  ruining  the  work  of  His  hands.  4.  It  has  been  the  source  of  earth's  pain 
and  sorrow.  Pain  is  the  messenger  of  disease,  and  disease  is  the  touch  of  death's 
finger;  and  with  disease  and  death  what  an  amount  of  sorrow  has  poured  in  upon 
our  world !  5.  It  has  laid  hands  on  His  saints.  Though  He  permitted  Herod,  and 
Pilate,  and  Nero,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  to  persecute  His  Church,  He  did  not 
thereby  indicate  indifference  to  the  wrong,  far  less  sympathy  with  the  wrong-doer. 
He  treasures  up  wrath  against  the  persecutor ;  He  will  judge  and  avenge  the  blood 
of  His  own.  So  will  He  take  vengeance  on  the  last  enemy,  6.  It  laid  hands  upon 
His  Son,  Death  smote  the  Prince  of  life,  and  the  grave  imprisoned  Him.  This 
was  treason  of  the  darkest  kind,  the  wrong  of  wrongs,  perpetrated  against  the 
highest  in  the  universe,  God's  incarnate  Son.  And  shall  not  God  visit  for  this  ? 
Shall  not  His  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  destroyer  for  such  a  crime  ?  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
And  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the  hook  of  life,  was  cast  into  the  lake 
of  fire. — The  eternity  of  the  sorrows  of  the  lost : —  Is  this,  then,  the  end  of  all 
the  projects  and  all  the  acts  of  the  boastful  sinner — man  ?  Alas  !  who,  then,  art 
thou,  that  repliest  against  Omnipotence?  Who  art  thou,  that  thinkest  God  is  to  be 
mocked?  I.  When  the  day  of  judgment  shall  come,  and  how  long  it  shali, 
last.  Revelation  has  not  disclosed.  It  is  called  the  day  of  judgment:  but  in 
Scripture  a  day  is  not  always  meant  to  express  that  particular  portion  of  time  which 
we  afi&x  to  the  term ;  but  a  season.  But  however  long  or  however  short  a  period 
the  tremendous  judgment  of  the  world  will  occupy,  we  know  assuredly  that  at  its 
conclusion  a  solemn  separation  will  be  made  of  those  who  have  served  God,  from 
those  who  have  served  Him  not.  The  place  to  which  the  latter  will  be  consigned  is 
described  in  almost  every  term  expressive  of  sorrow  and  pain.  It  is  called  a  furnace 
of  fire,  the  bottomless  pit,  whence  shall  be  seen  ascending  the  smoke  of  the  torments 
of  the  damned.  Scripture  warns  us  in  the  plainest  terms,  that  it  is  not  merely  the 
loss  of  the  happiness  which  God  had  offered  that  the  condemned  sinner  then  shall 
suffer,  but  some  positive  and  exquisite  anguish  and  torment.  '•  They  shall  drink  of 
the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is  poured  out  without  mixture  into  the  cup  of 
His  indignation."  "  They  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever." 
"  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire."  "  Their  worm  dieth  not,  and 
their  fire  is  not  quenched."  "  They  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment." 
II.  The  leading  observations  which  have  been  hade  against  the  doctbinb  of 


CHAP.  XX.]  REVELATION.  611 

ETERNAL  PUNISHMENTS.  1.  The  chief  One — and,  indeed,  what  ahnost  comprises  all 
the  rest — is  that  it  seems  hardly  consistent  with  the  justice  of  God  to  inflict  eternal 
punishment  for  a  temporal  sin.  The  notion  seems  to  arise  from  the  want  of  a  due 
consideration  of  what  is  sin.  If  a  man  considers  only  one  or  two  individual  acts  of 
his  own  wickedness,  there  may  appear  between  them,  taken  abstractedly,  and 
eternal  punishment,  a  great  disproportion.  But  he  omits  to  consider  what  the 
effect  of  those  few  acts  is,  not  only  on  his  own  soul,  but  on  the  world  in  which  he 
lives.  But  independently  of  the  effect  of  sin  on  others,  you  ought  not  to  forget, 
however  trifling  your  sin  may  appear,  what  is  the  nature  of  a  sinful  soul  in  the 
pure  sight  of  God  !  There  is  another  consideration.  Although  eternal  punishment 
is  denounced  against  what  are  termed  temporal  sins,  yet  it  is  only  on  sins 
unrepented  of.  God  has  shown  you  how  you  may  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
He  has  declared  how  you  may  be  redeemed  from  the  influence  and  the  curse  of  sin. 
The  degree  of  your  punishment  will  certainly  be  proportioned  to  your  sins,  for 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right.  But  its  duration  seems  to  be  fixed  for 
eternity  by  the  immutable  laws  of  Providence,  because  no  revealed  means  remain 
after  death  for  cleansing  your  soul  from  its  pollution.  There  is  yet  one  other  con- 
sideration. When  a  man  dies  without  repentance  and  change  of  heart,  after  a  life 
of  habitual  neglect  of  heaven,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  believe  that  had  his  Hfe  been 
prolonged,  and  the  power  of  indulging  in  sin  remained,  he  would  have  continued  a 
sinner  as  long  as  he  continued  to  exist.  It  is  said,  I  know,  that  punishments  cannot 
be  meant  to  be  final  and  eternal,  because  they  are  intended  to  reclaim,  either  by 
their  effect  on  the  sinner  himself,  or  as  examples  to  others.  The  punishments  of 
this  world  are  so.  But  lest  we  should  presume,  and  think  these  His  only  judg- 
ments. He  has  given  us  proofs  sufficient  that  in  the  ordinances  of  His  providence 
there  are  such  things  as  final  punishments.  Every  one  knows  that  the  whole  world 
was  once  exterminated  except  one  family,  and  that  such  extermination  was  for  its 
sins.  We  are  hereby  taught  that  punishment  is  not  always  intended  for  the 
reformation  of  the  sinner.  2.  We  will  now  consider  those  observations  which  are 
drawn  against  the  doctrine  from  Scripture  itself.  (1)  We  are  reminded,  then, 
that  the  words  which  are  made  use  of  to  imply  what  we  consider  to  be  a  never- 
ceasing  duration  are  often  applied  in  Scripture  to  other  matters,  which  are  known 
to  have  an  end,  and  therefore  that  they  mean  not  strictly  and  properly  eternity,  but 
only  a  long  and  undefined  succession  •  of  ages.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  the  words, 
"eternal,"  "everlasting,"  and  "for  ever,"  are  appUed  to  some  things  which  are 
known  to  have  an  end :  but  we  see  them  also  applied  to  those  things  which  we 
know  have  no  end ;  and,  above  aU,  the  expressions  in  question  concerning  the 
duration  of  punishments  are  those  which  are  applied  to  show  the  true  and  proper 
eternity  of  the  Supreme  Being  Himself.  To  reconcile  this  apparent  inconsistency, 
however,  is  not  very  difficult.  These  words,  "  eternal,"  "  everlasting,"  and  the 
like,  seem  always  meant  to  indicate  the  longest  expressible  existence  of  the  thing, 
or  the  being,  to  which  they  are  applied.  (2)  It  is  said  that  the  doctrine  of  eternal 
punishments  militates  against  the  known  mercy  of  God  and  the  general  spirit  of 
the  gospel,  which  is  a  scheme  of  salvation.  It  is  maintained  that  as  it  is  impossible 
for  any  creature  to  live  in  eternal  torments,  though  some  may  persist  for  a  longer, 
some  for  a  shorter,  period,  all  in  the  end  must  be  subdued,  and  that  a  universal 
restoration  will  crown  the  solemn  scene :  that,  as  the  Son  of  Man  came  to  seek 
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  His  coming  would  be  defeated  if  the  greater  part 
were  lost  for  ever;  that  when  it  is  said  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies 
under  His  feet,  and  that  the  last  enemy,  which  shall  be  destroyed,  is  death — the 
death  here  intended  is  the  second  death — and  that  when  this  penal  fire  shall  have 
accomplished  its  purpose,  it,  too,  shall  be  extinguished  ;  that  then  shall  be  brought 
to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written,  "  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory."  These  are 
contemplations,  full  indeed  of  awfulness,  but  full  of  holy  joy,  and  agreeing,  as 
they  do,  vfith  the  hopes  of  frail  and  sinful  man,  are  too  readily,  perhaps,  indulged 
by  him  as  founded  on  irrefragable  truth.  Whatever  meaning  your  own  opinion 
may  affix  to  the  Scriptural  expressions  concerning  the  duration  of  the  sinner's 
woes,  remember  one  truth,  viz.,  that  no  limit  is  there  affixed  to  them ;  that,  allowing 
the  terms  to  mean  only  a  succession  of  ages  upon  ages,  yet  that  no  period  is  mentioned 
when  such  succession  shall  end.  On  what  is  to  take  place  after  the  day  of  judg- 
ment Scripture  seems  purposely  silent.  ((?.  Matthew,  M.A.)  The  terrihU  doom 
of  the  lost : — It  is  a  pathetic  tale  to  tell,  but  I  do  not  vouch  for  its  absolute  truth, 
that  once  a  famous  composer  wrote  a  great  anthem  to  be  sung  at  a  festival.  He 
sought  to  picture  the  scenes  of  the  final  judgment,  and  introduced  a  strain  of  musio 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

representing  the  solemn  lamentations  of  the  lost.  But  no  singer  was  found  willing 
to  take  such  a  part.  So  the  wailings  and  woes  were  omitted ;  and  when  the  passage 
was  reached,  the  leader  simply  beat  the  time  in  silence  till  the  awful  chasm  was 
passed,  and  the  musicians  took  up  gloriously  the  strains  of  celestial  unison  lying 
on  the  other  side  of  it,  "  The  shout  of  them  that  triumph  and  the  song  of  them 
who  feast."  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Society  divided  by  Christ  into  two  great 
parts : — In  a  sermon  preached  by  the  Eev.  J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.,  he  pointed  out  the 
different  aspects  from  which  the  world  and  Christ  viewed  society.  The  world 
draws  a  horizontal  line  of  division,  or  rather  two  lines,  which  mark  off  humanity 
into  three  sections,  the  upper,  middle,  and  lower  classes.  Christ  draws  a  vertical 
line  throughout  the  whole  scale,  dividing  society  into  two  parts,  those  on  the  right 
hand  and  those  on  the  left ;  the  sheep  and  the  goats. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Vebs.  1-8.  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.— r/i«  new  heavens  and  new 
earth: — I.  Scbiptube  distinctly  reveals  the  fact  that  this  world  is  not  destined 
TO  CONTINUE  AS  IT  IS.  "  The  fashioH  of  this  world  changes  "  is  the  constant  statement 
of  the  inspired  writers.  We  seem  to  learn  this  from  the  very  fading  qualities  of 
everything  that  surrounds  us.  We  have  scarcely  enjoyed  the  warmth  of  the  summer 
sun  when  the  leaves  of  autumn  fall  fast  and  thick  around  us.  These  have  scarcely 
disappeared  when  we  tread  upon  the  snows  of  winter;  and  these  have  scarcely 
melted  away  before  the  budding  of  spring  again  surrounds  us,  and  Nature  gives 
indications  that  she  is  about  once  more  to  revive.  It  is  not  only  from  Scripture 
that  we  gain  such  lessons  as  this.  We  give  it  to  you  as  a  fact,  which  is  proved  to 
demonstration  by  science,  that  there  is  constantly  going  on,  in  the  mechanism  of 
the  universe  a  similar  decay  to  that  which  is  going  on  in  any  other  mechanism  that 
you  know.  You  are  aware  that  the  various  planets  that  surround  our  globe  move 
through  an  atmosphere ;  and  that  this  atmosphere  acts  as  a  repelling  and  hindering 
force  upon  the  planets  which  thus  move;  and  that  this  hindering  force,  acting 
constantly  upon  every  planet  that  moves  through  space,  must  eventually  so  check 
the  velocity  of  those  planets,  and  at  length  so  act  upon  their  movements,  as  to  bring 
the  whole  of  the  planet-machinery  to  a  stand.  And,  in  addition  to  this,  you  are  to 
remember  that  science  points  out  to  us  the  fact  that  in  the  very  centre  of  our  globe 
there  exists  a  sufficient  quantity  of  igniting  matter  to  burst  the  crust  of  our  globe, 
and  make  it  a  ruin  at  our  feet.  And  now  for  what  object  is  this  to  be  ?  Is  there 
to  be  anything  in  the  place  of  this  materialism  when  it  thus  falls  into  ruin  ?  Or 
are  we  to  reside  in  a  place  altogether  different  from  this  our  world — a  place  rather 
spiritual  than  material  in  the  elements  that  compose  it?  "I  beheld  a  new  heaven 
and  a  new  earth,  for  the  old  heaven  and  the  old  earth  were  passed  away."  "  We, 
therefore,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." 
In  the  first  place,  the  incarnation  of  Christ  would  lead  us  to  infer,  I  think,  that  we 
were  destined  to  be  material  as  well  as  spiritual  in  our  final  and  everlasting  state. 
You  are  to  remember,  again,  that  Christ  when  He  rose  from  the  dead  did  not  fling 
away  materiaUsm  for  ever ;  on  the  contrary,  His  body  came  back  to  His  spirit,  just 
as  ours  shall  come  back.  And  not  only  so,  but  He  now  bears  that  glorified  body  in 
the  courts  of  heaven.  And  we  may  conclude  that  if  Christ  has  thus  brought 
materialism  up  to  the  courts  of  God,  if  He  not  only  walked  the  earth  in  a  material 
body,  but  now  resides  in  heaven  in  glorified  materialism,  materialism  is  destined  to 
decay,  only  that  it  may  be  purified  with  the  fires  of  the  last  day.  But,  again,  this 
is  only  a  natural  inference  to  be  drawn  from  another  doctrine  of  the  Christian 
religion — I  mean  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Thus  we  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  when  St.  John  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  he  saw  what  literally  should 
come  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  old.  And  then  who  can  describe  the  beauty  of  such  a 
residence  as  this  ?  Scripture  only  gives  us  a  glimpse  into  paradise.  Methinks, 
perhaps,  we  could  not  understand  what  paradise  was ;  we  could  not  realise  the 
beauty  of  its  sounds,  the  richness  of  its  sights,  the  glories  of  its  landscape.  And  so 
Scripture  only  gives  us  a  glimpse  into  the  glories  of  our  future  home.  But  in  order 
to  make  this  more  evident  we  would  ask  you  to  remark  that  there  is  to  be  not  only 
a  new  earth,  but  a  new  heaven  as  well.     We  perhaps  could  understand  that  the 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  613 

earth  required  renewing.  It  is  inhabited  by  a  sinful  race.  But  you  will  naturally 
ask,  Why  does  heaven  require  to  be  renewed — ^heaven,  the  residence  of  God.  But 
we  think  you  mistake  in  fancying  that  the  heaven  which  is  here  stated  to  be  renewed 
is  the  heaven  wherein  God  dwells.  We  think,  rather,  it  alludes  to  the  firmamental 
space  that  surrounds  this  earth,  and  that  what  St.  John  means  to  assert  is  that  not 
only  does  the  earth  become  renewed  by  the  process  of  the  last  fiery  trial,  but  that  also 
the  atmosphere  itself,  the  place  wherein  planets  move,  where  the  whole  machinery 
of  the  stars  is  at  work,  that  this  place  too  is  purged  by  a  similar  process.  If  so, 
we  ask  you,  Does  not  imagination  at  once  falter  when  we  strive  to  conceive  such  a 
splendid  spreading  of  materialism  as  this  must  throw  open  ?  Not  only  shall  the 
earth,  then,  be  clad  with  beauty,  but  there  shall  come  a  clearing  process  upon  the 
air ;  and  this  shall  so  throw  open  the  firmamental  regions  to  man's  view,  and  so 
render  the  planetary  system  visible,  as  to  make  the  scene  literally  accord  with  the 
vision  of  St.  John — a  new  heaven,  as  well  as  a  new  earth.     11.  What  shall  be  the 

PRE-EMINENT  MABE   AND   CHARACTERISTIC   OF   THE   ARRANGEMENTS   AND   INHABITANTS   OP 

THIS  GLORIOUS  SCENE  ?  St.  Pctcr  tclls  US,  "  We  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new 
earth,  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness  "  ;  and  we  therefore  infer  that  righteousness 
will  be  the  characteristic  of  the  future  heavens  and  earth.  If  there  was  anything 
permitted  there  that  was  not  thoroughly  righteous — if  there  was  anything  like 
impurity  infecting  the  region  or  sinfulness  throwing  its  taint  upon  the  scene,  then 
in  vain  should  we  hope  for  such  a  beautiful  residence.  And  thus  there  comes  the 
practical  question  to  ourselves.  Are  we  or  are  we  not  fitted  for  such  a  scene  as  this  ? 
Fasten  not  your  affections  upon  things  below.  Take  them  as  God  gives  them  to  you : 
enjoy  them  as  far  as  God  allows  you ;  but,  remember,  there  is  decay  in  every- 
thing you  see.  {J.  P.  Waldo,  B.A.)  The  new  heaven  and  new  earth: — These 
words  refer  especially  to  the  future.  We  all  live  in  the  future  more  or  less ; 
it  is  so  full  of  possibilities  of  improvement  that  we  are  strongly  disposed  to  dwell 
upon  it.  God  has  not  allowed  the  future  state  to  be  wrapped  entirely  in 
mystery;  enough  has  been  revealed  to  inspire  us  to  inquire  into  its  glorious 
realities.  I.  That  there  is  a  great  change  to  take  place  in  the  heaven  and  the 
EARTH.  1.  The  new  heaven  implies  that  the  future  state  will  be  suited  to  the  soul 
in  the  fullest  possible  sense.  There  will  be  no  night  there — i.e.,  there  will  be  no 
ignorance  there.  The  •'  god  of  this  world  "  will  not  have  any  power  in  "  the  new 
heaven,"  nor  wiU  any  evS  men  or  false  teachers  be  found  there  to  blind  or  delude 
the  minds  of  the  inhabitants.  The  state  wiU  be  perfectly  adapted  to  the  redeemed 
soul.  There  will  be  no  doubt  there.  Certitude  will  be  the  mental  state  of  all  in^the 
future  life  ;  nor  wiU  there  be  any  fear  in  that  state.  The  deep  mysteries  of  the  future 
will  not  create  any  fear  in  the  minds  of  the  redeemed.  There  will  be  no  falsehood 
in  that  state  either ;  no  one  who  loveth  or  doeth  a  lie  shall  enter  into  it :  truth  will 
be  the  very  atmosphere  of  the  place.  There  will  be  no  such  thing  as  a  selfish 
emotion  experienced  by  any  soul  in  the  "  new  heaven."  Eighteous  principle  will 
be  the  governing  power  in  all.  Neither  will  there  be  any  hatred  in  the  *'  new  heaven. " 
All  will  be  sweet  and  harmonious  reasonableness.  2.  It  will  be  suited  to  the  body. 
It  will  be  a  state  of  established  health  and  vigour.  The  "  new  earth  "  will  abound 
in  all  the  elements  of  true  and  pure  strength.  So  perfect  will  the  body,  which  we 
shall  then  possess,  be  in  all  its  parts,  that  we  shall  never  be  conscious  of  any  evil 
passions  whatsoever.  There  will  be  no  want  in  the  "  new  earth."  The  "  new  earth  " 
will  be  richly  supplied  with  all  that  the  new  body  will  require ;  the  new  earth  and 
the  resurrection  body  will  be  most  thoroughly  fitted  the  one  for  the  other.  3.  The 
society  of  the  future  state  wUl  be  of  the  purest  and  the  best.  The  character  of  the 
inhabitants  wUl  be  such  that  defection  will  be  impossible.  There  will  be  great 
progression  to  fuller  knowledge,  larger  views,  and  more  comprehensive  understanding 
of  things  spiritual  and  eternal.  The  very  thought  of  it  is  an  inspiration  ;  what  must 
an  experience  of  it  be  ?  II.  That  the  future  state  will  be  one  of  vert  intimate 
spiritual  association  between  God  and  His  people.  "  The  tabernacle  of  G«d  will 
be  with  men."  III.  That  the  future  state  will  be  entirely  free  from  all 
TRIAL.  (D.  Rhys  Jenkins.)  The  unending  age  of  blessedness  : — I.  It  will  be  in 
A  sense  a  new  state.  1.  It  may  be  physically  new.  2.  It  may  be  dispensa- 
tionally  new.  Christ  will  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God  the  Father.  3.  It  may 
be  relatively  new.  New  in  the  estimation  and  feeling  of  the  occupants.  II.  It 
will  be  a  state  widely  differing  from  all  preceding  ones.  1.  The  difference 
will  arise  from  the  absence  of  some  things  which  were  identified  with  all  the 
preceding  states.  (1)  All  the  elements  of  mental  agitation — pride,  ambition, 
avarice,  revenge,  doubt,  fear,  envy,  guilt — will  be  excluded  from  heaven.   (2)  Death- 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

beds,  funeral  processions,  cemeteries,  are  not  known  there.  (3)  Suffering.  2.  This 
difference  will  arise  from  the  presence  of  some  things  which  have  not  been  in 
connection  with  any  preceding  states.  (1)  A  full  manifestation  of  God.  (2)  A 
perfect  fellowship  with  God,  (a)  Direct,  (h)  Permanent.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  : — 1.  Our  future  state  of  being  will  partake  very 
largely  of  a  material  character.  That  is,  we  shall  not  exist  in  an  invisible,  impal- 
pable condition,  floating  in  ether,  as  some  have  fancifully  supposed,  or  mysteriously 
suspended  upon  nothing.  The  soul  and  body  are  not  two  antagonistic  beings,  to  be 
severed  and  divorced  for  all  eternity.  They  are  separated  by  death  to  be  re-united 
at  the  resurrection.  2.  Our  occupation  in  a  future  state  will  be  greatly  influenced 
by  material  things.  It  would  be  unreasonable  to  attribute  to  the  future  life  an 
entire  absence  of  all  those  warm  and  sensible  accompaniments  which  give  expression 
and  force  to  our  present  being.  Christ  did  not  come  to  take  away  all  taste  for  the 
beautiful  in  nature,  but  to  refine  and  elevate  those  powers  by  which  we  apprehend 
and  appreciate  the  lovely  and  the  sublime.  Our  capacity  for  investigating  the 
works  of  God  will  not  merely  remain  undestroyed,  but  be  developed  so  as  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  the  new  state  of  being.  When  we  have  made  the  material  world 
minister  to  our  wants ;  when  we  have  gathered  to  our  tables  the  produce  of  all 
lands,  and  when  we  have  culled  from  the  beauties  of  nature  for  the  adornment  of 
our  homes — nay,  further,  when  we  have  made  the  steam-power  print  for  our  use 
the  ripest  thoughts  of  the  greatest  minds,  and  when  we  have  girdled  the  earth  with 
an  electric  band,  so  that  words  of  hearty  friendship  may  be  flashed  as  in  a  moment 
to  the  uttermost  ends  of  the  world — when  we  have  done  all  this  have  we  yet  put 
the  works  of  Omnipotence  to  their  highest  use  ?  Are  there  not  fields  yet  to  be 
entered,  regions  yet  to  be  explored,  treasures  yet  to  be  discovered,  harvests  yet  to  be 
reaped?  3.  We  anticipate  future  opportunities  to  unravel  the  perplexities  of  a 
Divine  providence.  4.  The  new  earth,  with  its  new  and  sinless  life,  will  afford 
opportunity  for  the  more  perfect  comprehension  of  the  mysteries  of  grace.  (F. 
Wagstaff.)  The  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  : — I.  The  sources  whence  the 
HAPPINESS  OF  heaven  IS  DERIVED.  1.  The  happincss  of  heaven  will  be  derived  from 
increased  and  perfected  knowledge.  On  earth  our  residence  is  so  short,  our  mental 
faculties  are  so  limited,  our  hearts  are  so  carnal,  and  our  opportunities  of  acquiring 
knowledge  are,  in  many  cases,  so  few,  that  the  wisest  and  the  hoUest  know  but 
httle  either  of  the  character  or  the  works  of  God.  What  sources  of  happiness 
will  be  afforded  by  the  moral  government  of  God,  when  we  are  permitted  to  read 
the,  sealed  book  of  providence,  and  by  the  work  of  redemption,  when,  in  the  very 
presence  of  the  Eedeemer,  we  gaze  upon  its  height  and  depth  and  length  and 
breadth.  2.  The  happiness  of  heaven  will  be  derived  from  holiness  of  character. 
Sin  and  misery  are  so  connected  that  no  mere  change  of  place  can  sever  them  ; 
and  the  mind  of  man  is  so  much  its  own  place  that,  if  unsanctified,  it  would  make 
a  hell  of  heaven.  3.  The  happiness  of  heaven  will  be  derived  from  the  society  of 
angels  and  the  redeemed.  4.  This  happiness  will  be  derived  from  the  presence  and 
friendship  of  Jesus  Christ.  5  This  happiness  will  be  derived  from  the  employ- 
ments of  the  inhabitants.  II.  The  peculiarities  by  which  the  happiness  of 
HEAVEN  will  BE  DISTINGUISHED.  1.  The  happiucss  of  heavcu  will  be  perfect  in  its 
nature.  That  is,  it  will  be  free  from  every  imperfection  and  alloy  that  mingles 
with  our  enjoyments  here.  2.  The  happiness  of  heaven  will  be  various  in  its 
degrees.  There  is  a  prophet's  reward,  and  a  righteous  man's  reward.  3.  The 
happiness  of  heaven  will  be  progressive  and  eternal.  (J.  Alexander.)  The  future 
abode  of  the  saints  : — None  can  deny  that  after  the  resurrection  and  the  final  judg- 
ment the  just  made  perfect  will  not  be,  as  angels,  simply  spiritual  essences,  but  be 
endowed,  as  when  on  earth,  with  material  bodies.  Now  material  beings  naturally 
presuppose  a  material  locality ;  material  sight  would  be  simply  useless  unless 
there  were  material  substances  to  see  ;  material  hearing,  unless  there  were  material 
sounds  to  hear.  This  obviates  one  great  objection  to  what  I  am  saying,  that  the 
whole  Apocalyptic  description  is  only  the  lowering  of  heavenly  ideas  to  earthly 
minds.  If  a  mere  spiritual  state  were  being  described,  doubtless  it  would  be  so ; 
but  when,  to  say  the  least,  much  that  is  material  must  be  mixed  up  with  it,  the 
argument  vanishes.  Consider,  again,  the  remarkable  teiTns  in  which  the  abode  of 
the  elect  is  mentioned,  after  the  final  doom :  "  A  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth." 
And  lest  any  one  should  think  this  is  a  mere  casual  expression  of  St.  John's 
(granting  that  such  things  might  be),  St.  Peter  also  and  Isaiah  speak  of  "new heavens 
and  a  new  earth."  If,  now,  there  were  no  analogy  between  the  old  and  the  new, 
between  the  first  and  the  second  earth,  to  what  purpose  this  particular  and  thrice- 


CHAP.  XXI.]  '    REVELATION.  615 

repeated  expression  ?  And  most  remarkably  it  is  said,  "  There  was  no  more  sea." 
There  is,  therefore,  so  strong  a  resemblance  between  the  two  earths,  that  the  absence 
of  the  sea  in  the  second  is  thought  a  point  worthy  of  notice.  Therefore,  all  the 
varieties  of  natural  beauty,  besides  this,  it  may  be  presumed,  still  will  exist.  If  of 
one  thing  in  a  series  it  is  recorded  that  it  is  abolished,  the  natural  presumption 
about  the  others  is  that  they  remain.  And  in  the  mystical  descriptions  of 
heaven  with  which  Scripture  abound,  we  find  frequent  references  to  the 
other  most  remarkable  components  of  earthly  scenery.  To  trees,  for  there 
is  the  tree  of  life ;  to  mountains,  for  there  is  the  utmost  bound  of  the 
everlasting  hills;  to  lakes,  for  there  the  glorious  Lord  will  be  a  place  of 
broad  streams;  to  rivers,  for  there  is  the  river  of  the  water  of  life.  Surely 
it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  these  things  are  purely  metaphorical ;  nor  can  it  be 
even  said  that  the  expressions  are  used  in  a  sacramental  sense.  {J.  M.  Neale,  D.D.) 
There  was  no  more  sea. — Heaven  without  a  sea : — 1.  There  shall  be  in  heaven  no 
more  trackless  wastes.  Over  three-fourths  of  this  whole  globe  is  composed  of 
a  wild,  cheerless,  trackless  waste  of  waters.  The  ship  passes  over  it  and  leaves  no 
trace  of  its  route.  The  sun  woos  it,  the  zephyrs  waft  it,  the  dews  and  rains 
descend  upon  it,  yet  it  produces  no  vegetation.  How  many  human  beings  seem  to 
spend  useless  hves,  leaving  the  world  no  better  nor  happier  than  when  they  came 
into  it !  There  is  no  corner  for  such  supernumeraries  in  the  New  Jerusalem.  Its 
inhabitants  shall  not  spend  eternity  in  doing  little  but  to  sing  songs  and  wave  palm 
branches ;  but  in  service,  glorious  service,  for  the  great  King.  Great-  energies  will 
not  be  expended,  as  too  often  in  this  life,  in  vain  efforts.  2.  There  shall  be  in 
heaven  no  more  devouring  waves.  3.  There  shall  be  in  heaven  no  buried  secrets. 
The  sea  is  full  of  concealment  and  mystery.  The  scientific  explorer  dredges  out 
wondrous  revelations  from  the  bosom  of  its  gloomy  depths.  In  heaven  all  earthly 
secrets  shall  be  revealed,  and  there  shall  be  no  more  sea.  4.  There  shall  be  in 
heaven  no  restless  existence.  The  changeful  tides,  the  constant  agitation  of  surface, 
the  winds  and  hurricanes,  the  ever-shifting  scenery  of  old  ocean  are  a  picture  of 
human  life,  with  its  rises  and  falls,  its  joys  and  sorrows,  its  births  and  deaths,  its 
successes  and  failures — fickle,  transitory,  uncertain,  unsatisfactory  human  life. 
What,  is  it  possible  that  all  this  agitation  of  time  shall  some  day  cease?  Its 
unquiet  of  body,  its  tumult  of  mind,  its  yearning  of  soul  all  come  to  an  end  ?  Yes, 
in  heaven,  where  "  there  is  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God,"  a  blessed  calm,  an  eternal 
peace  of  soul  in  the  presence  of  God.  (M.  D.  Kneeland,  D.D.)  No  more  sea : — 
We  know  not  whether  there  will  be  a  literal  physical  sea  or  not  in  the  future 
world.  To  the  Apostle  John,  who  doubtless,  in  common  with  aU  his  countrymen, 
looked  upon  the  sea  with  dread,  the  absence  of  it  in  the  heavenly  vision  may  have 
been  welcomed  as  a  relief.  All  the  allusions  to  the  sea  in  the  Bible  refer  solely  to 
its  power  or  danger — never  to  its  aesthetic  aspects ;  and  many,  especially  those  to 
whom  the  sea  has  proved  cruel,  may  sympathise  with  this  prejudice,  and  rejoice  to 
accept  the  announcement  in  all  its  literality,  that  in  heaven  there  shall  be  no  more 
sea.  To  others,  again,  whose  earliest  and  sweetest  associations  are  connected  with 
its  shelly  shores  and  its  gleaming  waters,  a  world  without  a  sea  would  seem  a 
world  without  life  or  animation,  without  beauty  or  attraction — a  blank,  silent 
realm  of  desolation  and  death.  I.  The  existence  of  the  sea  implies  separa- 
tion. The  sea,  along  with  its  accompanying  lakes  and  rivers,  is  in  this  world  the 
great  divider.  In  the  peculiar  arrangements  of  land  and  water  on  the  surface  of 
the  earth  we  have  a  clear  and  unmistakable  evidence  of  God's  intention  from  the 
very  beginning  of  separating  mankind  into  distinct  nationalities.  For  this  separa- 
tion a  twofold  necessity  suggests  itself.  It  exercised  a  restraining  and  a  constraining 
influence.  Had  mankind  been  permitted  to  remain  for  an  indefinite  period  in  one 
narrow  region  of  the  earth,  brought  into  close  and  constant  communication  with 
each  other,  and  speaking  the  same  language,  the  consequences  would  have  been 
most  disastrous.  They  would  have  inevitably  corrupted  one  another.  Family  and 
individual  interests  would  have  come  into  frequent  and  violent  coUision.  Their 
proximity  would  have  been  the  occasion  of  endless  wars  and  deeds  of  violence  and 
bloodshed.  God,  therefore,  mercifully  interfered ;  He  separated  mankind  into 
distinct  nations,  placed  them  in  different  scenes  and  circumstances,  and  effectually 
kept  them  apart  by  means  of  seas  and  trackless  oceans  ;  and  thus  the  maddening 
passions  of  man  were  rendered  comparatively  innocuous,  or  circumscribed  within 
the  narrowest  possible  limits.  Another  reason  for  this  separation  of  the  human 
race  by  means  of  the  sea  was  that  national  character  might  thus  be  formed  and 
educated — that  the  one  type  of  human  nature  might  develop  itself  into  every  pos- 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

sible  modification  by  the  force  of  different  circumstances  and  experiences.    If  there 
were  no  individuality  among  nations  mankind  could  make  no  progress ;  all  human 
societies  would  lose  the  mental  activity,  the  noble  competition,  the  generous  emula- 
tion which  distinguish  them ;  there  would  be  no  mutual  instruction,  nothing  to 
keep  in  check  local  evils,  and  by  the  better  agencies  of  one  region  stimulate  into 
action  similar  agencies  in  another.     And  it  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  this 
barrier  continued  insurmountable  while  the  infant  races  were  receiving  the  educa- 
tion and  undergoing  the  discipline  that  were  to  qualify  them  for  enlarged  inter- 
course with  each  other.    "When,  however,  the  day  appointed  by  God  to  enlighten 
and  emancipate  the  world  approached,  the  sea  became  all  at  once,  through  the 
improvement  of  navigation  and  ship-building,  the  great  highway  of  nations,  the 
great  channel  of  communication  between  the  different  and  distant  parts  of  the 
world.     Christianity  is  rapidly  melting  the  separate  nationalities  into  one ;  but  the 
fusion  of  these  discordant  elements  into  one  glorious  harmony,  pure  as  sunlight, 
inspiring  as  a  strain  of  perfect  music,  will  never  be  accomplished  in  this  world. 
"  And  there  was  no  more  sea."     Methinks  these  words  must  have  had  a  deep  and 
peculiar  significance  to  the  mind  of  the  old  fisherman  when  we  think  of  the  cir- 
cumstances in  which  he  was  placed  when  he  wrote  them.    A  touching  tradition 
pictures  the  aged  apostle  going  day  after  day  to  an  elevated  spot  on  the  ocean-rock, 
to  which,  Prometheus-like,  he  was  chained,  and  casting  a  longing  look  over  the 
wide  waste  of  waters,  as  if  by  thus  gazing  he  could  bring  nearer  to  his  heart,  if  not 
to  his  sight,  the  beloved  land  and  the  cherished  friends  for  whom  he  pined.     The 
cause  of  his  beloved  Master  needed  the  aid  of  every  faithful  arm  and  heart,  but  he 
could  do  nothing.     Oh  !  a  feeling  of  despondency  must  have  often  seized  him  when 
he  thought  of  aU  from  which  the  cruel  sea  divided  him.    And  when  the  panorama 
of  celestial  scenery  was  spread  out  before  his  prophetic  eye,  to  compensate  him  for 
the  trials  of  banishment,  with  what  joy,  methinks,  must  he  have  seen  that  from 
horizon  to  horizon  there  was  no  sea  there — nothing  to  separate — nothing  to  prevent 
the  union  and  communion  of  those  whom  the  grace  of  Christ  had  made  free,  and 
His  power  had  transferred  to  that  "  large  place  "  I     "  And  there  was  no  more  sea." 
Do  not  these  words  come  home  to  our  own  hearts  with  peculiar  tenderness  of 
meaning  ?    For  what  home  is  there  whose  circle  of  happy  faces  is  complete,  from 
which  no  wanderer  has  gone  forth  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?    Heaven  is  the  land 
of  eternal  reunion.     The  friends  who  bade  reluctant  farewell  to  each  other  on  earth, 
and  dwelt  apart  with  wide  seas  rolling  between,  shall  meet  on  the  eternal  shore  to 
separate  no  more  for  ever.    II.  "  And  there  was  no  more  sea."     These  words  imply 
that  in  heaven  there  shall  be  no  more  change.     The  sea  is  the  great  emblem  of 
change.     There  is  nothing  in  the  world  more  uncertain  and  unstable.     Now  it  lies 
calm  and  motionless  as  an  inland  lake — without  a  ripple  on  its  bosom ;  and  now  it 
tosses  its  wild  billows  mountains  high,  and  riots  in  the  fury  of  the  storm.    And 
not  only  is  it  the  emblem  of  change :  it  is  itself  the  cause,  durectly  or  indirectly,  of 
nearly  aU  the  physical  changes  that  take  place  in  the  world.    We  cannot  name  a 
single  spot  where  the  sea  has  not  some  time  or  other  been.    Every  rock  that  now 
constitutes  the  firm  foundation  of  the  earth  was  once  dissolved  in  its  waters,  lay  as 
mud  at  its  bottom,  or  as  sand  and  gravel  along  its  shore.     The  materials  of  our 
houses  were  once  deposited  in  its  depths,  and  are  built  on  the  floor  of  an  ancient 
ocean.    What  are  now  dry  continents  were  once  ocean-beds ;  and  what  are  now 
sea-beds  will  be  future  continents.    Everywhere  the  sea  is  still  at  work — encroach- 
ing upon  the  shore — undermining  the  boldest  cliffs  by  its  own  direct  agency.    And 
where  it  cannot  reach  itself,  it  sends  its  emissaries  to  the  heart  of  deserts,  and  the 
summits  of  mountain  ranges,  and  the  innermost  recesses  of  continents — there  to 
produce  constant  dilapidation  and  change.    Viewed  in  this  light  there  is  a  striking 
appropriateness  in  there  being  no  more  sea  in  the  eternal  world.    Heaven  is  the 
land  of  stability  and  permanence.    There  will  be  progress,  but  not  change  ;  growth, 
but  not  decay.    There  will  be  no  ebb  and  flow — no  waxing  and  waning— no  rising 
and  setting — no  increasing  and  diminishing  in  the  life  of  heaven.     There  will  be 
perfect  fulness  of  rest  in  the  changeless  land  where  there  is  no  more  sea.    III.  The 
existence  of  the  sea  implies  the  existence  of  storms.    And  is  not  this  life,  even  to 
the  most  favoured  individuals,  a  dark  and  rainy  sea,  with  only  here  and  there 
a  few  sunlit  isles  of  beauty  and  peace,  separated  by  long  and  troubled  voyages  ? 
There  are  many  outward  storms  that  beat  upon  us  in  this  world — storms  of  adversity 
arising  from  personal,  domestic,  or  business  causes ;  as  soon  as  one  blows  past, 
another  is  ready  to  assail  us.    And  there  are  inward  storms — storms  of  religious 
doubt,  of  conscience,  of  temptation,  and,  worse  than  any  of  these,  the  raging  of  our 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  617 

own  corrupt  affections  and  unsubdued  desires.    Between  these  two  seas  many  of  us 
are  scarcely  ever  allowed  to  know  what  a  calm  means.     But  amid  all  these  storms 
we  are  strengthened  and  consoled  by  the  assurance  that  they  are  necessary,  and  are 
appointed  to  work  together  for  good.     Yet  still  we  long  for  their  cessation,  and  look 
forward  with  joyful  hope  to  the  region  of  everlasting  peace.     In  heaven  there  will 
be  no  stormy  winds  or  raging  waters.     Through  the  shoals  and  the  breakers,  and 
the  sunken  rocks  of  those  perilous  worldly  seas,  the  Christian  voyagers,  some  on 
boards  and  some  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship,  will  escape  all  safe  to  land — and 
there  shall  be  no  more  sea.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)        No  more  sea  : — I.  No  morb 
PAiNFuii  MYSTERY.    We  look  out  upou  the  broad  ocean,  and  far  away  it  seems  to 
blend  with  air  and  sky.     Mists  come  up  over  its  surface.     Suddenly  there  rises  on 
the  verge  of  the  horizon  a  white  sail  that  was  not  there  a  moment  ago ;  and  we 
wonder,  as  we  look  ont  from  our  hills,  what  may  be  beyond  these  mysterious  waters. 
And  to  these  ancient  peoples  there  were  mysteries  which  we  do  not  feel.     Whither 
should  they  come,  if  they  were  to  venture  on  its  untried  tides  ?    And  then,  what 
lies  in  its  sunless  caves  that  no  eye  has  seen  ?    It  swallows  up  life  and  beauty  and 
treasure  of  every  sort,  and  engulphs  them  all  in  its  obstinate  silence.   What  should 
we  see  if  depth  and  distance  were  annihilated,  and  we  beheld  what  there  is  out 
yonder,  and  what  there  is  down  there  ?    And  is  not  our  life  ringed  round  in  like 
manner  with  mystery  ?     Oh  !  to  some  hearts  surely  this  ought  to  come  as  not  the 
least  noble  and  precious  of  the  thoughts  of  what  that  future  life  is—"  there  shall 
be  no  more  sea  "  ;  and  the  mysteries  that  come  from  God's  merciful  limitation  of 
our  vision,  and  some  of  the  mysteries  that  come  from  God's  wise  and  providential 
interposition  of  obstacles  to  our  sight  shall  have  passed  away.     II.  No   more 
REBELLIOUS  POWER.     God  lets  people  work  against  His  kingdom  in  this  world.    It 
is  not  to  be  always  so.     The  kingdom  of  God  is  in  the  earth,  and  the  kingdom  of 
God  admits  of  opposition.     Strange !     But  the  opposition,  even  here  on  earth,  all 
comes  to  nothing.     Men  may  work  against  God's  kingdom,  the  waves  may  rave 
and  rage;  but  beneath  them  there  is  a  mighty  tidal  sweep,  and  God's  purposes  are 
wrought  out,  and  God's  ark  comes  to  "  its  desired  haven,"  and  all  opposition  is 
nugatory  at  the  last.    But  there  comes  a  time,  too,  when  there  shall  be  no  more 
violence  of  rebellious  wills  lifting  themselves  against  God.     The  opposition  that 
lies  in  all  our  hearts  shall  one  day  be  subdued.     The  whole  consent  of  our  whole 
being  shall  yield  itself  to  the  obedience  of  sons,  to  the  service  of  love.     III.  No 
MORE  DISQUIET  AND  UNREST.     Surcly  some  of  US  are  longing  to  find  anchorage  whilst 
the  storm  lasts,  and  a  haven  at  the  end.     There  is  one,  if  only  you  will  believe  it, 
and  set  yourselves  towards  it.     There  is  an  end  to  all  "  the  weary  oar,  the  weary 
wandering  fields  of  barren  foam."     On  the  shore  stands  the  Christ ;  and  there  is 
rest  there.   {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        No  more  sea  : — This  fact  can  be  read  physically. 
It  would  be  the  easiest  reading,  but  perhaps  not  the  only  one,  nor  the  most  satisfying 
and  helpful  one.     Rendered  physically,  it  would  neither  satisfy  curiosity  nor  offer 
stimulus.    It  would  add  nothing  practically  to  our  knowledge  of  the  future,  because 
we  know  nothing  of  the  other  physical  conditions  with  which  this  fact  of  sealess- 
ness  would  stand  in  relation  ;  and  no  fact  means  anything  when  standing  alone. 
Every  man  in  conceiving  the  things  which  are  eternal  has  to  think  in  terms  of 
time ;  and  in  conceiving  the  things  which  are  celestial  has  to  think  in  terms  of 
earth.     In  our  most  spiritual  moods  we  cannot  get  away  from  our  common  sur- 
roundings or  from  our  every-day  vocabulary.   We  have  only  one  language  in  which 
to  phrase  present  experience  and  heavenly  anticipatings.   The  finest  pictures  which 
our  thought  paints  of  the  things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal  are  done  in  tints 
gathered  from  off  a  pallet  of  earthly  colour.     If  we  are  weary,  then  heaven  means 
rest ;  if  we  are  sin-sick,  then  heaven  means  holiness  ;  if  we  are  lonely,  then  heaven 
means  reunion  with  the  loved  ones  that  have  gone  on  before.     It  any  kind  of 
barrier  invests  us,  we  think  that  in  heaven  that  barrier  will  be  erased.     In  the 
sailor-boy's  dream  of  home,  no  buffeting  waves  or  tempestuous  sea  divide  longer 
between  him  and  the  old  hearthstone.    For  the  time  being  there  is  with  him  no 
more  sea.     Now  there  are  many  phases  of  life,  many  limitations  by  which  we  are 
hedged  in,  upon  which  this  sentiment  of  our  text  falls  with  a  singular  power  of 
stimulus  and  of  comfort,  and  the  more  completely  these  waters  of  separation  sunder 
us,  and  exile  us  from  our  soul's  object,  the  more  richly  freighted  with  fruition  does 
the  new  and  the  sealess  city  become  to  us.   There  are  in  the  first  place  our  physical 
limitations,  by  which  we  are  so  many  of  us  so  closely  and  painfuUy  walled.     Much 
of  our  severity  and  acidity  is  only  indigestion  become  a  mental  fact,  and  a  good 
deal  of  our  solicitude  and  distrust  are  no  more  than  an  enfeebled  condition  of  the 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

Llood  telling  upon  the  spirit.  The  body  made  to  be  the  helpmeet  of  the  soul  is 
become  its  adversary.  Much  of  sin  is  the  offspring  of  the  body.  Redemption  and 
immortality  are  as  much  of  the  body  as  of  the  mind.  Then  there  are  our  mental 
limitations.  Men  want  to  know,  but  they  do  not  know  how  to  know.  Our 
philosophy  is  tentative.  Thinking  is  trying  experiments  mostly.  We  think 
different  things  at  different  times,  and  no  two  men  think  the  same  thing,  as  no  two 
eyes  see  the  same  rainbow.  And  then  most  of  that  which  we  do  know  is  of  things 
that  are  going  to  last  but  a  little  ;  as  it  were,  a  gathering  of  wilting  flowers.  All 
knowledge  is  transient,  that  is,  of  things  that  are  transient,  as  the  splendour  fades 
from  off  the  hills  as  the  sun  passes  under  the  west.  There  are  also  our  moral 
limitations.  Holiness  is  yonder,  and  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed.  We  can  abstain 
from  acts  of  sin,  but  do  not  succeed  in  becoming  clean  through  and  through. 
Our  wishes  outrun  our  attainments.  Our  bodies  hold  us  back  ;  our  past  holds  us 
back ;  our  surroundings  detain  us.  We  want  it  should  become  our  nature  to  do  right. 
Holiness  lies  in  the  future,  but  it  is  a  sure  fact  of  the  future,  and  our  wall  of  moral 
separation  shall  be  broken  down,  our  exile  repealed,  the  island  made  continuous 
with  the  continent,  and  no  more  sea  in  the  New  City  of  God.  ( C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D .) 
No  more  tea : — I.  There  will  be  no  more  mystery.  1.  Our  life  is  a  mystery — 
birth,  health,  sickness,  death.  2.  Revelation  is  a  mystery — prophecy,  miracles. 
Calvary.  3.  Providence  is  a  mystery — prosperity  of  ungodly,  adversity  of  the 
godly,  death  of  children,  war.  II.  There  will  be  no  more  trouble.  The  sea 
a  picture  of  our  life — restless,  stormy.  1.  Business  troubles,  2.  Domestic 
troubles — an  erring  son,  bereavement.  3.  Personal  troubles — disease  of  body, 
perplexity  of  mind  about  religion,  spiritual  needs.  III.  There  will  be  no  more 
IMPURITY.  IV.  There  will  be  no  more  danger.  1.  Danger  from  pernicious 
books.  2.  Danger  from  evil  companions.  3.  Danger  from  Satanic  influences. 
V.  There  will  be  no  more  hidden  lite.  VI.  There  will  be  no  more 
sepabation.  {A.  Gray  Maitland.)  The  world  without  a  sea: — I.  There  is  no 
division  there.  How  much  there  is  in  this  world  that  divides  men  !  There  are — 
1.  Social  caste.  2.  National  prejudices.  3.  Religious  sectarianism.  4.  Selfish 
interests.  6.  Mutual  misunderstandings.  None  of  these  will  exist  in  heaven. 
n.  There  is  no  mutation  there.  The  only  change  is  that  of  progress.  1, 
Progress  in  higher  intelligence.  2.  In  loftier  services.  3.  In  nobler  fellowship. 
No  change  in  the  way  of  loss.  The  crown,  the  kingdom,  the  inheritance — aXL 
imperishable,  in.  There  is  no  agitation  there.  Human  life  here  has  many 
storms.  In  how  many  hearts  does  deep  call  upon  deep,  and  billows  of  sorrow  roll 
over  the  soul  I  In  heaven  there  are  no  spiritual  storms.  {Homilist.)  The  tea- 
less  world : — St.  John  saw  that  the  sea,  whilst  a  great  and  essential  good  on  earth, 
might  in  some  aspects  be  regarded  as  an  emblem  of  what  was  evil,  and  therefore 
undesirable.  I.  The  sea  is  emblematic  of  separation.  Think  of  receiving  a 
cablegram  to-day  teUing  that,  say  in  Australia,  a  loved  mother  or  child  was  lying 
dying  and  calling  for  you.  How  keenly  you  would  feel  the  barrier  set  by  the  sea  ! 
n.  The  sea  is  emblematic  op  peril.  Some  of  the  saddest  wrecks  on  record  have 
taken  place  on  our  coasts.  The  sea,  therefore,  is  a  fit  type  of  peril.  Now  "  the  sea 
is  no  more  "  in  heaven,  and  so  there  is  no  occasion  of  hurt,  no  cause  of  danger,  no 
need  for  anxiety.  We  move  amid  perils  now.  HI.  The  sea  is  emblematic  op 
COMMOTION.  The  sea  is  never  stiU.  Even  at  its  calmest  there  are  ebbings  and 
flowings,  and  sometimes  in  storm  the  disturbance  is  very  great.  We  have  our 
calms,  but  also  our  storms.  A  life  of  uninterrupted  prosperity  would  be  good  for 
none  of  us.  But  the  heavenly  experience  is  better  than  earth's  best.  When  we 
reach  the  land  of  light  the  need  of  testing  shall  be  past,  and  the  reason  for 
discipline  shall  have  vanished  away.  And  soothe  sea  shall  be  no  more."  (G. 
Gladstone.)  Why  there  will  be  no  more  sea : — St.  John  writes  of  the  blessed  life 
of  the  new  creation,  where  holy  souls  are  at  rest,  that  there  is  "  no  more  sea." 
What  was  the  sea,  then,  to  him — what  is  it  everywhere — that  he  should  choose  it  to 
symbolise  something  that  is  unheavenly — something  that  is  to  be  done  away  with 
when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come  ?  I.  The  sea  is  that  which  sunders  man  from 
man.  It  divides  nation  from  nation,  as  well  as  land  from  land.  Whatever  the 
original  unity  of  the  race,  it  breaks  that  unity  apart.  That  is  the  very  epithet  that 
a  Latin  poet  (Horace),  who  lived  just  before  St.  John's  time,  applied  to  it — the 
"  dissociable  "  ocean.  So  long  as  the  seas  intervene,  this  is  a  divided  world.  The 
family  of  souls  cannot  be  literally  one  ;  the  universal  neighbourhood  and  brother- 
^hood  at  which  the  gospel  aims  cannot  be  actually  represented  till  the  first  earth  is 
passed  away  and  there  is  no  more  sea.     But  if  there  is  one  thought  that  lies 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  619 

nearer  the  heart  of  the  gospel  than  any  other,  it  is  that  of  the  perfect  oneness,  or 
flowing  together,  and  living  together,  of  the  nations  and  souls  of  men.  The 
blessed  bond  of  that  harmony  began,  in  fact,  to  be  woven  when  Christ  was  born, 
and  the  angels  predicted  peace  at  His  coming,  at  Bethlehem.  We  know  well 
enough  how  slowly  the  consummation  has  advanced  against  wars,  crusades,  caste, 
slavery,  the  complicated  injustices  and  wrongs  of  a  selfish  society  1  Hereafter  it 
will  not  be  so.  Hatreds,  suspicions,  oppressions,  cruelties,  quarrels,  are  all  to  be 
swept  away.  The  spirit  of  Christ's  mediation  shall  be  the  reigning  force.  So 
much  for  the  society  at  large.  Think,  too,  of  the  heavenly  comfort  it  must  bring  to 
private  hearts  to  have  all  the  sorrows  of  personal  separations  ended.  There  will  be 
no  empty  rooms  that  feel  empty,  or  deserted  hearts.  Communion,  fellowship,  love, 
the  presence  of  the  loved,  will  be  perpetual.  H.  There  is  a  second  character  of  the 
sea  which  probably  likewise  suggested  it  to  St.  John,  for  Christian  comfort,  as  an 
image  of  what  is  of  the  earth  earthy,  and  must  therefore  pass  away  before  the 
coming  in  of  an  everlasting  satisfaction.  The  ocean  is  all  a  field  of  nothing  but 
barrenness.  Nobody  makes  a  home  on  that  restless,  fluctuating  floor.  The  sailor 
is  a  ceaseless  fugitive.  Nothing  settles  or  abides  on  that  restless  breast.  All  the 
life  it  ever  sees  or  supports  is  a  transitional,  passing  life,  moving  from  one  tarrying- 
place  or  coast  to  another.  What  an  image  it  is  of  the  fickle  and  transient  elements  of 
this  world  that  now  is,  compared  with  the  fixedness  and  stability  and  blooming  life 
of  that  which  Christ  has  opened  I  More  than  this  :  there  is  a  key  to  this  second 
part  of  the  meaning  of  the  text  in  the  closing  passage  of  the  chapter  that  goes 
just  before.  "  The  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it."  The  sea  is  a  great 
graveyard.  It  is  the  home  of  the  drowned  and  buried  that  it  has  swallowed  up  by 
thousands.  And  it  never  allows  affection  to  set  up  a  sign  where  the  dead  go  down. 
There  is  no  harvest  from  it,  except  the  harvest  of  the  resurrection.  But  then, 
following  this  scene  of  the  judgment  is  the  new  creation,  and  when  the  Evangehst 
comes  just  after  to  speak  of  that,  his  mind  goes  back  to  the  sepulchral  sea.  And 
lo !  it  is  gone  for  ever.  In  other  words,  dropping  the  figure,  that  new  world — the 
Christian  home — is  all  a  dwelling-place  of  life — life  everywhere ;  life  without  sleep ; 
life  for  ever.  Desolations  and  destructions  are  come  to  a  perpetual  end.  Every- 
thing there  must  be  as  useful  as  it  is  beautiful,  pnd  as  fruitful  as  it  is  fair. 
You  may  say  there  is  a  wild  and  wondrous  beauty  about  the  ocean ;  and  no  doubt 
in  this  material  world  it  has  its  uses ;  but  neither  the  gospel  in  this  world  nor  the 
evangelic  descriptions  of  the  next  recognise  any  beauty  that  is  not  the  source  of 
peace,  or  life,  or  benefaction.  Heathen  beauty,  Greek  beauty,  cold,  restless,  faithless 
inteUectual  beauty,  must  be  baptized  into  the  warm  "  spirit  of  life  "  in  Christ 
Jesus,  or  there  is  no  room  for  it  in  the  heaven  Christ  opens.  {Bp.  F.  D. 
Huntington.)  The  sea: — I.  Some  of  the  many  present  uses  of  "the  sea." 
Among  other  special  particulars,  and  most  material,  one  of  the  most  prominent  that 
strikes  us  is,  it  causes  under  Providence — 1.  The  fertility  of  the  earth.  2.  The 
temperature  of  climates.  How  serviceable  are  its  gales,  and  how  refreshing  are  its 
breezes,  especially  after  the  burthen  and  heat  of  the  summer's  day !  3.  Employ- 
ment and  sustenance  to  man.  The  first  followers  and  chosen  disciples  of  our  Lord 
were  chiefly  "fishermen."  4.  Intercourse  with  foreign  and  distant  lands.  Again, 
the  sea — 5.  Affords  security  and  defence  for  weaker  states,  and  enables  them  to 
withstand  the  encroachments  of  their  more  powerful  neighbours.  6.  It  signally 
subserves  the  purposes  of  its  Creator.  "  Fire  and  vapour,  storm  and  tempest,  all 
fulfil  the  Almighty's  word."  Once  the  sea  arose,  "  the  deeps  were  broken  up,  and 
the  foundations  of  the  earth  were  discovered,"  in  order  to  destroy  the  world.  II. 
Some  EMBLEMS  taken  from  "  the  sea."  In  other  words,  the  instructive  lessons  it 
particularly  gives.  1.  It  reveals  somewhat  of  the  Divine  perfections.  Doth  it  not 
remind  us  continually  of  His  power.  His  mercy,  and  His  judgments?  How  widely 
spread,  how  fathomless !  2.  The  sea  represents  the  varied  characters  of  men. 
3.  The  vicissitudes  of  human  life.  4.  The  state  and  circumstances  of  the  world. 
III.  Some  EVENTS  either  literally  or  figuratively  represented  as  fulfilled — "  there 
shall  be  no  more  sea."  1.  No  more  dangers!  no  more  hazards,  likened  to 
"perils  on  the  sea."  2.  No  more  trials,  deceptions,  errors,  mistakes,  and  persecu- 
tions from  the  world  !  3.  No  more  concealment  of,  or  the  keeping  from  us  what  is 
agreeable,  and  of  which  we  would  desire  the  possession.  4.  No  more  straitened 
limits  and  bounded  habitations.  5.  No  more  estrangement  from  our  brethren.  6. 
No  more  separation  from  our  friends.  7.  No  longer  any  distance  (any  of  our 
present  intervening  barriers)  between  the  Christian  and  his  God.  {W.  Williams,  M.A.) 
No  more  sea : — 1.  The  sea,  to  ^t.  John  and  the  men  of  his  day,  was  a  great  barrier 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

of  separation.  We  must  remember  that  the  art  of  navigation  was  not  then  what 
it  is  to-day.  Think  of  the  ships  of  the  ancients  as  compared  with  ours ;  think  of 
them  probably  without  either  chart  or  mariner's  compass.  All  this  is  changed  now. 
The  sea,  instead  of  being  a  barrier,  has  become  the  great  highway  of  the  nations. 
But  we  have  to  remember  what  the  sea  was  to  St.  John.  It  was  a  type,  an  emblem 
of  things  that  divided  men.  There  was  the  sea  of  racial  hatred,  of  selfish  interests, 
of  false  religions,  of  cruel  prejudice,  of  bitter  animosities.  To  the  Jew  every 
Gentile  was  a  natural  enemy,  an  outcast,  a  dog  of  the  uncircumcision.  To  the 
Greek  the  people  of  other  nations  were  barbarians.  To  the  Romans  all  but  their 
own  countrymen  were  hostes,  towards  whom  enmity  was  the  approved  relation. 
And  how  much  of  this  continues  to  this  day !  We  see  it  in  the  grasping  policy  of 
chartered  companies  and  of  statesmen,  in  the  competitions  of  modern  commerce, 
in  the  deadly  warfare  between  capital  and  labour,  in  the  bitterness  of  sectarian 
life,  in  the  jealousies  and  rivalries  of  social  life  and  the  domestic  circle.  2.  The  sea, 
to  St.  John,  was  doubtless  a  source  of  fear  and  terror.  The  Jews  seem  to  have  had 
no  love  for  the  mighty  deep.  They  invariably  looked  upon  it  with  dread  and  awe. 
St.  John  appears  to  have  shared  the  sentiment  of  his  countrymen.  From  his 
desolate  island  he  had  gazed  upon  the  sea  in  its  many  and  ever-changing  moods. 
His  mind  associated  the  most  terrible  objects  with  it.  It  was  out  of  the  sea  that  he 
saw  arise  the  wild  beast  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  upon  his  heads  the 
name  of  Blasphemy.  It  was  on  the  many  waters  of  the  deep  that  he  saw  seated 
that  purple-clad  woman  who  had  upon  her  forehead  written,  "  Mystery,  Babylon 
the  great,  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth."  To  him  the  sea 
was  a  type  of  the  confederate  forces  of  evil  that  were  sweeping  over  the  world, 
spreading  ruin  and  desolation ;  of  the  fearful  storms  that  were  breaking  in 
upon  the  infant  Church.  But  it  was  only  to  last  for  a  season.  Gradually  the  wild 
instincts  of  the  human  heart  would  be  subdued.  The  fierce  billows  of  opposition 
and  wickedness  and  unbelief  would  be  hushed  and  stilled.  They  had  their  limits 
fixed ;  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further ;  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves 
be  stayed."  There  should  be  "  no  more  sea."  3.  The  sea  was  a  type  of  the  world's 
unrest.  That  .^gean  Sea,  laving  the  rocky  island  of  Patmos,  like  the  great  ocean 
everywhere,  was  never  still.  Whenever  he  looked  out  upon  it,  its  waters  were 
heaving  and  tossing  to  and  fro.  A  pict\ire  of  the  disquietude  of  the  human  spirit 
apart  from  God.  He  had  felt  it  himself  before  he  became  a  disciple  of  Jesus 
Christ :  he  had  seen  it  in  the  life  of  his  countrymen,  in  the  life  of  the  philosophers 
he  had  met  at  Ephesus,  in  the  life  of  that  Boman  world  with  which,  in  various 
ways,  he  had  been  brought  into  contact.  Unrest  was  the  sign  everywhere.  The 
world  was  full  of  a  restless  life,  of  longings  and  questionings  and  yearnings  it 
could  not  still.  And  the  sea  described  that  restlessness  better  than  anything  else. 
And  John  turned  with  relief  from  the  troubled  scene  which  everywhere  presented 
itself  to  the  rest-giving  work  of  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The 
sea  was  a  symbol  of  mystery.  It  was  specially  so  to  the  ancients  with  their  limited 
knowledge  of  its  vast  confines  and  of  the  wonders  and  glories  of  its  fathomless 
depths.  Think  of  the  mountains  that  lie  beneath  the  surface  of  the  deep ;  of  the 
life  with  which  it  teems ;  of  the  towns  and  villages  it  has  engulfed ;  of  its 
myriads  of  nameless  graves;  of  the  secrets  it  keeps;  of  tales  it  has  to  unfold. 
Oh,  sea !  thy  name  is  mystery.  And  the  mystery  of  which  the  sea  speaks  meets  us 
everywhere.  Find  a  man  who  is  not  awed  with  a  perception  of  life's  mysterious- 
ness,  and  you  have  found  a  man  who  has  never  seriously  begun  to  think.  No 
sooner  do  I  ask,  "  What  am  I  ?  Whence  came  I  ?  Why  am  I  here  ?  Whither  am 
I  going  ?  "  than  I  am  conscious  that  I  am  in  the  presence  of  profound  and  in- 
scrutable mysteries.  Why  should  there  be  disease  and  pain  ?  Why  do  the  innocent 
suffer  with  the  guilty  ?  What  was  the  origin  of  evil,  and  why  was  it  permitted  to 
enter  the  world  ?  Why  does  a  good  and  wise  Providence  allow  storm  and  tempest 
to  overtake  men  ?  And  here  is  our  comfort,  that  John  foresaw  a  time  when  the 
mysteries  of  life  shall  be  swallowed  up  in  knowledge.  No  longer  will  the  great  sea 
of  doubt  or  mystery  roll  over  us ;  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known,  the  day  shall 
break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  and  the  dark,  impenetrable  waters  shall  be  no 
more.     (J.  H.  Burkitt.) 

Ver.  2.  The  holy  city.  New  Jerusalem. — The  descent  of  the  New  Jenualem ; — When 
tired  of  the  turmoils  of  the  present,  how  delightful  it  is  to  look  up  and  hear,  from 
the  blessed  source  of  all  transgression,  "  Behold,  I  make  aU  things  new  !  "  (chap, 
xxi.  5).    All  things — science,  literature,  arts,  philosophies,  commerce,  trade,  inter- 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  .     621 

course  between  countries  and  provinces,  and  above  all,  in  religion — all  things  will 
be  made  new.  This  new  golden  age  belongs  to  a  more  interior  Christianity  than 
earth  has  yet  received :  an  inner  city  for  the  soul,  which  was  imaged  by  that  which 
John  saw,  a  golden  city  and  a  crystal  one,  descending  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven, 
a  New  Church,  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  Some  are  startled  when  they  hear  of  a 
new  Church  ;  yet  nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that  such  a  Church  was  in  due  time 
to  be  given  to  men.  Jerusalem  in  the  Scriptures  signifies  the  Church  :  a  New 
Jerusalem  must  therefore  mean  a  New  Church.  The  magnificent  city  beheld  in 
spirit  by  John  was  a  grand  symbol  of  the  future  new  and  glorious  Church  which 
would  bless  the  earth.  It  is  to  descend  from  God,  the  Father  of  His  people  and  the 
Author  of  all  good  out  of  heaven.  It  does  not  originate  with  man.  When  the 
Lord  came  into  the  world  and  planted  the  kingdom  of  God  within  men,  as  He  said 
(Luke  xvii.  20,  21),  it  is  foretold  by  the  prophet  in  similar  terms  to  those  used  by 
John,  "  For,  behold,  I  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,"  &c.  (Isa.  Ixv.  17,  18). 
To  alter  the  state  of  society  altogether,  both  as  to  its  principles  and  practices,  is  to 
change  heaven  and  earth.  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,"  said  Paul,  "  he  is  a  new 
creature  ;  old  things  have  passed  away  ;  behold  all  things  have  become  new  "  (2  Cor. 
V.  17).  And,  indeed,  when  this  happy  change  takes  place  with  anyone  individually, 
he  feels  all  things  to  have  a  new  face  and  a  new  reality  for  him.  His  view  of  the 
Lord  is  altogether  bright  and  new,  where  it  had  before  been  dark  and  threatening. 
His  thoughts,  his  hopes,  his  prospects,  are  altogether  confident  and  cheerful,  and 
his  outward  life  is  new  and  virtuous.  And  may  we  not  look  around  now,  and  ask, 
Is  it  not  so  ?  Has  not  society,  even  now,  immensely  changed  ?  Where  are  the  old 
bigoted  principles  which  taught  men  to  go  out  and  persecute,  and  even  destroy 
others,  in  the  name  of  God  ?  Where  all  the  old  maxims  which  taught  each  nation 
to  regard  others  as  their  natural  enemies,  and  to  injure  and  destroy  their  power 
and  their  trade  as  a  patriotic  act  and  a  duty  ?  Where  are  the  selfish  maxims  which 
confined  power  and  privilege  to  a  few  to  whom  all  others  should  Slavishly  bend  ? 
These  are  all  gone,  or  rapidly  going];  and,  instead  of  their  unholy  reign,  we  see 
constantly  advanced  and  constantly  extending  sentiments  of  brotherhood,  of 
reverential  remembrance  that  we  are  aU  children  of  One  who  is  our  Father  and  our 
Saviour.  Every  year  the  mutual  intercourse  of  nations,  and  the  good-will  which  is 
its  attendant,  are  extending,  and,  aided  by  the  victorious  march  of  steam  and 
telegraph,  will  no  doubt  ere  long  unite  all  nations  in  the  ties  of  mutual  love. 
A  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  are  indeed  appearing.  And  now,  therefore, 
Ib  the  time  that  the  New  Jerusalem  may  be  expected.  Oh,  what  a  hope  and 
a  blessing  for  mankind  are  unfolded  by  the  descent  of  this  city  of  God  I 
To  those  who  enter  it  the  perplexities  of  ages  are  ended.  Enmity  gives  way, 
to  love,  anxiety  to  trust,  and  crime  to  virtue.  God  in  His  Divine  humanity 
dwells  with  men.  They  shall  be  His  people,  and  G*od  Himself  shall  be  with  them, 
and  be  their  God.  (J.  Bailey,  Ph.D.)  Heaven  : — "  I  saw  the  holy  city."  The 
words  are  allegorical  of  course.  But  they  signify  something  in  which  we  all 
believe.  A  city  is  a  real  thing.  Not  the  less  real  ii  it  be  heavenly.  "  The  holy 
city  "  is  what  we  commonly  call  heaven.  I.  Heaven  is  a  state.  It  is  not  a  place. 
It  may  or  may  not  be  connected  with  space  :  we  know  not.  Certainly  that  is  not 
its  essence.  Where  God  is,  where  Christ  is,  there  is  heaven.  If  even  it  have  a 
place,  that  is  not  what  makes  it  heaven.  Even  already,  even  in  this  life,  we  have 
had  experience  that  neither  place  nor  yet  circumstance  is  a  condition  of  happiness. 
Such  glimpses  of  happiness  as  we  catch  below,  whether  in  others  or  in  ourselves, 
are  absolutely  independent  of  both.  Heaven  is  a  state — a  state  of  happiness ;  of 
perfect  satisfaction  for  the  whole  man,  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  the  entire  absence 
for  ever  of  all  that  is  painful  and  bitter  and  sorrowful,  and  the  conscious,  the  per- 
vading presence  of  all  that  is  restful  and  delightful  and  blessed.  II.  Heaven  is  a 
SOCIETY.  On  the  one  side  we  have  had  trying  experiences  in  this  world  of  com- 
panies and  co-existences  which  were  not  delightful.  The  wear  and  tear  of  life,  the 
rubs  and  jars  of  life,  the  annoyances  and  wearinesses  of  life,  are  connected  in  our 
thoughts  not  with  solitude  but  with  society.  But  when  we  speak  of  heaven,  of  the 
Holy  City,  as  a  society,  we  must  carefully  exclude  aU  these  experiences.  In  heaven 
there  will  be  perfect  communion  of  mind  with  mind,  heart  with  heart,  spirit  with 
spirit.  1.  In  his  vision  of  the  great  multitude  which  no  man  could  number  he 
gives  this  as  the  history  of  them  all  (chap.  vii.  14).  2.  There  will  be  this  also — a 
unity  of  employment  (chaps,  xiv.  4  ;  xxii.  3).  There  will  be  no  monotony  there — 
but  there  will  be  unbroken  harmony ;  harmony  not  of  praise  only  but  of  work. 
3.  This  unity  o£  memory,  and  this  unity  of  employment  in  the  holy  city,  will  be^ 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

further,  and  yet  more  briefly,  a  unity  of  worship.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  New 
Jerusalem  : — But  why  a  New  Jerusalem  ?  Because  the  old  one  failed  of  its  purpose, 
and  was  spoiled  by  the  wickedness  of  man.  What  is  the  idea  of  Jerusalem  as 
depicted  in  the  Bible  ?  Simply  a  city  where  everything  is  at  peace  because  it  is 
under  the  full  enjoyment  of  God's  presence,  a  city  which  is  safe  and  happy  because 
it  allows  itself  to  be  guided  and  ruled  by  God  in  every  detail.  As,  however,  this  old 
Jerusalem  failed  of  its  object,  it  is  the  work  of  God  in  the  Christian  dispensation 
to  form  a  new  one.  And  this  is  going  on  now  ;  we  are  still  hoping  for  and  working 
[towards  the  New  Jerusalem.  But  God  does  not  tell  us  merely  to  look  forward  to 
lit.  Just  as  in  the  wilderness  He  was  with  His  people,  foreshadowing  the  glory  of 
Jerusalem  in  the  glory  of  the  tabernacle,  so  now  He  is  still  going  about  with 
humanity.  We  are  not,  then,  to  look  forward  to  a  Jerusalem  as  something 
•which  will  be  entirely  new,  or  to  a  heaven  which  will  be  absolutely  strange, 
but  rather  it  is  our  duty  in  this  world  to  build  up  a  social  life  upon  such  principles 
as  we  know  will  form  the  basis  of  life  in  the  future  state.  There  are  three  great 
principles  appearing  over  and  over  again  in  the  Apocalypse  in  its  references  to  this 
heavenly  society,  the  New  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  first  is  that  it  is  a  life  of  brotherhood, 
of  social  brotherhood.  All  the  beings  to  be  found  there  are  of  one  mind,  of  one 
heart  and  soul,  before  the  throne  of  God,  all  singing  one  song,  all  clothed  in  the 
same  dress.  They  are  a  great  brotherhood  banded  together  with  but  one  aim,  one 
desire — and  that  the  glory  of  Almighty  God.  The  second  great  principle  of  the 
New  Jerusalem  is  the  awfulness  of  sin  ;  over  and  over  again  we  are  told  that  out  of 
it  must  be  cast  everything  that  is  unclean;  every  sin  must  be  banished.  God 
Almighty  is  the  Light  of  it,  and  He  cannot  look  upon  impurity.  Once  more,  the 
third  great  principle  is  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Jesus  Christ.  Who  is  the  object 
of  worship  in  heaven  ?  Who  is  on  the  throne  whom  all  the  saints  and  angels  are 
worshipping  and  adoring  ?  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  King  of  kings,  the 
Lord  of  lords,  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  Beginning  and  the  End.  Li  the  New 
Jerusalem  there  is  but  one  object  of  adoration — the  Lord  Jesus.  There  is  but  one 
beginning  and  ending,  but  one  answer  to  every  question — Christ.  What  we  want  is 
greater  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  a  greater  belief  that  God  is  as  good  as  His  word,  and 
that  though  the  world  does  present  a  very  sorry  appearance,  and  though  the  Church 
may  seem  to  be  an  utter  failure,  still  God  is  on  His  throne,  and  Jesus  is  interceding 
for  us,  and  the  saints  and  angels  are  on  our  side.  But  remember,  we  must  be  true 
to  our  part  of  the  transaction ;  He  needs  our  co-operation,  and  it  is  only  by  thus 
working  together  that  we  shall  produce  the  New  Jerusalem,  {jas.  Adderley,  M.A.) 
The  first  city  and  the  last  (with  Gen.  iv.  17) : — In  Genesis  we  have  the  first  city  built 
by  Cain,  in  Eevelation  the  last  city  built  by  Christ.  I  wish  to  show  how  the  spirit 
of  Christ  will  purify  and  exalt  city  life,  how  it  will  arrest  the  evil  of  the  multitude 
within  the  city  walls,  how  it  will  develop  the  good,  and  bring  the  corporate  life  to  a 
glorious  perfection.  It  was  said  of  Augustus  that  he  found  Rome  brick  and  left  it 
marble  ;  but  Christ  shall  work  a  far  grander  transformation,  for,  finding  the  cities 
of  the  earth  cities  of  Cain,  He  shall  change  them  into  New  Jerusalems,  holy  cities, 
cities  of  God.  We  must  not  look  for  the  city  that  John  saw  in  some  future  world, 
strange  and  distant ;  we  must  look  for  it  in  the  purification  of  the  present  order. 
Now,  what  makes  a  great  city  a  sad  sight  ?  what  is  the  cause  of  its  terrible  and 
perplexing  contrasts  ?  and  how  will  Christ  cure  these  evils,  and  bring  the  clean  thing 
out  of  the  unclean  ?  I.  The  spirit  of  Cain  was  the  spirit  of  ungodliness.  It  was 
the  spirit  of  worldliness,  it  was  the  fastening  to  the  earthly  side  of  things,  and  the 
leaving  out  of  the  spiritual  and  Divine  :  it  made  material  life  a  substitute  for  God, 
and  in  all  things  aimed  to  make  man  independent  of  God.  In  opposition  to  this 
Christ  brings  into  city  life  the  element  of  spirituality.  "  Coming  down  out  of 
heaven  from  God."  It  is  in  the  recognition  of  the  living  God  that  Christ  creates 
the  fairer  civilisation.  He  puts  into  our  heart  assurance  of  God's  existence,  govern- 
ment, watchfulness,  equity,  faithfulness.  II.  The  spirit  of  Cain  was  the  spirit  of 
UNBBOTHERLiNEss.  The  first  city  was  built  in  the  spirit  of  a  cruel  egotism,  built  by 
a  fratricide,  and  Cain's  red  finger-marks  are  on  the  city  still.  The  rich  things  of 
commerce  are  stained  by  extortion  and  selfishness — the  bloody  finger-marks  are  not 
always  immediately  visible,  but  they  are  generally  there.  Yes,  the  foundation-stone 
of  the  city  was  laid  on  the  corpse  of  a  brother,  and  ever  since  has  the  city  been 
built  up  in  the  spirit  of  rapacity,  ambition,  and  cruelty.  And  what  is  the  outcome 
of  this  selfishness  ?  It  creates  everywhere  weakness  and  wretchedness  and  peril. 
It  throws  a  strange  black  shadow  on  all  the  magnificence  of  civilisation.  And  in 
the  end,  whatever  has  the  stain  of  blood  on  it  rots  and  smells  and  perishes.     The 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  623 

spirit  of  Christ  is  the  spirit  of  brotherliness.  There  are  red  marks  once  more  on  the 
new  city,  but  this  time  they  are  the  Builder's  own  blood,  teaching  us  that  as  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  us,  so  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.  Oh !  what 
a  mighty  difference  will  the  working  of  this  spirit  make  in  all  our  civilisation ! 
How  it  will  inspire  men,  soften  their  antagonisms,  lighten  their  burdens,  wipe  away 
their  tears,  make  rough  places  smooth,  dark  places  bright,  crooked  places  plain. 
III.  The  spirit  of  Cain  was  the  spirit  of  unrighteousness.  Cain  acted  in  untruth- 
fulness, injustice,  violence.  Our  great  populations  are  full  of  wretchedness,  because 
there  is  everywhere  such  lack  of  truth  and  equity  and  mercy.  The  spirit  of  Christ 
is  the  spirit  of  righteousness.  Christ  comes  not  only  with  the  sweetness  of  love, 
but  with  the  majesty  of  truth  and  justice.  He  creates,  wherever  He  is  received, 
purity  of  heart,  conscientiousness,  faithfulness,  uprightness  of  spirit  and  action. 
And  in  this  spirit  of  righteousness  shall  we  build  the  ideal  city.  Some  time 
ago,  in  one  of  the  Reviews,  a  writer  gave  a  picture  of  the  London  of  the  future, 
when  all  sanitary  and  political  improvements  shall  have  been  perfected.  No  dust 
in  the  streets,  no  smoke  in  the  air,  no  noise,  no  fog,  spaces  everywhere  for  flowers 
and  sunlight,  the  sky  above  always  pure,  the  Thames  running  below  a  tide  of  silver ; 
but  think  of  the  city  of  the  future  in  whose  life,  laws,  institutions,  trade,  politics, 
pleasure  the  righteousness  of  Christ  shall  find  full  and  final  manifestation.  Where 
is  the  poet,  the  painter  who  shall  paint  for  us  that  golden  city  so  holy  and  clean  ?  It 
is  painted  for  us  here;  it  is  "the  holy  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven,"  &o. 
(W.  L.  Watkimon.) 

Ver.  3.  The  tabernacle  of  Ctod  is  with  men.— The  elimination  of  the  law  of 
antagonism  (with  Isa.  xxviii.  21) : — I.  The  law  of  antagonism  is  unnatural.  Some 
great  thinkers  maintain  that  nature  is  altogether  good  and  glorious.  A  distin- 
guished scientist  reminds  us  of  "  that  gracious  Nature  to  whom  man  yearns 
with  filial  instinct,  knowing  her,  in  spite  of  fables,  to  be  his  dear  mother 
(Ray  Lankester,  "  Degeperation,"  p.  67).  On  the  other  hand,  equally  able  men 
teach  that  nature  is  malefic  and  abominable.  J.  S.  Mill  in  a  famous  passage 
paints  nature  as  teeming  with  amazing  cruelty  and  terror.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
Gold  Coast  people  a  large  spider  made  the  world,  and  the  philosopher  would 
have  readily  agreed  that  it  bore  many  marks  of  such  creation.  So  widely 
different  is  the  interpretation  of  the  world  given  by  these  thinkers,  that  it  is  hardly 
possible  to  believe  that  they  are  speaking  of  the  same  object.  Which  view,  then,  is 
correct  ?  We  say  both,  and  taken  together  they  express  the  view  of  the  world  given 
in  the  Christian  revelation  ;  the  conclusions  of  philosophy  agree  with  the  theology 
of  the  Church,  Revelation  declares  that  the  world  as  it  existed  in  the  thought  of 
God,  as  it  came  from  the  hand  of  God,  was  "  very  good,"  The  constitution  of 
things  was  altogether  gracious ;  the  original  order  was  full  of  harmony,  loveliness, 
and  blessing.  It  was  just  like  God  to  make  a  world  like  that  which  arises  with 
music  and  splendour  upon  our  delighted  senses  in  the  beginning  of  revelation.  A 
world  so  garnished  and  ordered  agrees  with  our  conceptions  of  the  Divine  wisdom 
and  goodness.  Over  such  an  orb  well  might  the  morning  stars  sing  together,  and 
all  the  sons  of  God  shout  for  joy.  Our  first  text  reminds  us  that  God  sometimes 
executes  what  must  be  described  as  "  strange  work  " ;  that  is,  work  which  seems 
altogether  at  variance  with  His  glorious  character,  and  with  the  acknowledged 
principles  of  His  government.  Now  we  affirm  that  the  whole  present  government 
of  this  world  partakes  largely  of  this  character  ;  it  is  a  "  strange  work  "  to  meet  an 
extraordinary  crisis.  The  sweating,  the  groaning,  the  bleeding,  the  dying,  all  the 
tragic  aspects  of  life,  do  not  belong  to  the  Divine  eternal  order ;  they  are  the  con- 
sequences, not  of  the  laws  of  God,  but  of  the  violation  of  those  laws,  and  they  exist 
only  locally  and  temporally  for  ends  of  discipline,  lesser  evils  permitted  and  over- 
ruled for  the  prevention  of  greater.  If,  entering  a  house,  we  find  a  father  speaking 
angrily  to  his  child,  taking  away  his  toys,  limiting  his  liberty,  chastising  him  with 
the  rod,  we  know  that  aU  this  is  contrary  to  parental  feeling,  an  interruption  of 
the  common  beautiful  order— that  it  is  a  "  strange  work  "  directed  to  specific, 
pressing,  necessary  ends ;  so  we  believe  it  to  be  with  this  present  epoch  of  world- 
suffering — it  is  God's  strange  act  necessitated  by  our  disobedience,  still  over-ruled 
by  His  love.  II.  It  is  the  purpose  or  God  in  Jesus  Christ  to  abolish  the 
LAW  OF  antagonism.  "  Bchold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  will 
dwell  with  them."  The  Deity  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  who 
brings  us  into  loving  relationship  with  God,  and  into  loving  relationship 
with   one    another,  thus    banishing    the    world's    disorder   and    distress.     In 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

His  life  and  death  we  have  the  supreme  illustration  of  unselfishness.  The 
grand  burden  of  His  gospel  is  love,  mercy,  pity  ;  it  is  the  most  eloquent  plea 
for  charity,  sympathy,  humanity.  And  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit  He  breaks  down 
in  men  that  tyranny  of  selfishness  which  is  the  secret  of  all  our  woes,  and  enthrones 
within  our  soul  the  power  of  love.  He  utterly  destroys  in  the  heart  of  man  the 
egotism,  pride,  greed,  envy,  wrath,  which  render  the  emulations  of  society  so  bitter 
and  destructive.  But  the  question  may  be  urged,  What  is  to  guarantee  our  safety 
and  progress  when  the  fiery  law  is  abolished  ?  The  prevalence  of  the  spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Universal  love  shall  take  the  place  of  antagonism  in  the  discipline 
of  the  race.  In  the  individual  life  we  find  a  ready  and  apposite  illustration  of  the 
passage  from  the  lower  law  of  action  to  a  higher.  In  the  days  of  youth  we  were 
kept  to  duty  by  the  austerity  of  our  masters  ;  a  whole  system  of  minute  and 
coercive  discipline  was  necessary  to  overcome  our  laziness,  our  love  of  indulgence, 
our  waywardness.  The  law  of  antagonism,  as  we  encountered  it  in  the  schoolroom, 
was  very  bitter  indeed  to  some  of  us ;  yet  we  now  know  it  was  essential  to  our  pro- 
gress that  we  should  have  been  subjected  to  such  coercion.  But,  growing  into  men, 
we  conceived  a  passion  for  knowledge,  art,  business,  duty ;  larger  views  opened  to  us; 
nobler  motives  began  to  make  themselves  felt,  a  sense  of  dignity  and  responsibility 
was  created  in  us ;  the  spur  within  took  the  place  of  the  spur  without,  and  the  whole 
work  of  life  is  now  done  in  a  far  freer,  happier  spirit.  In  Christ  we  receive  the  adoption 
of  sons,  the  inheritance  of  brothers,  and  as  the  spirit  of  Christ  prevails,  the  race  wiU  be 
controlled  by  the  milder  yet  stronger  principle.  The  energy  of  love  will  replace  the 
energy  of  hate ;  the  energy  of  hope,  the  energy  of  fear ;  the  energy  of  disinterested- 
ness, the  energy  of  selfishness ;  the  energy  of  joy,  the  energy  of  suffering :  the 
energy  of  conscience  and  righteousness,  the  energy  of  lawless  passion.  III.  Thb 
LAW  OP  ANTAGONISM  IS  BEING  ELIMINATED.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of 
modern  thought  is  its  deep  discontent  with  the  law  of  antagonism.  We  are  greatly 
and  increasingly  pained  by  the  spectacle  of  universal  strife  and  suffering.  We  are 
told  that  for  various  reasons  the  agony  of  the  world  is  not  so  great  as  it  seems,  that 
nature  knows  no  morality,  that  the  splendid  results  justify  the  bloody  battle  ;  these 
and  other  excuses  are  urged  in  extenuation  and  defence  of  the  principle  of  antago- 
nism. But  we  refuse  to  be  comforted  ;  we  will  not  reconcile  ourselves  to  such  a 
ghastly  state  of  things ;  we  decline  to  believe  that  such  infinite  sorrows  are  normal 
and  inevitable.  We  may  well  believe  with  Emerson,  "  This  great  discontent  is  the 
elegy  of  our  loss,  and  the  prediction  of  our  recovery."  We  see  signs  of  change  to 
a  happier  state  of  things  in  our  relation  to  nature.  We  are  beginning  to  under- 
stand much  better  the  laws  and  forces  of  the  physical  universe ;  we  are  rapidly 
learning  how  gloriously  the  elements  and  creatures  may  serve  us :  nay,  in  the  fields 
of  nature  we  discover  how  more  and  more  to  gather  grapes  from  thorns  and  figs 
from  thistles.  "  The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together,  and  the  lion  shall  eat 
straw  like  the  bullock  "  ;  "  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fig  tree  ;  and 
instead  of  the  briar  shall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree."  A  celebrated  traveller  con- 
cludes a  famous  book  with  these  pregnant  words :  "  The  superiority  of  the  bleak 
north  to  tropical  regions  is  only  in  their  social  aspect ;  for  I  hold  to  the  opinion 
that,  although  humanity  can  reach  an  advanced  state  of  culture  only  by  battling 
with  the  inclemencies  of  nature  in  high  latitudes,  it  is  under  the  equator  alone  that 
the  perfect  race  of  the  future  will  attain  to  complete  fruition  of  man's  beautiful 
heritage,  the  earth."  Only  by  battling  with  the  inclemencies  of  nature  can  man 
reach  an  advance  state  of  culture,  but  having  reached  that  intellectual  and  moral 
perfection,  he  will  under  the  equator  enter  into  complete  fruition  of  his  beautiful 
heritage.  How  much  all  this  sounds  like  the  teaching  of  the  Bible !  The  bleak 
north  makes  us,  and,  being  made,  the  perfect  race  enters  into  the  paradises  reserved 
for  it  beneath  the  sun.  And  there  is  much  in  modern  life  to  indicate  how  easily  all 
this  may  come  to  pass.  We  see  signs  of  change  to  a  happier  state  of  things  within 
society  itself.  A  process  of  amelioration  is  going  on  everywhere.  There  is  an 
attempt  to  get  more  justice,  fairness,  and  even  mercy,  into  commercial  rivalries  ;  to 
substitute  some  plan  of  co-operation  for  the  existing  competition,  if  that  is  possible. 
Signs  of  change  to  a  happier  state  of  things  are  visible  also  in  international  life. 
There  is  growing  up  with  wonderful  rapidity  a  sense  of  the  brotherhood  of  man ;  a 
larger  and  purer  patriotism.  Salvator  Rosa  long  ago  painted  his  picture,  "  Peace 
burning  the  Instruments  of  War."  This  generation  may  not  witness  that  glorious 
bonfire,  but  many  signs  signify  that  ere  long  it  shall  be  kindled,  lighting  the  foot- 
steps of  the  race  into  the  vaster  glory  that  is  to  be.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  The 
tabernacle  of  God  : — I.  The  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  mbh.     1.  Throughout  thia 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  625 

whole  book  we  find  continual  reference  to  the  temple  service  of  the  Jews.  This 
furnishes  some  of  its  most  striking  symbols.  Thus  we  have  an  altar,  incense, 
priests  clothed  in  white,  cherubim,  and  the  sacred  presence  of  God.  2.  This 
symbol  of  the  tabernacle  denotes  the  personal  approach  of  the  saints  to  God.  3. 
This  allusion  to  the  tabernacle  also  instructs  us  that  part  of  the  felicity  of  heaven 
will  consist  in  the  worship  of  God.  II.  They  shall  be  His  people,  and  He  shall 
BE  THEIR  God.  1.  His  people.  There  shall  be  a  public  and  infallible  acknow- 
ledgment of  all  who  are  His,  by  their  admission  into  the  tabernacle  of  God.  2.  He 
will  be  their  God.  This  implies,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ancient  Jewish  Church,  the 
engagement  of  all  His  perfections  on  their  behalf.  III.  Their  exemption  from  the 
SUFFERINGS  AND  SORROWS  OF  MORTALITY.  {J.D.  Carey.)  Change  and  the  unchange- 
able : — "  The  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men."  That  is  our  great  vision  of  victory, 
SO  glorious,  so  touching.  These  beautiful  words  never  fail  to  stir.  Let  us  think  a 
little  over  the  picture.  "  The  tabernacle  with  men."  First,  it  tells  us  that  God's 
presence  among  men  is  now  in  a  house,  in  an  abode,  in  a  home,  so  that  we  may 
know  where  He  is  to  be  found.  He  is  no  longer  here  upon  earth  merely  as  a  flying 
cry  in  the  wilderness,  as  an  invisible  wind  that  bloweth  where  it  listeth.  But  God 
has  done  more  than  send  out  a  cry  to  the  world  ;  He  has  made  Himself  a  tabernacle, 
a  chosen  spot,  selected,  appointed,  where  He  is  always,  for  every  one  who  will  come 
there,  in  a  permanent,  secure  place  ;  He  has  taken  up  His  abode,  and  He  has  set 
His  name  there  in  the  midst  of  men,  so  that  among  their  houses  you  may  know 
God's  house,  and  in  the  thick  of  their  affairs  you  will  see  God's  affairs  going  for- 
ward. Look  at  this  vast  Cathedral  of  ours,  with  its  dome  and  golden  cross  lifted 
above,  always  to  be  seen,  and  within  the  hush  of  the  silent  spaces,  and  souls  that 
are  there  being  steeped  in  calm.  There  is  just  a  little  something  here  to  show  that 
God  has  made  His  tabernacle  with  men.  And  yet  that  is  not  all  or  half  the 
picture  conveyed  to  us  by  these  words  of  St.  John.  The  tabernacle  it  is,  not  the 
temple,  we  remember.  The  old  word  carries  us  back  far  beyond  the  Temple  of 
Zion  and  the  rock.  It  bids  us  think  of  the  days  of  the  pilgrimage,  of  the  long- 
trailing  masses  moving  across  the  desert  sands,  always  moving,  ever  onward,  drawn 
forward.  In  the  morning  the  tent  is  struck  :  then  there  is  the  long,  weary  march, 
and,  at  the  fall  of  night,  the  camp  again.  The  changing  scene,  the  unchanging 
home,  that  is  the  stamp  and  the  brand  that  should  be  on  the  Church.  First,  the 
moving  tent,  the  tabernacle,  that  follows  as  they  move.  Men  are  moving  still, 
moving  to-day  fast,  on  and  on,  no  rest  and  no  pause,  that  long,  unflagging  pilgrim- 
age still  proceeding,  multitudes  and  multitudes,  and  all  in  motion,  quick,  eager 
motion.  And  the  tabernacle  of  the  Church  must  move  with  them — "  with  men  "  it 
is  to  be.  That  is  its  first  necessity.  Wherever  they  go,  beyond  all  these  tumbling 
seas  they  have  crossed,  it  must  go,  through  all  hazards,  at  their  side,  moving  with 
this  moving  host,  they  must  never  miss  it.  There  must  be  no  scruples  and  dally- 
ings,  and  fears  and  anxieties,  and  suspicions  and  sloth,  which  keep  the  tabernacle 
behind  on  the  march,  lagging,  belated,  timid,  shrinking,  left  behind  in  some  old 
deserted  camp  through  which  they  have  gone.  There  it  is  to  be  ;  not  somewhere 
else,  but  just  there ;  touching  all  these  novel  adventures,  welcoming  all  these  new 
sights,  tasting  all  this  new  experience,  bearing  all  these  new  burdens,  sharing  all 
these  new  burdens,  sharing  all  these  new  anxieties — "  with  men."  Oh !  it  must  go 
amid  incessant  change,  and  yet  still  the  same  tabernacle  of  our  fathers,  the  same 
abode  where  God  always  can  be  found,  the  one  gospel,  the  one  pardon,  the  one 
benediction,  and  the  one  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice.  {Canon  Scott 
Holland.)  God  tabernacling  with  men  : — Here  we  have  first  the  announcement 
of  a' fact,  the  fact  that  God  has  entered  into  associations  of  some  kind  with  man,  of 
an  especial  and  intimate  character,  more  intimate  apparently  than  any  which  exists 
between  Him  and  the  other  creatures  of  His  hand.  And  secondly  we  have  here  an 
expression  of  wonder — "the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men."  I.  What  the 
"  TABERNACLE  OF  GoD  "  IMPLIES.  Certainly  when  we  transfer  an  expression  like  this 
from  the  associations  of  our  finite  life  to  the  life  of  the  Divine  and  illimitable  Being 
we  must  do  so  with  serious  reservations.  To  the  Arab  of  the  desert  his  tent  is  his 
covering,  his  shelter,  his  home.  When  a  tabernacle  is  said  to  be  God's,  something 
more  must  be  meant  which  corresponds  in  some  way  with  our  human  associations 
with  the  expression,  but  something  also  widely  different.  To  the  Omnipresent  a 
tabernacle  cannot  be  a  covering,  it  cannot  be  a  shelter  to  Him  who  fills  all  in  all. 
The  expression  is  of  itself  startling  and  parodoxical,  and  yet  it  does  contain  a  truth 
which  is  not  the  less  worth  attention.  Reflect,  then,  on  the  power  which  we  men 
have  of  making  our  presence  emphatic  and  felt.    We  know  from  experience  how  a 

40 


G26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 


man  may  sit  among  his  fellows,  giving  little  or  no  token  of  intelligence  and  sym- 
pathy, watching  what  passes,  hearing  what  is  said,  yet  making  no  sign,  no  intima- 
tion even  of  recognition.  And  we  know  how  possible  is  the  very  reverse  of  all 
this,  how  thought,  and  feeling,  and  resolve  may  flash  forth  in  countenance  and  in 
speech,  and  may  profoundly  impress,  win,  subdue  all  who  come  within  the  limits  of 
a  striking  human  personality.  This  means  that  we  have  the  power  of  accentuating 
our  presence  among  our  fellow-men  at  will.  We  do  not  cease  to  be  present  in  our 
limited  way  when  we  do  not  thus  accentuate  it,  when  we  find  ourselves  in  company 
which  throws  us  back  upon  our  own  thoughts  as  distinct  from  company  which  pro- 
vokes an  expression  of  what  we  are  thinking  and  feeling.  Still,  we  are  made  in 
God's  image,  and  therefore  it  is  not  irreverent,  making  all  due  allowance  for  the 
interval  which  separates  the  finite  from  the  infinite,  to  presume  something  analogous 
in  Him.  He  is  the  Omnipresent.  But  He  may  surely,  if  He  wills,  emphasise  His 
presence  by  connecting  either  its  manifestations  or  its  blessings  with  particular 
spots,  or  actions,  or  persons,  or  incidents,  or  edifices,  or  ordinances.  He  is  the 
Almighty,  and  who  shall  say  Him  nay  ?  For  us  His  creatures  the  only  reasonable 
question  can  be  whether  there  are  grounds  for  thinking  that  He  has  done  so  :  and 
we  do  not  forget  the  essential  conditions  of  His  illimitable  being  because  we  attri- 
bute to  Him  the  exercise  of  a  power  which  He  has  not  denied  to  ourselves.  "  The 
tabernacle  of  God,"  then,  is  an  expression  which  implies  not  that  the  presence  of 
the  Omnipotent  can  be  limited,  but  that  it  can  be  for  certain  purposes  determined 
or  emphasised  in  a  particular  direction.  What  is  the  deepest  desire  in  human 
nature  ?  what  is  the  secret  of  that  unappeasable  restlessness  of  the  human  heart 
which  no  created  object  can  permanently  allay  ?  It  is  the  implanted  longing  for 
God.  ♦'  Like  as  a  hart  desireth  the  water  brooks,  so  longeth  my  soul  after  Thee,  O 
God  " — not  merely  a  desire  to  know  God  ;  knowledge  of  the  unattainable  may  be 
only  torture,  not  merely  a  desire  to  be  purified  for  the  sight  of  God,  but  a  desire  to 
be  really  united  to  Him,  a  hope  that  we  may  evermore  dwell  in  Him  and  He  in  us. 
When  the  soul  which  the  Infinite  Being  has  created  for  Himself  finds  itself  one 
with  Him,  its  deepest  instinct  is  perfectly  satisfied,  and  then,  and  then  only,  it  is  at 
peace.  Now  the  realisation  of  this  implanted  hope  of  the  soul  of  man  was  first 
shadowed  out,  and  then  it  was  provided  for.  God  tabernacled  among  men  first 
intermittently  and  distantly,  and  then  by  actual  union  with  mankind  in  the  incar- 
nation, and  lastly  in  the  society  which  sprang  from  this  union,  the  holy  Church  of 
Christ.  II.  The  fikst  Jewish  tabernacle.  "Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is 
with  men."  This  might  have  been  said  of  the  sacred  tent  of  which  we  read  so 
much  in  the  books  of  Moses,  and  which  was  the  centre  of  the  worship  of  Israel 
until  the  building  of  the  Temple.  It  is  "  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  as 
our  version  renders  the  original  words ;  more  accurately  it  is  "  the  tabernacle  of 
meeting."  This  solemn  phrase  implied  not  a  house  in  which  men  would  meet 
together  to  talk  or  to  hear  about  God,  but  where  God  would  meet  with  His  people. 
God  would  hold  His  court  in  it  or  at  it.  There  He  would  instruct  His  chosen 
servants  ;  there  He  would  meet  His  people.  And  the  history  of  Israel  abundantly 
illustrates  what  was  practically  meant.  With  the  tabernacle  was  closely  associated 
a  cloud,  or  pillar  of  cloud,  as  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  From  it 
proxjeeded  the  guidance,  the  warning,  the  judgment  which  might  be  needed  for 
Israel.  Nor  was  this  cloud  by  any  means  the  only  association  of  the  tabernacle 
with  the  sacred  Presence.  Within  the  tabernacle  was  the  breastplate  of  the  High 
Priest,  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  through  which  the  Divine  will  was  communicated 
to  devout  inquirers  ;  and  in  the  hohest  recess  of  the  tabernacle  was  the  sacred  ark 
containing  the  two  tables  of  the  law,  and  covered  by  the  mercy-seat,  that  symbol  of  the 
Divine  compassion  covering  human  transgressions  of  the  eternal  law ;  while  above 
were  the  winged  cherubim,  representatives  these  of  created  life  in  its  highest  form, 
bending  to  adore  the  moral  revelation  of  the  Self-Existent  which  the  contents  of 
the  ark  enshrined.  We  cannot  exaggerate  the  importance  of  the  position  of  the 
two  tables  of  the  law.  It  marked  off  in  the  eyes  of  Israel,  as  sharply  as  was 
possible,  God's  revelation  of  Himself  as  righteousness,  from  the  Egyptian  and 
other  Eastern  conceptions  of  Him  as  some  form  of  cosmic  force  or  nature-power, 
whether  productive  or  otherwise.  And  this  was  the  central  scene  of  the  Presence 
vouchsafed  in  the  tabernacle,  which  made  it  as  the  Psalmist  calls  it,  "  the  tent 
which  He  had  pitched  among  men."  And  above  this  ark  was  the  Shekinah,  Divine 
glory,  the  centre  point  of  the  adoration  of  primitive  Israel.  The  Presence  in  the 
tabernacle  was  undoubtedly  a  localised  presence,  a  particular  determination  of 
the  presence  of  God,  whose  Being  knows  no  bounds.      But  the  tabernacle   had 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  627 

no  necessary  or  inseparable  relations  to  the  Presence  which  it  for  a  while 
enshrined.  Its  relation  to  the  Presence  was  provisional.  It  did  its  work  for  the 
people  of  revelation,  and  then  it  passed  away.  III.  A  deeper  meaning.  The 
sacred  manhood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  His  body  and  His  human  soul,  became 
by  the  incarnation  the  tabernacle  of  God.  The  Son,  which  is  the  Word  of  the 
Father,  begotten  from  everlasting  of  the  Father,  very  and  eternal  God,  took  man's 
nature  upon  Him  in  the  womb  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  of  her  substance  ;  so  that  two 
whole  and  perfect  natures  were  joined  together  in  one  person,  never  to  be  divided. 
The  Son  had  existed  from  eternity ;  and  then  He  wrapped  around  His  eternal 
person,  and  indissolubly,  a  human  body  and  a  human  soul.  His  human  body  and 
soul  were  the  tabernacle  in  which  He,  the  Eternal  Word  and  Son,  deigned  to  dwell, 
not  for  thirty-three  years  only,  but  for  ever.  And  thus  whilst  men  looked  on  a 
human  form  and  heard  human  language,  and  noted  the  circumstances  of  a  human 
life,  and  asked,  "Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son?  and  is  not  His  mother  called 
Mary  ?  "  as  if  nothing  in  the  world  could  possibly  be  plainer.  He  on  the  other  hand 
could  say  without  a  trace  of  exaggeration,  '•  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the 
Father  "  ;  •'  The  Son  of  Man  which  is  in  heaven  "  ;  "  Before  Abraham  was  (became) 
I  am  "  ;  *'  I  and  the  Father  are  one."  It  is  this  which  makes  the  Gospels  unUke 
any  other  books,  even  any  other  inspired  books.  They  describe  a  life  radically 
nnlike  any  other  life  that  ever  was  lived  on  earth.  It  is  the  life  of  the  Divine  Being 
making  human  nature  His  tabernacle,  dwelling  on  earth  in  human  form.  True, 
the  first  three  Gospels  lay  stress  chiefly  on  the  human  form,  and  the  fourth  lays 
stress  chiefly  on  the  Divine  nature  which  it  veiled  and  yet  manifested.  But  they 
all  of  them  describe  One  who,  living  among  men,  was  infinitely  more  than  man, 
since  His  manhood  was  the  tabernacle  of  God.  IV.  The  Christlaj?  Church. 
"  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men."  This  is  true  in  a  somewhat 
different  sense  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  in  which  Christ  has  dwelt  throughout  the 
Christian  ages.  He  has  kept.  He  is  still  keeping.  His  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with 
you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world."  He  has  been  with  us  for  more  than 
eighteen  centuries.  His  Church  is  an  outflow  of  His  incarnate  life.  For  this 
Church  of  His  is  an  aggregate  of  Christian  lives,  and  each  living  Christian  is  a 
product  and  an  extension  of  the  hfe  of  the  Redeemer.  "  As  He  is,  so  are  we  in 
this  world,"  "  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory."  There  is  more  in  a  Christian's 
life,  as  there  was  more  in  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  than  meets  the  eye.  The 
Christian's  thought  is  supplied,  enriched,  controlled  by  a  Book  in  which  human 
words  veil  the  mind  of  the  Eternal.  His  intellect  is  illuminated,  his  affections  are 
expanded,  his  will  is  invigorated,  his  whole  nature  is  first  renewed,  and  then 
sustained  and  developed  by  a  force  which  Christendom  calls  grace,  and  which  flows 
forth  from  the  sinless  manhood  of  the  incarnate  Christ  at  the  bidding  of  His  Spirit. 
Still,  although  Christ  is  thus  with  His  Church,  and  she  is  the  tabernacle  which  He 
has  pitched  in  the  wide  field  of  humanity,  she  is  composed  of  weak  and  sinful 
men,  and  so  far  she  is  out  of  correspondence  with  the  perfect  manhood  in  which  His 
God -head  tabernacled  on  earth,  and  in  which  He  still  dwells  within  her.  The 
Bride  of  the  Lamb  is  not  yet  prepared  for  the  Bridegroom's  welcome.  The 
tabernacle  of  the  Church  in  which  Christ  dwells  on  earth  is  soiled  and  torn. 
It  could  not  be  translated  in  its  present  condition  to  the  courts  above.  He 
who  dwells  in  it  must  prepare,  must  glorify,  must  embellish  it.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
God^s  tabernacle  on  earth  : — The  voice  that  uttered  these  words  is  said  to  have  been 
a  "  great  "  one,  indicating  their  importance,  and  God's  desire  that  we  should  Usten 
to  the  announcement.  We  are  not  told  who  uttered  it.  It  "  came  out  of 
heaven  " ;  this  is  all  we  know.  It  was  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  looking  down 
from  the  upper  glory,  and  rejoicing  in  what  had  at  length,  after  so  many  ages  and 
so  many  hindrances,  been  accomplished  upon  earth.  I.  The  desirableness  of  this 
state  of  things.  Many  things  show  us  this.  1.  The  interest  which  the  inhabi- 
tants of  heaven  take  in  it,  as  seen  in  the  words  before  us.  2.  The  pains  and  costs 
which  God  has  been  at  to  bring  about  this  issue.  3.  The  work  of  Christ,  through 
which  it  has  been  brought  about.  4.  The  desire  with  which  prophets  and 
righteous  men  have  desired  this  issue.  6.  The  change  which  it  will  produce  on  earth. 
II.  The  declared  purpose  of  God  as  to  this  glorious  issue — God  having  His 
tabernacle  with  men.  One  of  the  earliest  statements  is  an  intimation  of  God's  pur- 
pose respecting  this.  Paradise  was  meant  not  merely  as  man's  abode,  but  as  God's 
abode  with  man  ;  so  that  when  man  sinned,  God  is  represented  as  coming  down  to  the 
garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day.  Man's  sin  then  frustrated,  if  we  may  so  speak, 
God's  purpose  in  the  meantime,  yet  it  did  not  hinder  that  purpose  from  being 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

made  known.  This  great  original  purpose  of  God  to  have  His  dwelling  with  men 
continued  to  be  presented  to  man  in  type  and  prophecy  from  that  day  forward, 
to  show  that  it  had  only  been  postponed,  not  abandoned — postponed  in  order  to  be 
carried  out  more  fully  and  more  gloriously  than  it  could  have  been  before. 
Especially  was  this  the  case  in  Israel's  history,  from  the  time  that  the  tabernacle 
was  erected  in  the  wilderness  to  the  day  when  the  temple  and  city  were  laid  in 
ruins  by  the  hand  of  the  aliens.  The  statement  in  the  Gospel  of  John  regarding 
the  Son  of  God  is  another  declaration  of  this  same  purpose :  "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  "  ;  literally,  tabernacled  or  pitched  His  tent  among  us. 
And,  in  our  Lord's  words,  we  have  more  than  once  the  intimation  of  the  same 
thing.  "If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words  :  and  My  Father  will  love  him, 
and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him  "  (John  xiv.  23).  And 
it  is  this  which  is  the  complete  fulfilment  of  Christ's  name  Immanuel,  ''  God  with 
us."  Nor  have  there  been  any  intimations  of  God's  design  ultimately  to  abandon 
earth,  after  He  has  accomplished  certain  ends.  On  the  contrary,  all  that  He  has 
said  and  done  hitherto  indicate  His  intention  to  restore  it,  to  glorify  it,  and  to  fit  it 
for  being  His  abode.  III.  The,  means,  or  process,  by  which  God  is  bringing  all 
THIS  about.  1.  The  first  actual  step  was  the  incarnation.  By  taking  a  body 
made  out  of  the  substance  of  earth.  He  joined  Himself  in  perpetual  afiinity  with 
man  and  his  world  ;  and  that  which  God  has  thus  joined  together,  who  shall  put 
asunder  ?  2.  His  life  on  earth  was  the  second  step  towards  the  end  in  view.  His 
living  here  for  thirty-three  years  was  the  declaration  of  His  desire  and  purpose  to 
make  earth  the  seat  of  His  tabernacle.  But  in  this  life  we  see  more  than  this. 
We  see  TTitti  taking  possession  of  creation ;  we  see  Him  doing  battle  with  its 
oppressors:  we  see  Him  casting  out  Satan,  healing  diseases,  overcoming  death. 
He  who  did  these  things  in  the  day  of  His  humiliation  and  weakness,  and  before 
His  great  work  upon  the  Cross  was  accomplished,  will  surely  do  exceeding  abun- 
dantly more  than  all  these,  in  the  day  of  glory  and  power,  now  that  He  has 
finished  His  work,  and  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  3.  His  death  was 
the  next  step.  He  was  earth's  Sin-bearer  as  well  as  man's.  He  took  upon  Him 
the  curse  of  earth  as  well  as  man  ;  and  the  thorns  which  formed  His  crown  showed 
how  truly  He  was  bearing  the  curse  upon  creation  which  Adam's  sin  had  caused. 
As  the  bearer  of  man's  guilt.  He  was  naUed  to  the  cross  ;  as  the  bearer  of  earth's 
curse.  He  was  crowned  with  thorns.  Earth  has  now  been  sprinkled  with  His 
blood ;  and  that  blood  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  4.  His  burial  was  the  next  step. 
By  death  the  Prince  of  life  overcame  death  ;  and  in  His  burial  He  was  pursuing 
the  routed  foe,  and  compelling  him  to  deliver  up  his  prey.  Thus  did  He  commence 
the  expulsion  from  death  of  that  mortality  and  corruption  which  had  defaced  it  so 
sadly.  5.  His  resurrection  was  the  next  step.  Wresting  His  own  body  from  the 
dominion  of  death.  He  showed  how  ere  long  He  is  to  wrest,  not  only  the  bodies  of 
His  saints,  but  the  whole  creation,  from  the  bondage  of  corruption.  Christ's 
resurrection  not  only  proclaimed  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  but  also 
the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.  6.  His  ascension  into  heaven  was  the  next 
step.  When  He  ascended,  He  not  only  led  captivity  captive,  but  He  carried  up 
into  heaven  His  own  body  as  the  representative  of  earth.  That  portion  of  earth 
which,  in  His  body,  He  has  carried  up  into  heaven,  proclaims  to  the  inhabitants  of 
heaven  His  interest  in  earth,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  earth  the  certainty  of  His 
purpose  respecting  earth's  final  restitution.  And  for  what  is  this  ascended  Saviour 
interceding?  Not  only  for  His  Church,  but  for  earth  itself.  "Ask  of  Me,  and 
I  will  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  ends  of  the 
earth  for  Thy  possession."  Nor  shall  these  intercessions  be  long  in  vain.  Soon 
shall  they  be  all  answered,  and  the  cry  be  heard,  "  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is 
with  men  1 "  1.  Saint,  are  you  making  ready  for  that  day  ?  Are  you  walking 
worthy  of  an  heir  of  that  glory?  Are  you  remembering  that  your  body  is  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Are  you  at  one  with  Father  and  with  Son  in  your 
desire  for  that  restitution  of  all  things  ?  2.  Sinner,  what  are  your  thoughts  of  that 
day  ?  What  hopes  have  you  of  sharing  its  blessedness  ?  From  that  world  all  sin 
is  swept  away ;  and  can  you  hope  to  dwell  in  it  ?  Nothing  that  defileth  shall 
enter ;  and  do  you  expect  to  enter  it  ?  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  descent  of  heaven 
to  earth: — I.  The  sentiments  of  which  this  proclamation  is  expressive. 
1.  The  exultation  of  joyous  discovery.  2.  The  rapture  of  sacred  astonishment. 
3.  The  eagerness  of  solemn  expectation.  4.  A  benevolent  interest  in  all  that 
pertaing  to  the  welfare  and  destiny  of  man.  6.  The  satisfaction  of  devout 
intelligence,   beholding  in  the  events  which  it  contemplates   fresh    attestations 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  629 

of  the  stability  and  fulness  of  their  own  eternal  welfare,  as  dependent  on  the 
Divine  counsels  and  character.  6.  Preparation  for  instant  and  cheerful  concur- 
rence in  the  effectuation  of  God's  purposes,  and  the  advancement  of  His  glory. 
II.  The  events  by  which  this  proclamation  is  called  forth.  1.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  be  directed,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  wonders  of  providence,  as  exhibiting,  in 
all  their  succession  and  variety,  the  immediacy  of  God's  concern  for  human 
welfare,  and  the  individuality,  as  well  as  constancy,  of  His  regard.  2.  But  we  turn 
to  a  still  more  elevated  subject,  and  notice  the  sublimer  wonders  of  redemption,  as 
adapted  pre-eminently  to  arouse  the  emotions  and  corroborate  the  sentiments 
which  our  text  embodies.  3.  We  would  briefly  advert  to  the  mysteries  of  sanc- 
tifying influence,  as  signalising  the  residence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  even  in  the 
hearts  of  His  people.  4.  The  final  revelations  of  the  Divine  power  and  greatness, 
both  at  the  close  of  time,  and  through  the  ages  of  eternity.  III.  For  the  direct 
improvement  of  this  inquiry,  let  us  now  examine  the  manner  wherein  rr  teaches 
us  TO  reflect  both  on  our  privileges  and  our  duty.  1.  We  should  meditate 
upon  this  subject  with  mingled  gratitude  and  wonder,  as  on  a  theme  majestic  even 
beyond  our  highest  contemplation,  and  yet  not  too  elevated  for  our  hopes.  2. 
We  should  reflect  on  the  subject  before  us  with  united  watchfulness,  diligence, 
and  trust,  by  which  alone  we  can  practically  realise  the  enjoyment  of  so  great  a 
blessing.  3.  Let  us  connect  our  meditations,  in  relation  to  the  truth  thus  certified, 
with  a  correspondent  appreciation  of  every  ordinance  which  confirms  it,  and  every 
symbol  whereby  it  is  made  known.  4.  The  consideration  of  this  blessing  should 
inspire  us  with  sacred  ambition  and  a  generous  ardour  to  diffuse  both  its  knowledge 
and  its  participation  among  those  who  are  yet  destitute  of  its  enjoyment.  5.  Let  us, 
finally,  contemplate  the  declaration  of  the  text  with  holy  and  unquenchable  desire 
directed  habitually  towards  that  happy  period,  wherein  it  shall  attain  the  perfect 
disclosure  of  its  import  and  the  perpetuity  of  its  unlimited  fulfilment.  {R.  S.  McAll, 
LL.D.)  The  tabernacle  of  God  with  men : — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  fulfilled  by 
the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His  body — tent-like — was  set  up  in  the 
manger.  1.  The  tabernacle  in  the  desert  was  in  the  first  instance  the  pledge  of 
God's  constant  presence  with  His  people.  Christ  said,  **  I  am  with  you  alway." 
But  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  Jews  there  was  a  special  token  of  the  Divine  presence 
in  the  Shechinah.  So  the  presence  of  Christ  is  at  times  made  more  manifest  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  tabernacle  was  also  a  witness.  It  was  a  witness  to  God's 
faithfulness,  love,  and  care.  What  a  vdtness  was  the  Incarnation.  3.  The 
tabernacle  was  the  appointed  place  and  means  for  all  intercourse  with  God.  By 
Jesus  we  have  communion  with  God.  He  is  God  brought  near.  4.  The  tabernacle 
was  for  sacrifice.  No  sacrifice  could  be  offered  in  any  other  place.  ^  The  incarnate 
Christ  is  the  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  He  is  our  burnt  offering — He  is 
also  the  altar  of  incense,  and  it  is  only  through  Him  that  any  of  our  offerings,  praise, 
money,  service,  bodies,  can  rise  acceptable  to  God.  5.  This  tabernacle,  altar,  sacrifice, 
incense  are  always  at  hand — "  with  men  "  we  can  obtain  forgiveness  at  any  moment. 
{J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  highest  good  : — I.  The  highest  companionship.  1.  Close. 
2.  Permanent.  3.  Wonderful.  4.  Transcendental.  II.  The  highest  belation- 
8HIP.  1.  Subjects  of  My  kingdom.  2.  Students  in  My  school.  3.  Children  in  My 
family.  IH.  The  highest  proprietorship.  1.  No  one  can  have  higher  possession. 
2.  No  soul  can  be  satisfied  without  this  possession.  {U.  R.  Thomas.)  Heaven  on 
earth  : — The  text  tells  you  that  the  tabernacle  of  God  can  come  down  from  heaven 
and  be  a  dwelling-place  to  man.  You  are  living  in  a  world  of  sin,  which  is 
continually  pressing  upon  you  on  every  side  with  all  its  weight.  Your  souls  made 
for  higher  things  cannot  breathe  freely  in  it.  Its  elements  are  hostile  to  your  well- 
being.  And  the  only  way  in  which  you  can  protect  yourselves  effectually  from  the 
evil  that  is  in  the  world  is  to  bring  down  the  air  of  heaven  into  it,  and  surround 
yourselves  with  its  crystal  purity.  It  you  take  that  vital  air  with  you  wherever  you 
go,  it  will  be  a  wall  of  defence  round  about  you,  which  will  keep  out  all  evil 
influences.  There  is  no  protection  like  this  tabernacle  of  God  within  which  you 
dwell,  this  element  of  godliness  in  which  you  live,  and  move,  and  have  your  being. 
And  what  blessedness  do  they  enjoy  who  are  hid  in  this  tabernacle  of  God!  What- 
ever may  be  the  things  that  yield  you  most  happiness  here,  nothing  can  give  you 
solid  satisfaction  even  in  these,  but  the  enjoying  of  them  in  the  Lord,  in  union  with 
Him  whose  blessing  maketh  truly  rich  and  addeth  no  sorrow.  Nothing  can  give 
such  a  zest  to  earthly  joys  and  pursuits  as  the  assurance  that  you  are  naturalised 
in  the  heavenly  world.  What  wonderful  properties  does  the  air  of  heaven  impart 
to  the  things  of  earth  !     We  forget  that  our  common  earth  is  already  among  the 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxi. 

stars,  is  itself  a  star ;  that  we  are  truly  at  present  celestial  inhabitants.  Would 
that  it  were  true  of  us  that  we  are  made  to  sit  together  in  the  heavenly  places  in 
Christ  Jesus  here  and  now ;  that  the  spiritual  world  is  over  our  natural  world  as 
the  sky  is  over  the  earth,  and  influences  everything  in  it !  Would  that  we  were 
not  merely  preparing  for  a  future  heaven,  but  living  in  heaven  now  !  And  in  order 
to  make  the  tabernacle  of  God  to  be  indeed  with  men,  you  must  each  of  you  do 
your  share.  If  God  is  your  own  tabernacle,  and  you  show  by  your  character  and 
conduct  that  you  are  living  a  life  of  faith  in  Christ,  you  will  help  to  make  the  whole 
world  one  tabernacle  of  God.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  within  you,  will  help  to 
make  a  kingdom  of  heaven  without  you.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes. — No  tears  in  heaven : — 
Tears  are  the  symbol  of  sorrow.  Tears  are  sometimes  shed  through  excess  of  joy. 
Yet  a  tearful  joy  is  ever  akin  to  grief.  I.  The  present  state  of  the  believeb  is 
ONE  or  TEARS.  1.  Bccause  he  is  living  in  a  world  of  sin.  (1)  While  God  is  loved, 
the  Saviour  served,  and  His  law  honoured,  the  believer's  heart  has  yet  to  mourn 
over  the  defectiveness  of  his  service,  and  not  infrequently  over  his  lapses  into  sin. 
(2)  Nor  is  his  own  sin  alone  the  cause  of  his  sorrow.  He  is  no  unaffected 
spectator  of  the  unbelief  and  ungodliness  and  wickedness  of  his  fellow-men.  2. 
Because  he  is  in  a  world  of  suffering.  Because  of  sin,  suffering  has  an  inlet 
through  our  whole  nature,  and  is  the  chief  burden  of  its  history.  It  rises  up  like 
mist  out  of  the  landscape,  to  darken  the  whole  scene  of  our  present  pilgrimage. 
(1)  Think  of  the  suffering  that  enters  even  the  believer's  dwelling  when  he  experi- 
ences the  stroke  of  adverse  providence.  (2)  How  often  is  the  believer  made  to 
suffer  from  the  stroke  of  relative  bereavements !  (3)  How  often  has  the  believer 
to  sorrow  over  personal  infirmities  and  aflflictions  !  3.  Because  the  world  in  which 
he  lives  is  a  world  of  death.  As  a  curse,  death  is  inseparable  from  sorrow.  Even 
where  unstinged,  it  tells  of  pain,  of  suffering,  and  tears.  II.  The  future  state 
OF  the  believer  is  one  in  which  there  shall  be  no  tears.  1.  This  removal 
of  tears  is  directly  traceable  to  God.  It  is  enjoyed  through  grace  in  virtue  of  the 
Saviour's  blood,  and  God  bestows  it  through  the  pardon  of  the  believer's  sins,  and 
by  giving  him  a  right  and  title  to  eternal  life.  2.  This  removal  of  tears  is  com- 
plete. In  the  future  world  every  source  of  sorrow  shall  have  gone.  3.  This 
removal  of  tears  shall  be  for  ever.  Never  shall  heaven's  sky  be  clouded  nor 
heaven's  bliss  be  interrupted  by  one  single  moment's  experience  of  the  vicissitudes 
of  time.  in.  The  reason  why  the  future  state  of  the  believer  shall  be  a 
STATE  FREE  FROM  TEARS.  1.  Bccausc  of  the  beUevcr's  personal  presence  with  Christ. 
2.  Because  it  ^  a  state  of  personal  perfection.  3.  Because  it  shall  be  a  state  of  re- 
newed union  and  communion  with  Christian  friends  for  ever.  4.  Because  it  is  a 
state  of  unalloyed  happiness.  {G.  Jeffrey,  D.D.)  The  tearless  heaven : — Amongst 
the  troubles  of  this  chequered  earth  our  griefs  are  sometimes  so  sore  that  tears  come 
as  a  relief.  But  this  is  not  because  tears  are  a  good  thing  in  themselves,  but 
because  an  outward  weeping  is  better  than  an  inward  lamentation.  Tears  have  but 
one  deep,  primary  source,  and  that  source  is  sin.  Beneath  our  gentlest  virtues  there 
sleeps  the  lava  of  an  evil  impulse  ready  to  spring  forth  at  any  smaU  ignition. 
When  the  penitent  weeps  over  his  sins,  when  the  Christian  weeps  over  his  short- 
comings, it  is  well ;  for  they  are  the  mourners  in  Zion  to  whose  gloom  a  dawn  is 
promised.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  thus  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted." 
When  the  finger  of  the  destroyer  beckons  us  to  look  at  our  cherished  ones  lying  in 
his  embrace,  it  is  not  wrong  to  weep.  Such  tears  must  flow,  for  they  are  the  signs 
of  severed  love.  From  whatever  source  the  tears  we  shed  may  spring,  they  shall 
be  wiped  away  in  heaven.  1.  They  are  sometimes  caused  by  temporal  depression. 
Such  depression  cannot  extend  beyond  the  bounds  of  time.  In  the  abode  where 
tears  are  wiped  away  there  shall  be  no  more  poverty.  "  They  shall  hunger  no 
more,"  &c.  2.  Defective  friendships  are  a  prolific  source  of  tears.  Sometiines 
this  defection  is  occasioned  by  infirmity,  temper,  ignorance,  or  prejudice.  Many 
are  our  friends  just  so  long  as  the  sun  of  prosperity  is  shining;  but  as  soon  as  our 
sky  darkens  into  gloom,  their  smiles  darken  into  frowns.  Ay,  and  treacherous 
relationships,  too,  draw  forth  our  tears.  What  bitter  tears  did  David  shed  over  the 
perfidy  of  his  own  son  !  And  there's  many  a  father  now  who  knows  something  of 
the  same  grief.  The  flatterer  of  to-day  is  the  reviler  of  to-morrow.  The  smile  will 
often  wreath  into  a  sneer,  and  the  eulogy  change  into  a  scoff.  But  there  will  be  no 
faithless  friends  in  heaven.  No  Judas  shall  be  found  sitting  at  the  board.  No 
tears  shall  fall  over  the  treachery  of  lover,  brother,  friend.     3.  How  widely,  more- 


CHAP.  XXI,]  REVELATION.  -  631 

over,  do  the  fingers  of  affliction  fling  open  the  sluices  of  our  tears  !  These  frames 
of  ours  are  frail.  "All  flesh  is  grass."  And  it  is  an  affecting  sight  to  watch  in 
those  we  love  the  gradual  or  quick  transition  from  health  to  sickness,  from  activity 
to  languor,  and  from  strength  to  pain.  But  there  is  no  infirmity,  no  mental  or 
physical  decay,  to  break  in  upon  the  immortal  activity  and  youth  of  heaven.  And 
what  is  the  hand  which  shall  thus  wipe  away  our  tears  ?  It  is  a  hand  which  once 
was  pierced  with  nails  ;  but  there  is  no  scar  upon  it  now.  The  banishment  of  these 
tears  is  an  act  which  is  Divine.  He  sends  no  ministering  angel  round  to  soothe  and 
comfort  those  He  has  redeemed ;  but  He  is  His  own  missionary,  and  carries  His 
own  solace.  *•  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes."  1.  He  will  do  it 
lovingly.  As  the  "  brother  born  for  adversity,"  He  will  come  gently  on  His  assua- 
ging errand ;  and  as  a  high  priest  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  will  He 
bid  our  mourning  cease.  2.  And  He  will  do  it  effectually.  He  will  not  merely  dry 
up  a  fountain  that  shall  anon  break  forth  afresh ;  but  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away. 
Every  cause  of  tears  shall  be  removed  ;  for  He  shall  destroy  sin,  the  great  master 
evil — the  wide,  deep  ocean  from  which  all  tears  have  been  supplied.  {A.  Mursell.) 
The  utter  removal  of  sorrow  in  heaven  : — I.  We  are  to  consider  thk  teaks.  1.  We 
will  mention  those  which  arise  from  secular  affliction.  2.  Those  that  arise  from 
social  losses.  3.  Those  that  arise  from  bodily  pains  and  infirmities.  4.  Those 
which  arise  from  moral  imperfections  —  to  a  Christian  the  most  painful  of  all. 
6.  Those  which  arise  from  the  wickedness  of  others.  II.  Let  us  pass  from  the 
tears  to  consider  the  removal  of  them.  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from 
their  eyes."  1.  It  is  Divine.  *'  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes." 
He  alone  can  do  it ;  He  is  the  Father  of  mercies,  the  God  of  all  grace,  the  God 
of  all  comfort.  2.  The  deliverance  is  future.  It  is  not  said,  God  does,  but  *'  God 
shall,  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes."  Earth  will  always  be  distinguished  from 
heaven.  You  are  now  in  the  conflict ;  and  it  is  a  trying  one.  It  is  death  that 
will  proclaim  the  triumph,  and  say  the  warfare  is  accomplished.  3.  The  de- 
liverance is  complete.  *'  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears."  Nothing  shall  be  seen 
but  joy  and  gladness — nothing  heard  but  thanksgiving  and  the  voice  of  melody. 
4.  It  is  certain.  Thy  hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  it  is  founded  in  the 
word  of  Him  that  cannot  lie.  III.  The  uses  we  are  to  make  of  this  delight- 
ful ASSURANCE.  1.  Are  you  found  in  the  number  of  the  heirs  of  this  promise? 
Will  this  be  accomplished  with  regard  to  you  ?  2.  The  subject  should  remind  us  of 
our  obligation  to  the  Redeemer  of  sinners.  3.  Does  not  this  subject  completely  roll 
away  the  reproach  of  religion  ?  4.  Christians,  in  the  midst  of  your  troubles,  this 
subject  ought  to  comfort  you.  You  see  that  the  last  is  the  best,  not  only  of  some 
but  of  all  your  trials.  {W.  Jay.)  No  more  death. — What  is  death  ? — I.  Death 
IS  "  the  wages  of  sin."  Men  try  to  keep  that  fact  out  of  view,  and  ascribe  death 
to  accident,  disease,  and  second  causes,  without  fathoming  the  depths  to  which 
they  ought  to  descend.  In  Adam's  transgression,  that  was  wrapped  up  like  the  oak 
in  the  acorn.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  Man  works  for  and  wins  that ;  and  the 
Judge  of  aU  the  earth  uprightly  pays  it.  11.  Or,  death  is  a  Divine  appointment 
— "  It  is  appointed  unto  man  once  to  die."  It  did  not  obtain  a  place  in  God's 
world  without  His  permission  or  decree.  No  casualty,  no  blind  chance  precipitates 
man  into  the  grave.  It  is  not  nature  worn  out,  or  so  much  animal  machinery 
wasted  away,  it  is  the  judicial  appointment  of  the  Holy  One,  protesting  against  all 
iniquity.  HI.  Or,  death  is  "the  king  of  terrors."  It  is  often  called  "the 
debt  of  nature  "  ;  and  that  is  one  of  the  softening  epithets  by  which  men  try  to  dis- 
guise from  themselves  the  true  character  of  death.  But,  in  truth,  nature  abhors 
and  recoils  from  such  an  allegation.  Death  comes  because  nature  has  been  out- 
raged, because  the  heart  of  man  has  revolted  against  his  God ;  and  the  rebel  must 
therefore  encounter  all  that  is  terrific,  since  he  supposed  there  was  a  more  excellent 
way  than  living  in  amity  and  walking  in  love  with  his  Maker.  IV.  Or,  death  is 
THE  extinction  OF  SPIRITUAL  LIFE — "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thou  shalt  die." 
Man  then  became  dead  to  God,  to  holiness,  to  happiness,  and  heaven — he  was  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins.  V.  But  mercy  did  interpose ;  and  we  therefore  proceed 
to  view  death  under  another  aspect — it  is  an  abolished  thing;  Christ  has 
"  abohshed  death."  Strange  message  that,  amid  our  crowded  churchyards,  where 
the  dead  far  outnumber  the  living  in  the  less  crowded  city !  Yet  not  more  strange 
than  true — wherever  the  way  appointed  by  the  Lord  of  Life  is  followed,  death  is 
abolished,  and  the  body  and  soul  will  both  live  for  ever.  VI.  Or,  death  is  a 
SLKEP.  "  Sleep  in  Jesus."  VII.  Or,  death  may  be  regarded  as  the  servant, 
ASD  THE  TXBT  PBOPEBTY  OF  BELIEVERS :  "  All  things  are  youTS  .  .  .  whether  life  or 


632  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

death."  In  such  a  case,  death  is  the  messenger  sent  to  call  the  believer  home,  or 
to  summon  him  into  the  presence  of  his  Father.  The  grotto  of  Posilippo  is  a  long 
dark  passage  through  a  mountain  near  Naples.  While  in  that  vault-like  place, 
extending  over  some  hundreds  of  yards,  the  wayfarer  feels  the  dreariness  and  dis- 
comfort of  the  scene.  But  when  he  emerges  to  the  west,  the  bay  of  Baise  stretches 
at  his  feet,  one  of  the  richest  and  most  balmy  even  of  Italian  scenes  ;  or  to  the  east 
— then  he  is  greeted  by  the  bay  of  Naples,  with  its  unutterable  outspread  of  beauty, 
of  city,  of  mountains,  ocean,  and  volcano,  till  the  eye  revels  and  luxuriates 
amid  the  profusion  of  loveliness.  It  is  a  type  of  the  believer  emerging  from 
death.  The  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  are  spread  out  before  him ;  and 
though  there  be  "  no  more  sea,"  the  fulness  of  joy  becomes  his  beatitude  for  ever. 
The  curse  is  quenched — the  sting  is  extracted;  and  misery,  sorrow,  fear  — 
for  all  these  things  are  portions  of  death — are  over  for  ever.  {Christian  Treasury.) 
Neither  sorrow. — The  end  of  sorrow  : — How  many  tears  now  fall  daily  from  weeping 
eyes.  1.  How  oft-times  the  Christian  sheds  the  tears  of  penitence,  as  he  feels  the 
shadow  of  guilt  fall  across  the  memories  of  the  past.  But  there  the  painful  re- 
membrance of  his  errors  will  be  lost  in  the  glad  radiance  of  eternal  absolution.  2. 
Here  we  sometimes  cannot  help  the  bitter  tears  of  mortification  rising  to  our  eyes 
at  our  own  failures  in  the  Christian  life.  In  a  better  world  we  shall  see  how  God 
led  us.  He  will  wipe  away  the  tears  of  regret  and  mortification,  as  we  learn  why  it 
was  that  our  lives  were  moulded  and  shaped  in  this  or  that  fashion.  3.  Often  in 
this  life  the  Christian  sheds  tears  of  indignation.  Dean  Swift,  who,  with  all  his 
faults,  had  an  honest  hatred  of  what  was  mean  and  unjust,  had  inscribed,  by  his 
own  direction,  on  his  tomb,  that  he  hoped  to  rest,  "  where  fierce  indignation  would 
no  longer  lacerate  his  heart."  But  the  balmy  air  and  the  sunny  slopes  of  the  new 
paradise  of  God  will  never  know  anything  of  the  sin,  the  injustice,  and  the  cruelty, 
which,  by  their  shadows,  darken  the  heart  even  of  the  Christian  here.  {W.  Hard- 
man,  LL.D.)  Neither  .  .  .  pain. — No  more  pain : — There  is  no  need  to  explain 
to  any  human  being  what  it  is  that  is  meant  by  pain.  We  know  pain  by  the  best 
means  of  knowing :  we  know  it  by  having  felt  it.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  may 
use  the  word,  in  which  its  meaning  is  wider  than  it  is  as  it  stands  in  this  text. 
Pain  may  be  taken  to  mean  everything  that  you  would  shrink  from,  from  whatever 
source  it  may  come — everything  that  implies  suffering,  sorrow,  anguish.  But  it  is 
not  in  this  large  sense  that  the  word  is  to  be  understood  in  this  text.  For  you 
observe  that  the  writer  of  the  Revelation  distinguishes  it  from  sorrow,  from  death, 
from  tears.  But  pain  means  bodily  suffering.  Pain  means  that  suffering  which 
though  felt  in  the  soul  has  its  origin  in  the  body.  And  now  you  see  that  in  the 
better  world  there  is  to  be  an  end  of  it.  "  There  shall  be  no  more  pain."  In  the 
better  world  above,  then,  pain  shall  be  unknown.  Many  a  poor  sufferer,  doubtless, 
will  cherish  a  very  soothing  and  cheering  thought  of  heaven  as  the  only  place  where 
there  is  *'  no  more  pain."  Pain  is  in  itself  never  a  desirable  thing.  Great  good 
may  come  through  it,  or  of  it ;  but  the  actual  suffering  in  itself  must  always  be  a 
thing  from  which  we  would,  if  it  were  possible,  shrink  away.  You  know  how  pain, 
even  when  not  very  great,  and  even  when  not  likely  to  be  followed  by  serious  con- 
sequences, destroys  the  enjoyment  of  life.  A  thousand  blessings  may  be  neutralised, 
so  far  as  concerns  their  power  of  making  us  happy,  by  one  little  fretting  pain.  For 
pain  is  a  thing  that  you  cannot  well  forget  while  you  are  enduring  it ;  it  has  a 
wonderful  power  of  compelling  attention  to  itself  ;  you  cannot  long  or  heartily  think 
of  anything  else  while  you  are  suffering  acute  pain.  But  pain  does  worse  than  mar 
the  enjoyment  of  life ;  it  unfits,  as  a  general  rule,  for  the  work  and  duty  of  life.  As 
a  general  rule  you  cannot  do  your  work  well  when  you  are  suffering  pain  even  if 
not  very  great.  It  worries  you ;  it  draws  off  your  attention  from  what  you  are 
about ;  you  have  no  heart  for  your  task.  And  there  are  worse  possibilities  about 
pain  than  even  these.  I  do  not  forget  that  by  God's  blessed  Spirit's  working  it  has 
often  been  sanctified  to  work  the  soul  great  good  ;  it  has  served  to  wean  the  affec- 
tions from  the  things  of  time  and  sense.  But  this  is  the  tendency  of  pain  sanctified, 
it  is  not  the  natural  tendency  of  pain.  Do  not  you  know  that  pain  just  as  frequently 
makes  the  sufferer  fretful  and  impatient,  peevish  and  iU-tempered  to  those  around  ; 
nay,  ready  to  repine  at  the  allotment  and  providence  of  God  I  But  all  this  natur- 
ally leads  us  to  ask.  If  pain  be  so  bad  a  thing,  and  if  it  be  so  happy  an  assurance 
that  the  day  is  coming  when  there  shall  be  no  more  of  it,  why  is  it  here  at  all  ? 
1.  Pain  teaches  us,  for  one  thing,  how  feeble  and  dependent  we  are.  The  proverb 
says  that  pride  feels  no  pain  :  only  let  the  pain  be  great  enough  and  where  will  be 
the  pride  1    2.  And  for  a  second  thing,  pain  is  something  to  remind  us  of  the  evil 


CHAP.  XXI.  ]  RE  VELA  TION. 


of  sin.  You  never  would  have  had  a  headache  if  it  had  not  been  for  sin.  You 
never  would  have  known  a  sleepless  night,  a  shooting  pang  through  the  nerves,  or  a 
dull  weight  at  the  heart,  if  it  had  not  been  for  sin.  Our  natural  tendency  is  to 
think  to  ourselves,  oh,  sin  is  not  right — it  cannot  be  justified,  it  is  bad  no  doubt — 
but  it  is  not  such  a  very  great  matter  after  all.  What  does  pain  say  to  that,  think 
you  I  3.  And  another  lesson  taught  us  by  pain  is  suggested  by  this,  it  is  how 
terribly  God  can  punish ;  what  tremendous  appliances  of  punishment  He  has  at 
His  command.  What  fearful  suffering  God  does  inflict  even  in  this  world !  No 
man  would  have  kept  that  poor  sufferer  in  that  suffering  for  one  minute.  But  God 
keeps  him  there :  keeps  him  day  after  day,  week  after  week.  Oh,  we  have  an  in- 
flexible Judge  to  face,  merciful  though  He  be !  So  pain  teaches  something  of  the 
severity  of  God.  But  I  turn  gladly  to  another  lesson,  a  far  happier  lesson,  taught 
us  by  pain.  4.  It  reminds  us  how  great  was  our  blessed  Saviour's  love  for  our  poor 
sinful  souls,  which  made  Him  bear  such  an  unutterable  load  of  anguish  as  He  bore 
for  us.  Such  are  certain  lessons  which  we  are  taught  by  pain.  But  in  the  better 
world  pain  will  not  be  needful  to  enforce  them.  They  will  be  remembered  there  so 
far  as  it  is  fit  that  they  should  be  remembered,  without  the  necessity  of  having  that 
sad  monitor  ever  near.  And  thus,  as  in  that  happy  country,  pain  would  be  of  no 
use,  pain  will  go.  Oh  the  comfort  of  the  thought !  Christians  who  have  suffered 
much  in  this  being  remember  this,  that  in  heaven  there  shall  be  "  no  more  pain." 
The  parting  pang  which  the  believer  feels  in  leaving  this  world  is  the  very  last  that 
he  shall  ever  feel  at  all.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  No  pain  among  the  blessed : — 
I.  What  ake  the  evils  which  flow  from  pain,  and  usually  attend  it  in  this  life  ? 
1.  Pain  has  a  natural  tendency  to  make  the  mind  sorrowful  as  well  as  the  body 
uneasy.  2.  Another  evil  which  attends  on  pain  is  this,  that  it  so  indisposes  our 
nature  as  often  to  unfit  us  for  the  business  and  duties  of  the  present  state.  3.  Pain 
unfits  us  for  t^e  enjoyment  of  life  as  well  as  for  the  labours  and  duties  of  it. 
4.  Another  inconvenience  and  evil  which  belongs  to  pain  is  that  it  makes  time  and 
life  itself  appear  tedious  and  tiresome,  and  adds  a  new  burden  to  all  other  griev- 
ances. 5.  Another  evil  that  belongs  to  pain  is  that  it  has  an  unhappy  tendency  to 
ruffle  the  passions,  and  to  render  us  fretful  and  peevish  within  ourselves,  as  well  as 
towards  those  who  are  round  about  us.  6.  Pain  carries  a  temptation  with  it,  some- 
times to  re^pe  and  murmur  at  the  providence  of  God.  7.  To  add  no  more,  pain 
and  anguish  of  the  flesh  have  sometimes  prevailed  so  far  as  to  distract  the  mind  as 
well  as  destroy  the  body.  Extreme  smart  of  the  flesh  distresses  feeble  nature,  and 
turns  the  whole  frame  of  it  upside  down  in  wild  confusion.  It  has  actually  worn 
out  this  animal  frame,  and  stopped  all  the  springs  of  vital  motion.    11.  What  just 

AND  CONVINCING  ARGUMENTS  OR  PROOFS  CAN  BE  GIVEN  THAT  THERE  ABE  NO  PAINS  NOB 
UNEASY  SENSATIONS  TO  BE  FELT  BY  THE  SAINTS  IN  A  FUTUBE  STATE,  NOB  TO  BE  FEARED 

AFTER  THIS  LIFE  ?  1.  God  has  assuicd  US  in  His  Word  that  there  is  no  pain  for 
holy  souls  to  endure  in  the  world  to  come.  2.  God  has  not  provided  any  medium 
to  convey  pain  to  holy  souls  after  they  have  dropped  this  body  of  flesh.  3.  There 
are  no  moral  causes  nor  reasons  why  there  should  be  anything  of  pain  provided  for 
the  heavenly  state.  III.  What  are  the  chief  mobal  beasons  or  designs  of  the 
BLESSED  God  in  sending  pain  on  His  cbeatubes  hebe  below,  and  at  the  same  time 
show  that  these  designs  and  pubposes  of  God  abe  finished.  1.  Pain  is  sometimes 
sent  into  our  natures  to  awaken  slothful  and  drowsy  Christians  out  of  their  spiritual 
slumbers,  or  to  rouse  stupid  sinners  from  a  state  of  spii'.tual  death,  2.  To  punish 
men  for  their  faults  and  follies,  and  to  guard  them  against  new  temptations.  3.  To 
exercise  and  try  the  virtues  and  the  graces  of  His  people.  IV.  Inquire  what  are 
those  spibitual  lessons  op  instbuction  which  may  bb  learned  on  earth  from  the 
PAINS  WE  HAVE  SUFFERED  OB  MAY  SUFFER  IN  THE  FLESH.  1.  Pain  teaches  US  feelingly 
what  feeble  creatures  we  are,  and  how  entirely  dependent  on  God  for  every  moment 
of  ease.  2.  The  great  evil  that  is  contained  in  the  nature  of  sin,  because  it  is  the 
occasion  of  such  intense  pain  and  misery  to  human  nature.  3.  How  dreadfully 
the  great  God  can  punish  sin  and  sinners  when  He  pleases  in  this  world  or  in  others. 
4.  When  we  feel  acute  pains  we  may  learn  something  of  the  exceeding  greatness  of 
the  love  of  Christ,  even  the  Son  of  God,  that  glorious  Being  who  took  upon  Him 
flesh  and  blood  for  our  sakes,  that  He  might  be  capable  of  pain  and  death,  though  He 
had  never  sinned.  6.  The  value  and  worth  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  sweetness 
of  a  promise  which  can  give  the  kindest  relief  to  a  painful  hour,  and  soothe  the 
anguish  of  nature.  6.  The  excellency  and  use  of  the  mercy-seat  in  heaven,  and  the 
admirable  privilege  of  prayer.  Lessons :  1.  The  frequent  returns  of  pain  may  put 
OS  in  mind  to  offer  to  God  His  due  sacrifices  of  praise  for  the  years  of  ease  which 


e34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

we  have  enjoyed.  2.  To  sympathise  with  those  who  suffer.  3.  Since  our  natures 
are  subject  to  pain  it  should  teach  us  watchfuhiess  against  every  sin,  lest  we  double 
our  own  distresses  by  the  mixture  of  guilt  with  them.  4.  Pain  in  the  flesh  may 
sometimes  be  sent  to  teach  us  to  wean  ourselves  by  degrees  from  this  body  which 
we  love  too  well ;  this  body  which  has  all  the  springs  of  pain  in  it.  5.  We  are 
taught  to  breathe  after  the  blessedness  of  the  heavenly  state  wherein  there  shall  be 
no  pain.  {T.  Hannam.)  The  painless  world  : — I.  Pain  is  not  needed  there  to 
STIMULATE  SCIENTIFIC  KESEABCH.  Supreme  love  for  the  Creator  will  give  men  such 
a  delightful  interest  in  all  His  works  as  will  make  inquiry  the  highest  delight  of 
their  nature.  11.  Pain  is  not  needed  there  to  test  the  reality  ofmoraij  principle. 
The  character  will  be  perfected — the  gold  purified  from  all  alloy.  III.  Pain  is  not 
needed  there  to  promote  the  development  of  character.  We  shall  be  like  Christ, 
changed  into  His  image,  from  glory  to  glory.  IV.  Pain  is  not  needed  there  to  aid 
us  in  appreciating  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  V.  Pain  is  not  needed  there  to 
IMPRESS  us  with  THE  ENORMITY  OF  SIN.  (D.  Thomas,  D.B.)  Pain  :  its  mystery 
and  meaning  : — Suffering  is  the  most  stupendous  fact  in  human  experience ;  it  is 
the  most  difficult  problem  in  our  religion.  Alas  !  it  is  not  necessary  to  prove  its 
existence.  We  see  it  everywhere.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  that  amidst  such  surround- 
ings sensitive  persons,  who  feel  the  thrusts  of  life  keenly,  and  acutely  sympathise 
with  pain  in  its  manifold  forms,  as  experienced  by  others,  can  by  means  of  the 
imagination  be  cheered  with  a  f oreglance  of  a  better  state  of  things  when  the  former 
things  shall  have  passed  away.  The  Apostle  Paul,  a  man  of  massive  and  logical 
intellect,  the  greatest  Jew  that  ever  lived,  was  a  glorious  dreamer  who  found  com- 
fort and  courage  in  the  bright  prospect  of  the  far-off  future.  The  first  point  of  view 
in  which  pain  presents  itself  is  that  of  a  mystery.  Let  us  hear  what  metaphysicians 
have  to  say  respecting  it.  Plato  tells  us  that  pain  is  the  root,  the  condition,  the 
antecedent  of  pleasure,  and  the  latter  is  only  a  restoration  of  the  feeling  subject  from* 
a  state  contrary  to  nature  to  a  state  conformable  with  nature.  1  he  Kantian  philo- 
sophy maintains  that  pleasure  is  the  feeUng  of  the  furtherance,  pain  of  the  hind- 
rance of  life.  "  Pleasure,"  says  Hamilton,  "  is  a  reflex  of  the  spontaneous  and 
unimpeded  exertion  of  a  power,  of  whose  energy  we  are  conscious.  Pain,  a  reflex 
of  the  overstrained  or  repressed  exertion  of  such  a  power."  "  Pain,"  affirms 
Calderwood,  "  is  not  merely  a  negation  or  want  of  pleasure,  but  a  positive  experi- 
ence opposite  in  kind."  "  By  pleasure  and  pain  I  must  be  understood  to  mean 
whatsoever  delight  or  uneasiness  is  felt  by  us,  whether  arising  from  any  grateful  or 
unacceptable  sensation  or  reflection,"  is  the  opinion  expressed  by  John  Locke. 
After  reading  all  that  philosophers  have  written  on  the  subject,  mankind  will  stiU 
regard  it  as  an  unmitigated  evil,  nor  will  they  be  on  the  way  to  unravel  the  mystery. 
It  may  be  said  that  this  is  a  world  of  probation,  and  that  pain  ia  penal  or  discipli- 
nary. Such  is  often  the  case,  but  it  is  not  always  so.  Walk  through  the  lengthy 
wards  of  a  children's  hospital.  There  is  no  discipline  there.  Poor  children  I  they 
are  too  young  to  be  its  fitting  subjects.  Take  man  as  we  find  him— African  or 
Englishman,  Greek  or  Eoman— and  study  what  you  see.  The  poor  beggar  that 
sweeps  the  crossing,  and  that  holds  out  his  hat  to  you  for  a  copper,  is  a  child  of  God 
as  much  as  you  ;  the  only  difference  being  that  perhaps  you  know  it  and  try  to  act 
like  a  child,  while  he  has  forgotten  it  altogether.  Every-day  life  experiences  are 
illustrative  of  the  Pauline  expression,  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth,"  &c.  Does 
Almighty  God  find  His  pleasure  in  the  most  degraded  form  of  sensualism,  in 
witnessing  the  torments  of  His  creatures?  Were  such  a  conclusion  possible,  I 
could  not  ask  you  to  render  homage  to  Him,  because  He  is  the  sweetest,  gentlest, 
noblest  of  beings.  I  should  become  the  victim  of  despair.  But  let  me  crush  the 
spirit  of  blasphemy,  and  clear  up  this  dark  mystery  by  consulting  the  oracles  of 
God.  Therein  I  learn  that  man  is  the  author  of  all  the  misery  he  endures.  God 
made  man  free,  the  arbiter  of  his  destiny ;  but  when  put  to  the  proof  he  failed, 
yielded  to  temptation,  and  chose  evil  for  his  good.  Man  being  the  creature  of  sin, 
disease,  and  pain,  his  posterity,  from  the  hour  of  birth,  must  have  inherent  in  their 
nature  the  elements  of  multiform  suffering.  Here  you  see  that  sin  is  not  necessarily 
the  penalty,  but  the  consequence,  always  of  previous  transgression.  Moreover,  you 
will  observe  that  each  generation,  by  its  own  irregularities,  will  entail  upon  its  suc- 
cessor minds  more  debased,  and  bodies  more  accessible  to  disease.  Here  you  have 
an  explanation  of  the  mystery  of  pain.  From  our  own  experience  we  can  reason 
that  pain  in  its  manifold  shapes  works  for  our  good.  Tell  pie  the  painful  feeling 
in  you,  and  I  will  explain  to  you  its  mode  of  operation.  Have  you  a  want  unsatis- 
fied, are  you  weary  of  your  pleasures,  are  you  discontented  with  your  circumstances  ? 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  635 

In  this  feeling  there  is  a  strong  impulse  to  action.  Are  you  depressed  by  a  sense  of 
deficiency  or  of  transgression?  Therein  you  have  an  impulse  towards  virtue, 
towards  improvement.  Do  you  sigh  for  friendship,  or  feel  the  sting  of  unrequited 
love?  Therein  you  are  urged  to  live  out  of  self,  and  to  be  kind,  generous,  and 
pitiful  to  the  many  hearts  that  bleed  in  this  cold  and  selfish  world.  Are  you  sick — 
bereaved  ?  Has  pain  deadened  your  body  to  all  sensuous  pleasure  ?  Or,  surrounded 
by  your  kind,  is  your  heart  a  desolation  ?  Fortitude,  faith,  patience,  trust  in 
heaven,  the  hope  of  heaven — there  are  no  other  resources  when  the  heart  is  broken 
and  the  body  shattered  by  disease.  To  the  eye  of  a  sculptor  in  every  block  of  stone 
there  is  a  statue  ;  but  to  make  it  visible  to  every  eye  it  must  be  cut  out  of  the  block 
with  mallet  and  chisel.  But  the  stone  does  not  see  the  end  in  view,  it  only  feels  the 
rough  treatment  which  it  querulously  resents.  It  wishes  to  be  left  alone.  It  is 
quite  satisfied  with  itself  as  it  is.  "How  long  must  I  suffer?"  asks  the  stone 
sorrowfully.  "  Only  till  all  that  is  unsuitable  and  improper  shall  be  removed," 
rejoins  the  chisel ;  "  and  when  made  meet  for  the  high  situation  you  are  to  occupy, 
you  will  be  placed  amongst  the  others,  and  be  as  beautiful  as  they  are."  Pain  is 
oftentimes  the  result  of  disobedience  to  physical  laws ;  not  seldom  is  it  hereditary, 
the  diseased  body  and  corrupt  affections  being  transmitted  by  parents  to  their  off- 
spring ;  but  in  many  instances  it  is  not  traceable  to  either  of  these  causes.  A  being 
may  be  sinless  and  still  a  sufferer ;  a  sufferer,  not  because  his  heart  is  base,  but 
because  his  soul  is  noble.  If  we  be  pitiful,  tender,  and  sympathetic,  we  cannot 
escape  suffering.  Such  suffering  develops  character  ;  and  by  it  we  become  partakers 
of  God's  holiness — of  His  exquisite  compassion  and  sensibility.  Do  not,  therefore, 
suppose  that  simply  because  you  suffer  you  are  set  apart  of  God  and  made  an 
example.  You  are  under  the  law  which  Christ  lived  under,  which  all  human 
families  live  under.  Those  who  have  never  suffered  know  only  the  surface  of  hfe. 
As  one  must  strike  flint  to  call  forth  sparks  of  fire,  so  must  we  strike  the  heart  to 
make  it  capable  of  great  and  noble  deeds.  Austerity  and  mortification  moulded  the 
saints  of  old.  They  met  misfortune  with  a  smile,  and  scorned  the  fear  of  death 
even  when  the  fire  was  at  the  stake,  and  the  flames  rose  around  their  heads,  because 
they  knew  that  out  of  their  very  ashes  God  would  call  them  to  an  immortality  of 
happiness.  This  is  the  true  effect  of  sorrow :  it  detaches  us  from  the  earth,  lifts  us 
up  to  heaven,  and  unites  us  to  God.  {J.  E.  Foster,  M.A.)  Pain  : — I.  The  exist- 
ence, AND  EVEN  THE  DOMINANCE  OP  PAIN.  I  do  Hot  think  that  We  get  to  the  deepest 
root  of  this  tree  of  mystery  by  the  common  assertion  that  it  was  the  sin  of  man  from 
which  all  death  and  pain  sprang.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  the  higher  the  nature 
the  more  sensitive  it  is  to  pain.  II.  It  is  not  impossible  fob  us  to  discover  some  op 
THE  PUBPOSES  OF  PAIN,  whose  prevalence  in  this  world  is  so  widespread.  1.  Take 
one  of  the  lower  signs  of  human  progress  by  way  of  example.  Think  of  the  increase 
in  knowledge  and  skill  which  has  followed  on  the  sufferings  of  the  race.  2.  Think 
next  of  the  connection  existing  between  sufferers  and  sympathy.  May  it  not  be  a 
part  of  God's  purpose  in  permitting  pain  that  it  links  us  together  in  the  bonds  of 
love  ?  3.  Nor  must  we  overlook  the  effect  of  pain  aad  sorrow  on  moral  character 
and  on  religious  faith.  Wrongly  received,  they  provoke  to  sin ;  rightly  received, 
they  lead  us  to  self-conquest,  to  patience,  to  sympathy  for  others,  and  to  fellowship 
with  Christ.  (A.  Rowland.)  Pain  ended: — "Neither  shall  there  be  anymore 
pain."  This  is  the  inscription  on  the  tomb  of  Kobert  Hall  in  Bristol  cemetery. 
He  would  often  roll  on  the  carpet  in  agony,  we  are  told,  with  the  pain  in  his 
back.  (Thos.  Cooper.)  Chronic  suffering  : — Pascal,  the  great  mathematician 
and  moralist,  said,  "  From  the  day  that  I  was  eighteen  I  do  not  know  that  I 
have  ever  passed  a  single  day  without  pain.  {J.  F.  B.  Tinting,  B.A.)  F. 
W.  Robertson's  sufferings : — Torturing  pains  in  the  back  of  his  head  and  neck, 
as  if  an  eagle  were  rending  there  with  its  talons,  made  life  dreadful  to  him. 
During  Monday,  Tuesday,  and  the  greater  part  of  Wednesday  in  every  week  he 
suffered  severely.  Alone  in  his  room  he  lay  on  the  rug,  his  head  resting  on  the 
bar  of  a  chair,  clenching  his  teeth  to  prevent  the  groans  which,  even  through  the 
sleepless  length  of  solitary  nights,  the  ravaging  pain  could  never  draw  from  his 
manliness.  {S.  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  For  the  former  things  are  passed  away. — The 
transient  making  room  for  the  permanent : — As  a  mere  statement  of  a  fact  obvious  to 
one  who  reviews  any  period  of  a  history  from  a  point  subsequently  reached,  this  of 
course  is  comparatively  commonplace.  The  former  things  are  always  passing  away 
as  one  advances  in  knowledge  and  character  and  power.  It  is  so  with  the  individual. 
No  man  or  woman  has  reached  the  period  of  maturity  without  having  left  behind 
many  things  which  belong  to  the  earlier  periods  of  life.     And  what  is  true  of  the 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

individual  is  true  as  well  of  the  community  ;  true  of  a  city.  So  it  is  with  the  world 
itself.  All  former  things  are  continually  passing  away.  The  early  cannibalism, 
the  early  human  sacrifices ;  war  undertaken  simply  in  an  impulse  of  rapacity  and 
carried  on  in  a  spirit  of  ferocious  cruelty ;  tyrannies,  kingly  and  feudal ;  slaveries 
which  were  so  universal  in  the  past — they  have  gone  into  history.  Society,  in  the 
world  at  large,  has  thus  been  radically  changed,  and  while  perhaps  not  complete, 
certainly  the  life  is  better  ;  it  has  more  liberal  institutions,  juster  legislation,  wider 
possibilities,  a  trust  in  God  more  quickening,  more  instructive  literature,  more  lovely 
and  laudable  arts  than  it  had  in  the  earlier  time.  Former  things  from  it  have 
passed  away,  the  chains  have  dropped  from  the  limbs  of  the  emancipated  slave  as 
the  darkness  passes  from  the  vision  under  the  hand  of  the  skiKul  surgeon  who 
removes  the  cataract  from  the  eye.  Many  things  are  lost  which  we  would  like  to 
keep  in  this  process  of  development,  and  which  we  would  like  to  blend  with  the 
knowledge  and  power  of  our  maturer  years — the  simplicity  of  childhood,  its  capacity 
for  learning,  its  confidence  and  admiration  and  wonder.  In  the  city  as  it  goes  on 
in  opulence  and  power  we  would  like  to  retain,  if  it  were  possible,  the  early  neigh- 
bourly feeling,  early  simplicity  of  manners.  And  the  world  at  large  loses  some- 
thing in  losing  its  primitive  fancies,  which  belong  to  the  auroral  period  of  human 
experience.  And  yet,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  vastly  for  the  better,  as  we  are  constantly 
aware.  The  hope  of  humanity  consists  in  this  continual  progress,  where  the  former 
things  are  passing  away  and  the  new  things  are  being  attained  and  realised.  It  is 
the  introduction  of  Christianity  into  such  sluggish,  stagnant  and  unaspiring  empires 
as  those  of  China  or  of  Japan,  as  they  were  only  a  single  century  ago,  which  gives 
for  them  hope  and  promise  as  concerning  the  future.  The  former  things  are  pass- 
ing away.  In  the  nature  of  the  case  they  must  pass  away  from  the  individual  and 
from  the  race,  as  higher  influences  come  to  act  upon  it.  So  we  should  anticipate 
that  when  John,  the  prophet  of  the  Apocalypse,  looked  forward  into  the  final  period 
of  human  history  he  would  be  struck  with  this  fact  that  all  the  former  things  were 
passed  away  and  He  who  is  Lord  of  the  earth  hath  made  all  things  new.  He  would 
find  his  prophecy  in  part  realised  if  he  were  to  return  again  upon  the  earth  and 
mingle  in  human  society  as  it  now  exists.  But  yet  these  changes  as  they  have 
already  appeared,  and  as  he  would  see  them  if  he  were  to  revisit  the  planet,  are 
only  prophetic  of  changes  which  are  to  be  realised  when  the  power  by  which  tiiese 
have  been  wrought  has  come  to  its  complete  consummation  in  history.  And  it  is 
a  beautiful  thing  in  his  prophecy  that,  looking  forward  to  the  very  termination  of 
history  on  earth,  he  sees  the  earth  and  the  heavens  closely  assimilated,  so  that  you 
cannot  tell  where  the  horizon  of  the  earth  ends  and  that  of  heaven  begins.  There 
are  some  points  I  will  remark  upon  for  your  consideration.  1.  One  is  that  we  here 
touch  the  characteristic  difference  between  the  Christian  and  any  other  form  of 
religion  known  in  the  world.  What  is  sadder  in  history  than  to  see  how  the  Greek 
mind,  the  Egyptian  mind,  the  Persian  mind,  and  the  Roman  mind  had  sunk  into 
hopelessness  of  the  future,  at  the  time  when  the  gospel  of  Christ  was  preached  in 
the  world.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gospel  looks  forward  to  glory  to  be  realised  in 
the  centuries  to  come ;  sees  for  ever  things  passing  away  that  better  things  may 
appear ;  sees  the  customs  of  society  shivered  and  suddenly  disappearing  or  gradually 
disintegrating,  or  falling  into  heaps  of  rubbish.  So  in  all  a  new  force  is  working  in 
the  world  to  lead  men  forward  in  communities  to  a  higher  level  and  nobler  vision. 
It  expects  its  ultimate  victory  in  the  glory  of  the  future.  2.  That  is  one  thought, 
and  another  is  of  the  superb  confidence  which  the  early  Christianity  felt  in  itself 
and  which  its  teachers  had  in  it.  It  is  to  conquer  where  philosophies  have  failed  ; 
it  is  to  triumph  where  arts  have  only  degraded  the  world  ;  it  is  to  purify  where  the 
human  race  has  been  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  in  the  mire  of  sin.  Now,  cannot  we 
enter  into  the  sublime  confidence  of  the  apostles,  with  Christianity  enthroned  already 
over  the  larger  half  of  the  world  ?  I  am  ashamed  of  myself ;  I  am  ashamed  of  any 
Christian  individual  or  Church  where  there  is  the  least  fear  or  apprehension  con- 
cerning the  progress  and  the  mastery  of  this  religion,  whose  earliest  disciples  knew 
its  power,  because  they  had  seen  the  Lord ;  had  stood  around  His  Cross  ;  had  looked 
into  the  gate  of  the  sepulchre  from  which  He  had  come  forth.  3.  Another  thought 
is  suggested — namely,  this :  I  have  said  already  that  we  are  sorry  to  lose  many 
things  which  we,  after  all,  have  to  leave  behind  us  as  we  go  on  in  our  life  person- 
ally or  as  communities,  but  when  sin  is  expelled  there  is  no  longer  any  reason  why 
that  which  has  been  lovely  in  the  earlier  life  of  any  person  should  not  continue,  and 
only  come  to  its  more  perfect  manifestation  in  the  completed  maturity.  What  is  it 
that  corrodes  and  destroys  iiie  simplicity  of  childhood  ?     What  is  it  that  destroys 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  637 

that  early  and  tender  confidence  in  others  which  is  the  beauty  of  our  unfolding  life  ? 
What  is  it  that  makes  us  desirous  in  future  life  of  the  consciousness  of  power  out  of 
which  comes  pride  ?  Of  the  consciousness  of  position  out  of  which  we  are  aware 
that  we  have  lost  the  pure  sincerity  and  sweetness  of  our  childhood's  years? 
Everywhere  it  is  the  element  of  sin.  When  at  last  that  completed  state  is  realised 
from  which  sin  itself  is  eliminated,  all  the  innocence  of  childhood  with  all  the 
wisdom  of  age  shall  be  charmingly  combined ;  all  the  sweetness  of  early  fancy  with 
all  the  power  of  developed  faculty  ;  and  then,  in  addition  to  this,  that  which  has 
been  imperfect  and  ignorant  in  the  first  will  become  an  occasion  of  gladness  and 
praise  because  we  have  been  delivered  from  it.  4.  Finally,  the  perfection  of  that 
state  is  the  warrant  of  its  fixedness  and  finality  ;  that  which  is  perfect  is  susceptible 
of  no  further  change ;  you  cannot  re-make  the  sunshine,  because  it  is  perfect,  the 
same  to-day  as  when  it  fell  on  the  bowers  and  blooms  of  paradise ;  you  cannot 
re-make  the  atmosphere,  because  it  is  perfect,  the  same  as  when  the  lungs  first 
inhaled  it  on  the  earth ;  you  cannot  re-make  the  element  of  water,  or  the  blue  of 
the  sky,  or  the  green  of  the  verdure,  or  the  sunset  splendours.  When  this  final 
stage  is  reached  for  which  the  Lord  died,  on  account  of  which  He  underwent  His 
sacrifice,  which  the  apostle  saw  in  prophetic  vision,  of  which  we  beforehand  may 
catch  the  beauty  through  his  eyes,  and  for  which  it  is  the  privilege  in  life  of  each 
of  us  to  work  and  pray ;  when  that  final  period  comes  where  earth  and  heaven 
blend  and  holiness  and  wisdom  bring  perfect  peace,  the  absolute  completion  of  it, 
with  sin  expelled  and  grief  left  behind,  is  the  Divine  warrant  that  it  shall  be  ever- 
lasting. {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  The  coming  of  the  perfect^  and  the  departure  of  the 
imperfect : — I.  The  fokmer  things  connected  with  the  body  have  passed  away. 
Our  bodies  shared  the  ruin  into  which  sin  brought  our  race.  Mortality  and  corrup- 
tion took  possession  of  them.  They  became  subject  to  pain,  and  weariness,  and 
disease,  in  every  organ  and  limb.  All  this  shall  yet  be  reversed.  Former  things 
shall  pass  away.  This  head  shall  ache  no  more ;  these  hands  and  feet  shall  be 
weary  no  more ;  this  flesh  shall  throb  with  anguish  no  more.  II.  The  former 
THINGS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  SOUL  HAVE  PASSED  AWAY.  The  beginning  of  this  renova- 
tion was  our  "  being  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope."  This  re-begetting  dis- 
placed the  old  things  and  introduced  the  new.  The  sin,  and  the  darkness,  and  the 
misery,  and  the  unbelief,  and  the  distance  from  God — all  these  shall  come  to  a 
perpetual  end.  In  their  place  shall  come  holiness,  and  love,  and  light,  and  joy, 
and  everlasting  nearness — unchanging  and  unending  fellowship  with  that  Jehovah 
in  whom  is  life  eternal.  III.  The  former  things  connected  with  the  earth  have 
PASSED  AWAY.  This  earth  is  the  seat  of  evil  since  man  fell.  The  curse  came  down 
on  it ;  creation  was  subjected  to  the  bondage  of  corruption ;  Satan  took  possession 
of  it.  The  devouring  lion  shall  be  in  chains,  and  "  no  lion  shall  be  there."  The 
curse  shall  vanish  from  creation ;  the  blight  disappear.  Beauty  shall  clothe  all 
things.  Paradise  shall  return.  Holiness  shall  revisit  earth.  God  shall  once  more 
delight  in  it  and  set  His  throne  in  it.  Eighteousness  shall  flourish,  and  holiness  to 
the  Lord  be  inscribed  everywhere.  And  all  this  irreversible !  No  second  fall. 
Messiah — even  He  who  died  for  us  and  who  rose  again — is  on  the  throne,  and  no 
usurper  can  assail  it.    He  ever  lives  and  ever  reigns.     (H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5-8.  He  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said,  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new. — 
One  matchless  Creator : — Who  is  He  that  brings  into  existence  on  our  planet  a  new 
order  of  spiritual  things,  that  creates  a  new  moral  heavens  and  earth?  I.  He 
IS  IMMUTABLY  TRUTHFUL.  What  He  has  spoken  not  only  has  been  done,  but  is  being 
done,  and  must  be  done.  II.  He  is  everlasting.  HI.  He  is  infinitely  benefi- 
cent. He  pours  forth  in  all  directions  the  refreshing  and  crystal  streams.  And  all 
this  freely,  without  any  coercion,  hmitation,  partiality,  or  pause;  freely  as  He 
gives  the  beams  of  day  and  the  waves  of  vital  air.  IV.  He  is  surpassingly 
CONDESCENDING.  Two  things  are  here  stated  which  suggest  this  amazing  con- 
descension :  1.  This  recognition  of  every  individual  who  does  his  duty.  ••  He 
that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things."  That  He  should  notice  a  man  in  the 
mighty  aggregate  may  well  impress  us  with  His  condescension,  but  that  He  should 
notice  individual  man,  how  much  more  1  Here  we  have  the  universe  won  by  self- 
conquest.  Notice:  (1)  Self -conquest  as  the  grand  work  of  man.  The  soul  should 
be  ruled  by  sympathy  with  Gk)d,  sympathy  with  His  character,  His  operation.  His 
plans.  In  these  two  things  self-conquest  consists,  and  such  conquests  require 
battling — resolute,  brave,  persistent,  invincible  battling.  (2)  Self-conquest  as  win- 
ning the  universe.     "He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things."    He  gets  the 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

■whole  of  it,  he  penetrates  its  meaning,  appropriates  its  truth,  admires  its  beauties, 
drinks  in  its  poetry,  revels  in  its  spirit,  exults  in  its  God,  and  says,  "  The  Lord  is 
my  portion."  He  gets  the  whole  of  it  to  enjoy  for  ever.  2.  The  amazing  con- 
descension is  seen  in  the  affiliation  of  every  individual  man  that  does  his  duty. 
"And  he  shall  be  My  son."  He  only  is  a  son  who  has  the  true  filial  instinct, 
involving  trust,  love,  obedience,  acquiescence.  The  great  mission  of  Christ  into 
our  world  was  to  generate  in  humanity  this  true  filial  disposition,  enabling  them  to 
address  the  Infinite  as  "  our  Father."  V.  He  is  essentially  sin-resistino.  Sin  is 
cowardice,  sin  is  faithless,  sin  is  abhorrent,  sin  is  murderous,  sin  is  lascivious,  sin 
is  deceptive  and  idolatrous.  All  these  productions  of  sin  are  abhorrent  to  the 
Divine  nature.  "  It  is  the  abominable  thing  "  which  He  hates,  and  He  consigns  sin 
to  irretrievable  destruction,  for  it  is  destined  to  have  its  part  in  "  the  lake  which 
burneth  with  fire."  {Homilist.)  Christ  the  Renovator :  an  anticipation : — 
There  are  two  words  in  the  original  which  are  necessarily  translated  alike — " new" 
— in  our  Testaments.  Of  these  two  adjectives,  one  signifies  new  in  relation  to 
time,  the  other  new  in  relation  to  quality — the  first  temporal  novelty,  the  second 
novelty  intellectual  or  spiritual.  The  Apocalypse  is  full  of  the  Divine  novelty 
implied  by  the  latter  of  these  two  words.  Up  above  we  see  "  a  new  heaven." 
Down  below  the  long  "  becoming "  of  the  evolution  of  history  and  nature  is 
complete,  the  "one  far-off  divine  event"  is  reached ;  we  have  "a  new  earth." 
Out  of  the  city  that  was  in  idea  perfectly  holy  and  beautiful,  but  which  was  marred 
by  sin,  and  whose  battlements  were  never  steeped  with  the  sunrise  of  the  day  for 
which  we  wait — out  of  it,  as  it  were,  grew  "  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem."  Christ 
is  the  One  Renovator.  "  He  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  saith,  Behold,  I  make  all 
things  new."  I.  The  source  of  the  new  creation  is  the  new  humanity,  Christ 
THE  Second  Adam.  The  Incarnation  is  the  creation  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost  of  a  new 
member  of  the  human  family  to  be  the  head  of  "  a  people  that  shall  be  bom."  It 
was  not  merely  the  most  consummate  possible  evolution  of  pre-existing  moral  and 
historical  elements.  The  gardener  sees  a  stem  which  his  experience  tells  him  is 
endowed  with  peculiar  capacities.  He  enriches  it  by,  grafting  into  it  a  new  scion, 
not  of  or  from  the  tree,  but  from  another  which  is  of  a  higher  and  nobler  kind. 
Nothing  less  than  this  is  in  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation.  This,  I  believe,  was 
foretold  by  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xxxi.  22).  II.  The  result  of  this  is  the  creation  in 
Christ  and  by  Christ  of  a  new  humanity.  I  say,  by  Christ.  Christianity  has  a 
history,  but  is  not  a  history.  Christianity  has  a  book,  but  is  not  a  book.  An  idea 
may  be  great,  a  history  may  be  great,  but  a  person  is  greater.  Luther's  work,  or 
Napoleon's  work,  is  now  linked  to  Luther's  and  Napoleon's  ideas  or  history,  and  to 
nothing  else.  We  have  the  ideas  and  the  history  of  Christ  in  the  Gospels  and 
Epistles,  the  most  efficacious  of  all  ideas,  the  most  true  and  living  of  all  history. 
But  Christ's  work  continues  linked  to  Christ's  life.  Christ  is  not  merely  the  central 
figure  of  the  Galilean  idyll,  or  a  form  nailed  to  a  crucifix,  or  a  pathetic  memory. 
Our  relation  to  Him  is  not  merely  one  of  idea,  or  of  recollection,  or  of  literary 
sympathy.  It  is  a  present  union  of  life  with  life.  He  does  not  say — "  because  My 
words  shall  be  gathered  up  and  written  down  with  absolute  truth,  My  religion  shall 
live."  He  does  say — "  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  This  new  creation  by 
Christ  begins  in  the  depths  of  the  human  heart  and  life.  One  of  the  world's 
greatest  writers  has  illustrated  the  difference  between  true  and  false  schemes  of 
virtue  by  the  difference  between  the  work  of  the  statuary  and  that  of  nature.  The 
statuary  deals  with  his  marble  piecemeal ;  he  is  occupied  with  the  curve  of  a 
finger-nail,  or  the  position  of  a  lock  of  hair,  and  while  so  occupied  can  do  no  more. 
But  nature  is  at  work  with  a  simultaneous  omnipresence  in  root  and  leaf  and 
flower.  Christ's  renovation  is  unexhausted  and  inexhaustible.  He  says  Himself, 
"  Behold,  I  make  all  thmgs  new."  HI.  We  naturally — perhaps  in  these  days 
uneasily — proceed  to  ask  whether  the  words  of  the  text  admit  of  application  to 

THE  INXIiLLECTUAL  AS  WELL  AS  SOCIAL  PROGRESS   OF   CHRISTENDOM.      ThoSC   of   US   who 

have  seriously  tried  to  reconcile  that  in  us  which  thinks  with  that  which  feels  and 
prays  may  entertain  some  misgiving.  As  we  look  back  to  the  point  from  which  we 
started  many  years  ago  we  recognise  the  fact  that,  slowly  it  may  be,  but  surely,  we 
have  advanced  from  our  old  position.  1.  As  we  turn  to  nature,  all  of  us  at  least 
who  are  over  fifty  will  remember  our  youthful  view  of  Genesis,  with  its  rash 
anathemas  and  unhesitating  dogmatism,  with  its  crude  schemes  of  premature 
conciliation.  All  things  were  flashed  out  of  nothing,  moment  by  moment,  in  six 
consecutive  days  of  twenty-four  hours.  Eeflection  and  knowledge  have  convinced  us 
that  the  anticipation  of  exact  science  was  not  one  of  the  purposes  of  the  Bible. 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION. 


But  there  is  a  higher  life  than  that  of  which  science  knows.  There  is  a  light  in 
which  it  lives.  The  light  for  that  life  which  is  beyond  science  comes  to  us  through 
the  revelation  of  Moses.  What,  then,  do  we  learn  from  the  first  pages  of  the 
Bible?  We  say,  "I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth,"  not  less  truly  than  of  old,  but  with  a  deeper  and  larger  meaning.  Christ 
says  to  us  even  as  we  repeat  the  beginning  of  our  creed,  "  Behold,  I  make  all 
things  new."  2.  As  we  turn  to  Scripture  we  meet  with  a  similar  renovation  of  our 
earlier  view.  Consider,  for  instance,  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  Gospels.  It 
may  be  looked  upon  as  ascertained  that  the  Gospels  were  all  written  within  the 
first  century,  none  earlier  than  about  a.d.  60,  none  much  later  than  about  a.d,  80. 
This  historical  fact  in  itself  seems  strange  to  certain  primary  notions  from  which 
most  of  us  started.  Yet  a  little  reflection  dissipates  our  uneasiness.  In  the  bridal 
days  which  succeeded  Pentecost  the  young  Church  was  filled  with  a  heavenly 
enthusiasm.  At  first,  then,  thefe  was  not — and  there  needed  not  to  be — any  official 
memorial  of  the  life  of  Jesus.  The  apostle's  sermons  were  sometimes,  perhaps 
generally,  summaries  of  the  characteristics  of  that  life.  In  portions  of  the  apostolic 
epistles  particular  incidents  are  touched  upon  briefly — e.g. ,  the  birth,  the  circum- 
cision, the  transfiguration.  His  poverty,  the  fact  that  He  came  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  His  going  without  the  camp  bearing  His  Cross,  the  "Abba,  Father,"  the 
"  strong  crying  and  tears "  of  Gethsemane.  It  seems  to  be  certain  that  an 
unwritten  life  of  Jesus,  graven  upon  the  living  heart  of  the  Church,  preceded  the 
written  life.  In  this,  indeed,  there  is  no  derogation  from  the  real  glory  of  the 
written  word.  No  ark  of  the  new  covenant,  overlaid  round  about  with  gold,  kept 
in  its  side  the  book  of  the  new  law.  Yet  the  Holy  Spirit — without  a  separate 
miracle  working  in  each  syllable  and  letter — freely  used  the  memory  and  intelligence 
of  apostles  and  their  disciples,  that  Christ's  people  in  all  ages  might  know  the 
certainty  of  those  things  wherein  they  had  been  instructed ;  and  that  across  the 
gulf  of  ages,  through  the  mists  of  history,  our  eyes  might  see  the  authentic 
lineaments  of  the  King  in  His  beauty.  Further,  in  the  three  first  evangelists  there 
is  a  certain  common  basis  of  similar,  or  identical,  sentences  and  words.  Critics 
may  show  that  Matthew  copied  from  Luke,  or  Luke  from  Matthew ;  may  discuss 
whether  Matthew  is  the  "  primitive  "  of  Mark,  or  Mark  of  Matthew.  Even  without 
taking  into  account  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  to  *  bring  all  things  to  their  remem- 
brance whatsoever  He  had  said  unto  them,"  such  words  from  such  a  teacher  could 
never  perish  from  the  earth.  Thus,  any  change  which  criticism  may  make  in  our 
view  of  the  origin  and  character  of  the  Gospels  tends  to  elevate  our  conception  of 
their  subject.  We  see  in  them  a  Saviour  more  exalted,  if  that  were  possible.  We 
hear  words  yet  deeper  and  more  tender.  Here,  too,  Christ  saith,  "  Behold,  I  make 
aU  things  new."  3.  As  we  contemplate  the  process  of  religious  thought,  we  may  be 
sometimes  tempted  to  fear  that  a  period  is  approaching  when  religion  wiU  be  so 
spiritualised  as  to  dissolve  away.  The  answer  is  afforded  by  simply  considering 
the  abiding,  irreducible  elements  in  man's  nature— his  intellect,  his  conscience,  his 
affections.  {Abp.  Wm.  Alexander,)  Christ  the  true  Reformer  : — The  Church  of 
Christ  has  been  from  its  foundation  a  society  for  the  promotion  of  the  reform  of 
naankind.  You  may  not,  perhaps,  be  willing  to  recognise  this  at  first,  for  two 
reasons.  First,  so  much  has  been  accomplished.  Bemember  the  state  of  things  in 
the  world  before  Christ  came.  A  world  in  which  men  and  women  were  bound 
down  in  cruel  bondage,  in  which  there  were  no  hospitals  for  the  sick.  How  com- 
pletely Christianity  has  changed  the  whole  course  of  life.  But  there  is  another 
reason  why  you  may  find  it  very  hard  to  identify  the  Christian  religion  with 
reform.  It  is  because  the  reform  which  the  Christian  religion  works  is  based  on 
the  life,  the  teaching,  and  the  death  of  one  man,  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God.  (1)  How  true  a  reformer  Jesus  was  in  His  life.  He  shared  the  fate 
of  all  reformers — "  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  <fec.  Like  Socrates,  like 
Savonarola,  Latimer,  and  John  Huss  ;  like  many  another  in  Church  and  State,  He 
was  killed  by  the  people.  Your  true  Reformer  is  no  demagogue;  he  does  not 
flatter  the  people :  he  tells  them  the  truth.  (2)  Notice  Christ's  aims  and  His 
methods.  His  aim  was  not  that  of  most  reformers.  He  did  not  seek  in  the  first 
place  to  make  men  happy,  but  to  make  them  holy.  As  to  His  methods.  In  the  first 
place,  Christ  began  from  the  centre  and  worked  towards  the  circumference.  He  did 
not  come  into  the  world  with  any  elaborate  scheme  for  the  regeneration  of  society : 
He  had  no  scheme  for  making  men  wake  up  some  fine  morning  and  find  themselves 
all  happy  and  good.  Our  Lord  took  people  as  He  met  them,  singly,  and  got  hold 
of  their  wills,  and  changed  and  converted  them.     This  is  the  reform  which  alone 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

can  make  other  reforms  beneficial,  (2)  A  second  part  of  Christ's  method  was  that 
the  reform  was  thorough  and  complete,  extending  to  the  body,  soul,  and  spirit. 
(3)  The  methods  of  reform  adopted  by  Jesus  Christ  were  gradual.  He  Himself 
compares  His  influence  to  the  leaven,  &c.  So  it  has  ever  been  with  the  influence 
4,nd  teaching  of  Christ.  (4)  The  stimulus  or  motive  which  Christ  used  is  something 
very  different  from  what  many  reformers  have  used,  Fear,  self-interest,  jealousy 
have,  alas !  often  been  prominent  motives.  With  Christ  you  have  two  motives  put 
forward — "The  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  man."  {G.  L.  Ivem,  M.A.)  All 
things  new : — I.  The  Divine  method  of  effecting  the  great  change.  1.  It  is 
spiritual.  The  evils  which  exist  here  are  either  the  direct  fruits  of  sin,  or  the 
necessary  means  of  moral  discipline  for  its  removal.  A  remedy  for  them  must  be 
found,  not  in  miraculous  interference  with  the  established  order  of  nature,  but  in 
the  gospel  of  salvation.  2.  The  gospel  begins  by  regenerating  man  himself.  The 
Spirit  of  God  touches  his  heart,  quickens  his  intellectual  nature,  kindles  the 
imagination,  develops  the  reasoning  faculties,  and  imparts  a  desire  for  knowledge. 
3.  Herein  is  found  the  principle  which  is  to  regenerate  society,  which  is  to  be  the 
basis  of  a  true  civilisation.  Even  the  science,  so  called,  which  scoffs  at  both 
God  and  revelation,  owes  to  Christian  schools  its  culture,  to  a  Bible-taught  people 
the  ability  to  understand  and  use  it,  and  to  the  generous  protection  of  Christian 
laws  the  liberty  to  assert  itself  in  defiance  of  the  most  sacred  convictions  of 
mankind  with  impunity.  4.  Other  millennial  blessings  are  the  abolition  of  the 
great  social  evils  which  have  hitherto  cursed  the  world — war,  and  slavery,  and 
intemperance,  and  lust.  The  only  effective  way  to  reach  these  and  similar  evils  is 
to  make  men  themselves  better.  5.  But  it  is  not  alone  the  moral  and  social 
renovation  of  the  world  that  is  to  be  effected ;  it  is  the  physical  as  well.  The  same 
power  that  makes  man's  heart  new  will  ultimately  make  his  body  new,  and  so 
abolish  disease  and  premature  death.  II.  The  progress  which  has  been  made  in 
the  past  towards  this  promised  result.  It  was  a  hard  soil  in  which  Christianity, 
the  Divine  mustard-seed,  was  dropped  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  What  was 
the  reception  He  met  with  ?  Not  frigid  indifference,  but  violent  opposition.  At 
last  the  world  was  startled  to  hear  that  even  Caesar  himself  had  bowed  at  the  feet 
of  the  Nazarene,  and,  by  imperial  decree,  placed  the  hated  religion  on  the  throne 
of  the  empire.  II.  What  is  yet  to  be  done,  and  what  is  the  prospect  as  to  its 
COMPLETION  ?  1.  The  whole  world  is  to  become  known  and  accessible  to  Christian 
nations.  2.  Christianity  is  soon  to  become  the  sole  religion  of  mankind.  All 
others  are  on  the  wane.  3.  Christianity  is  rapidly  increasing  in  power.  4. 
Christianity,  as  never  before,  is  inspiring  the  powers  of  the  world,  and  directing 
them  to  the  improvement  of  mankind.  Science,  art,  commerce,  wealth,  are  her 
handmaids.  She  is  using  them  all  to  make  the  world  better,  and  man  happier. 
5.  Only  one  thing  is  wanting  more,  and  that  is  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
upon  the  Church  and  the  nations.  6.  The  grand  hope  and  expectation  of  the 
Church  as  to  the  future  becomes  thus  more  than  an  object  of  faith.  (J.  P.  Warren, 
D.D.)  The  renewal  of  all  things  : — I.  The  need  of  a  complete  moral  renewal. 
All  visions  of  a  political  or  economic  millennium  wreck  themselves  upon  the 
obstinate  fact  of  human  depravity.  With  this,  legislators,  philosophers,  and 
moralists  have  been  found  powerless  to  deal.  II.  An  adequate  power.  "  He  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne."  He  who  created  the  human  soul  can  renew  it.  Omnipotence 
rises  up  to  work.  III.  The  wonder  of  regeneration.  IV.  The  secret  of  "  holding 
out."  V.  The  great  need  of  the  Church — a  regenerate  membership.  VI.  The 
ultimate  renewal  of  all  outward  things — nations,  nature.  {Jos.  G.  Femald.) 
The  new  things  of  God  : — There  are  many  new  things  spoken  of  in  Scripture,  some 
of  more  and  some  of  less  importance.  Take  the  following  as  specially  the  new 
things  of  God:  I.  The  new  testament  or  covenant  (Matt.  xxvi.  28).  That  which 
was  old  has  vanished  away.  It  was  insufficient ;  it  could  not  help  the  sinner ;  it 
said  nothing  of  forgiveness.  But  the  new  covenant  is  all  a  sinner  needs :  it  comes 
at  once  with  a  free  pardon ;  it  presents  a  work  done  for  the  sinner,  not  a  work  for 
the  sinner  to  do.  II.  The  new  man  (Eph.  iv.  24).  This  seems  to  correspond  with 
the  "  new  creature  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17) ;  with  the  "  new  heart "  (Ezek.  xviii.  31) ;  with 
the  "new  spirit"  (Ezek.  xi.  19);  with  the  "heart  of  flesh"  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26); 
with  the  "  new  birth  "  (John  iii.  3) ;  and  the  being  "  begotten  again  "  (1  Pet.  i.  3). 
Newness  of  nature,  of  heart,  of  life,  of  words,  of  the  entire  being,  is  the  basis  of  all 
religion  and  true  worship.  III.  The  new  way  (Heb.  x.  19).  All  God's  dealings 
with  the  sinner  are  on  a  new  footing,  that  of  free  love,  simple  grace.  It  is  a  free 
way,  a  sufficient  way,  an  open  way,  a  perfect  way.    IV.  The  new  bono  (Psa.  xxiii.  3 ; 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION,  641 

Eev.  V.  9).  Every  new  day  brings  with  it  a  new  song  ;  or  rather  it  brings  materials 
for  many  new  songs,  which  we  should  be  always  singing.  Our  whole  life  should 
be  full  of  new  songs.  Yet  the  old  songs  are  not  thereby  made  obsolete  ;  they  do 
not  grow  tame  or  unmeaning.  As  the  old  songs  of  a  land  are  always  fresh  and 
sweet,  so  is  it  with  the  old  songs  of  faith.  These  new  songs  have  to  do  with  the 
past — for  often,  in  looking  into  the  past,  we  get  materials  for  a  new  song — with 
the  present,  and  with  the  future.  They  are  connected  with  ourselves,  our  families, 
with  the  Church,  with  our  nation,  with  the  work  of  God  just  now,  with  resurrec- 
tion, with  the  restitution  of  all  things,  with  the  glory,  the  New  Jerusalem,  and  the 
new  creation.  V.  The  new  commandment  (John  xiii.  34  ;  1  John  ii.  8).  VI.  The 
NEW  WINE  (Matt.  xxvi.  29).  He  is  Himself  the  giver  and  the  gift.  His  blood  is 
drink  indeed  here ;  much  more  hereafter.  It  is  "  new  "  here ;  it  wiU  be  much 
more  new  hereafter.  VII.  The  new  Jerusalem  (Eev.  iii.  12,  xxi.  3,  10).  This 
is  no  earthly  city.  VIII.  The  new  heavens  and  new  earth  (Isa.  Ixv.  17 ; 
2  Pet.  iii.  13).  IX.  The  new  name  (Rev.  ii.  17).  1.  Of  love.  The  Father's  love 
will  be  in  it.  2.  Of  honour.  It  will  be  no  mean  nor  common  name,  but  glorious 
and  celestial.  3.  Of  blessing.  It  will  proclaim  blessing;  it  will  be  a  name  of 
blessing.  4.  Of  wonder.  It  will  astonish  the  possessor,  and  every  one  who  hears  it ; 
no  one  shall  know  it  or  guess  it.  5.  Given  by  Christ.  "I  will  give."  As 
He  gave  names  to  Abram,  Jacob,  Peter,  John,  so  wQl  He  give  this  new 
name,  superseding  our  old  earthly  appellation.  6.  Most  suitable  and  characteristic. 
It  will  in  itself  summarise  our  past  history  and  character.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
Making  all  things  new  : — The  love  of  new  things  is  natural  to  man,  but  the  love  of 
old  things  is  equally  natural.  How  to  reconcile  these  two  instincts  without  doing 
wrong  to  either  is  a  perpetual  problem.  The  love  of  what  is  new  takes  three 
principal  forms.  First  there  are  those  who  are  always  looking  for  something  new. 
This  is  its  lowest  form.  It  is  a  perpetual  demand  for  novelty,  for  new  things  simply 
as  new.  In  such  a  mind  thought  is  disorganised,  and  becomes  a  heap  of  sand. 
Interest  in  life  fades  away,  for  the  heart  is  anchored  to  nothing.  The'  soul  drifts 
before  every  wind  of  accident.  The  power  of  attention  is  lost :  many  things  are 
taken  in,  nothing  retained.  Secondly,  there  are  those  who  are  always  contending 
for  new  things.  The  danger  here  is  in  narrowness  and  bigotry,  for  a  man  may  be 
as  bigoted  to  a  new  creed  as  to  an  old  one,  and  as  ready  to  persecute  the  conser- 
vatives as  they  are  to  persecute  him.  Nevertheless,  by  the  help  of  this  class  the 
world  moves  forward.  Thirdly,  there  are  those  who  make  all  things  new.  And 
this  is  the  highest  and  best  style  of  reform,  for  it  reforms  the  world  by  putting  new 
life  into  it.  Every  spring  God  says,  "  Behold  I  make  all  things  new."  The  old 
types  remain  unchanged,  the  forms  of  the  familiar  landscape  continue  the  same, 
the  grass  grows  green  in  the  valleys,  the  trees  cover  themselves  with  leaves,  exactly 
as  they  have  done  ten  thousand  times.  It  is  not  novelty  but  renewal.  And  so  the 
best  things  which  can  come  to  our  lives  are  not  novelties,  but  new  inspirations  of 
the  one  eternal  life.  Life,  in  all  its  forms,  makes  all  things  new,  and  makes  the 
world  new.  Events  which  have  happened  a  million  times  before  are  nevertheless 
always  new  with  each  recurrence.  What  can  be  older  than  birth,  childhood,  love, 
marriage,  death?  But  what  can  be  more  new,  more  full  of  fresh  influence, 
bringing  a  sudden  influx  of  joy  and  mystery,  awakening  the  soul  to  a  new  life,  than 
these?  A  new  truth  makes  aU  things  new.  I  have  often  talked  with  men  who 
were  brought  up  on  some  dead  creed,  who  were  taught  to  go  through  certain  forms 
of  worship  and  call  it  religion.  These  doctrines  had  hardened  their  hearts, 
deadened  their  spiritual  nature,  and  driven  them  from  God  into  doubt  and  unbelief ; 
for,  as  love  casts  out  fear,  so  does  fear  in  turn  cast  out  love.  Then  they  were  led 
by  some  good  Providence  to  see  God  in  a  new  light — a  being  without  caprice  or 
self-will,  with  steadfast  laws,  always  working  for  the  ultimate  good  of  all  His 
creatures,  wisely  giving,  wisely  withholding,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish. 
This  benign  truth  opened  their  soul,  made  all  nature  new,  all  life  new,  made  a 
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  took  away  anxiety  and  fear,  and  filled  their  days 
with  bright  hope  and  joy  in  all  work.  So,  too,  a  new  love  makes  all  things  new. 
Do  you  remember  the  beautiful  story  of  Silas  Mamer — how  a  man  with  no  friend- 
ships, no  affections,  living  alone  in  a  solitary  hut,  devoting  himself  to  saving  a 
hoard  of  gold,  was  robbed  of  his  money  ?  And  then,  when  he  came  back  to  his 
hut  in  despair,  he  found  a  Httle  abandoned  child  who  had  crept  into  his  house  and 
gone  to  sleep  on  the  hearth,  and  how  this  little  child  stirred  the  hidden  fountains 
of  life  in  the  miser's  heart,  so  that  he  devoted  himself  to  the  infant,  and  all  the 
world  became  by  degrees  to  him  another  world,  old  fears  expelled  and  new  hopes 

41 


642  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

created  by  the  power  of  this  new  affection  ?  In  this  way  Christ  makes  all  things 
new,  and  "  if  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creation."  Christ  gives  us  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  spirit,  not  by  any  miraculous  or  supernatural  power,  but  by  the 
power  of  the  new  truth  which  He  shows  to  us,  and  the  new  love  with  which  He 
inspires  us.  We  want  no  better  world  than  this,  no  better  opportunities  than  we 
have  here.  But  we  need  a  new  spirit  of  faith  and  love,  in  order  that  God's 
kingdom  shall  come,  and  His  will  be  done  in  this  world,  making  this  a  heaven. 
This  heaven  must  begin  in  our  own  hearts,  or  it  will  be  no  heaven  to  us.  I  was 
told  by  a  friend  that,  when  at  the  Centennial  Exhibition,  he  was  accosted  by  a 
family  who  were  walking  about  the  grounds,  who  asked  him  how  much  it  would 
cost  them  to  go  into  all  the  buildings.  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  it  will  cost  you  nothing. 
You  paid  at  the  gate  when  you  entered  the  grounds  the  whole  price."  So  I  see 
persons  who  go  to  church  year  after  year,  and  yet  stand  outside  of  Christianity,  not 
enjoying  the  love  of  God.  They  stand  outside  of  all  these  Divine  comforts  and 
hopes,  and  do  not  take  hold  of  them,  because  they  think  they  have  no  right  to  do 
so.  To  them  I  say,  Go  in  at  once,  and  take  all  you  need.  When  God  led  you 
through  the  gate  into  Christianity  the  price  was  paid.  You  will  not  probably,  it  is 
true,  become  great  saints  at  once.  But  you  can  begin  now  to  receive  God*^s  help, 
God's  power,  God's  inspiration,  and  the  hope  of  the  gospel.  Nothing  is  necessary 
but  to  go  in.  Thus  God  makes  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherever  the  truth 
and  love  of  Jesus  go.  The  new  heavens  first ;  the  new  earth  afterwards.  First, 
the  inward  convictions  ;  then  the  outward  life,  first  the  seed,  then  the  plant ;  the 
fruit  last  of  all.  {Jas.  Freeman  Clarke.)  The  new  self  (with  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26 ; 
2  Cor.  V.  17) : — I.  Human  hearts  unappeasably  cry  out  after  change.  Something 
new  we  all  need  ;  and  because  we  need,  we  crave  for  it ;  and  what  we  crave  after, 
we  hope  for.  The  old  we  have  tried,  and  it  is  not  enough.  We  are  still  not  right ; 
we  are  not  full ;  we  are  not  at  rest.  In  the  future  there  may  be  what  we  need,  and 
so  long  as  there  is  a  future,  there  is  hope ;  but  the  past  is  dead.  Now,  the  best 
lesson  which  the  years  can  teach  is,  perhaps,  this  one :  that  the  new  thing  we  need 
is,  not  a  new  world,  but  a  new  self.  Not  change  in  any  outward  surroundings  of 
our  lives ;  not  an  easier  income,  not  a  cheerfuller  home,  not  stronger  health,  not  a 
higher  post,  not  relief  from  any  thorn  in  our  flesh  against  which  we  pray ;  but  a 
change  within — another  self.  We  have  done  evil,  and  the  evil  which  we  have 
done  cleaves  to  us.  We  are  the  children  of  our  own  deeds.  Conduct  has  created 
character ;  acts  have  grown  to  habits ;  the  lives  we  have  led  have  left  us  such  men 
as  we  are  to-day.  And  forward  into  the  "  new  year"  we  must  go,  unaltered  with 
this  old,  evil,  dissatisfied  self  confirmed  and  stiffened  and  burdened  only  the  more 
as  the  past  behind  us  grows  longer  and  longer.  11.  At  this  point  the  gospel  meets 
us.  It  is  the  singular  pretension  of  the  Christian  gospel  that  it  does  make  men 
new.  It  professes  to  alter  character,  not  as  all  other  religious  and  ethical  systems 
in  the  world  have  done,  by  mere  influence  of  reason  or  of  motives,  or  by  a  discipline 
of  the  flesh ;  it  professes  to  alter  human  character  by  altering  human  nature.  It 
brings  truth,  indeed,  to  satisfy  the  reason  and  powerful  motives  of  every  sort  to 
tell  upon  the  will,  as  well  as  law  to  stimulate  the  conscience ;  but  in  the  very  act  of 
doing  so,  it  pronounces  all  these  external  appliances  to  be  utterly  insufficient  without 
a  concurrent  action  of  God  from  within  the  man.  The  real  change  it  proclaims  to 
be  a  change  of  "  heart"  or  spiritual  being ;  and  that  is  the  work  of  God.  Born  of 
a  man  who  is  flesh,  and  therefore  flesh  ourselves ;  we  have  to  be  born  of  another 
Man  who  is  Spirit,  that  we  too  may  become  spiritual.  And  this  other  Man,  of 
whom  we  have  to  be  spiritually  begotten,  can  beget,  for  He  is  our  original  M^er — 
the  Lord  from  heaven.  A  race  which  includes  God  need  not  despair  of  Divine  life  ; 
it  can  be  divinely  re-created  from  within  itself.  Think ;  to  be  a  new  creature ! 
Men  have  fabled  fancies  of  a  fountain  in  which  whoever  bathed  grew  young  again, 
his  limbs  restored  to  elasticity  and  his  skin  to  clearness.  To  the  old  world  it  was 
as  good  a  thing  as  priests  could  promise  to  the  good,  that  when  they  died,  the 
crossing  of  that  dark  and  fateful  river  should  be  the  blotting  out  for  ever  from  the 
soul  of  all  memorials  of  the  past.  But  God  gives  us  a  better  mercy  than  the  blessing 
of  forgetfulness.  The  Lethe  which  obliterates  from  recollection  a  sinful  past  is  a 
poor  hope  compared  to  the  blood  of  cleansing,  which  permits  us  to  remember  sin 
without  distress,  and  confess  it  without  alarm.  With  a  new  self,  cut  off  from  this 
dreadful  moral  continuity  with  the  past,  eased  of  one's  inheritance  of  self-reproach, 
and  made  quick  within  with  the  seed  of  a  new  future,  all  things  seem  possible  to  a 
man.  Old  things  pass  away;  all  things  become  new.  III.  Here  I  turn  to  some  in 
whose  bosoms  these  warm  words  find  cold  response.    It  is  very  beautiful  to  think 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION,  648 

of — this  transformation  of  a  man  and  of  his  life  by  the  breath  of  God.     Ones  you 
were  as  enthusiastic  and  hopeful  about  it  as  anybody.     You  desired  it,  you  sought 
it ;  you  believed  and  were  converted.     You  found,  certainly,  a  new  peace,  and  for 
a  while  your  world  did  seem  a  changed  world  and  yourself  a  changed  man.     You 
walked  lightly,  like  one  grown  young;  you  could  praise,  and  love,  and  rejoice.    But 
that  is  long  ago.     The  novel  pleasure  of  being  religious  faded  out  of  your  days,  like 
evening  red  out  of  the  sky  ;  somehow  the  old  world  resumed  its  place  about  you, 
and  you  returned  by  degrees  to  the  old  life.     To-day  God  has  given  us  a  new  year, 
and  with  it  He  has  sent  us  a  new  message — "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice, 
harden  not  your  heart  "  ;  "  to-day  is  the  day  of  salvation."     Dead  again  or  never 
truly  alive ;  what  matters  it  ?    You  surely  do  need  now,  at  all  events,  the  new 
heart  and  the  new  spirit.    And  the  ofifer  of  it  in  Jesus  Christ  is  as  genuine  and 
sincere  as  ever — to  you  as  free  as  ever.     The  way  to  it  lies  through   desire  and 
petition  and  expectation.     IV.  In  proposing  that  we  should  all  inaugurate  the  year 
by  seeking,  before  everything  else,  that  breath  of  life,  that  inward  renewing  of  the 
soul  through  the  inbreathed  Holy  Spirit  of  Jesus,  which  makes  us  new,  I  propose 
what  will  ensure  to  all  of  us  a  real  •'  new  year."     The  new  self  will  make  all 
around  it  as  good  as  new,  though  no  actual  change  should  pass  on  it ;  for,  to  a  very 
wonderful  extent,  a  man  creates  his  own  world.     We  project  the  hue  of  our  own 
spirits  on  things  outside.    A  bright  and  cheerful  temper  sees  all  things  on  their 
sunny  side.    A  weary,  uneasy  mind  drapes  the  very  earth  in  gloom.     Any  great 
enthusiasm,  which  lifts  a  man  above  his  average  self  for  the  time,  makes  him  like 
a  new  man,  and  transfigures  the  universe  in  his  eyes.    Now,  this  power  of  human 
nature,  when  exalted  through  high  and  noble  emotion,  to  make  its  own  world,  will 
be  realised  in  its  profoundest  form  when  the  soul  is  re-created  by  the  free  Spirit  of 
God.     Let  God  lift  us  above  our  old  selves,  and  inspire  us  with  no  earthly,  but 
with  the  pure  flame  of  a  celestial,  devotion ;  let  Him  breathe  into  our  hearts  the 
noblest,  freest  of  all  enthusiasms,  the  enthusiasm  for  Himself ;  and  to  us  all  things 
will  become  new.    {J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)        The  new  creation  : — I.  The  besemblance. 
1.  In  both  there  is  the  production  of  a  new  order  of  things.     From  chaos  of  old, 
God,  by  His  creative  fiat,  brought  life,  beauty,  light,  Ac,  and  from  the  corrupt  soul 
of  man,  by  His  redemptive  power.  He  evolves  high  spiritual  virtues.     2.  In  both 
there  is  the  production  of  something  new  by  the  Divine  agency.     Who  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  ?  &c.    God,  and  He  only.    Who  creates  a  soul  ?    The  same 
glorious  Being.     3.  In  both  there  is  a  production  of  the  new  according  to  a  Divine 
plan.    Every  part  of  the  universe  is  created  on  a  plan.    Science  discovers  this.     In 
conversion  it  is  so  (Eph.  ii.  10).    4.  In  both  there  is  the  production  of  the  new  for 
His  own  glory.     "  The  heavens  declare  His  glory."    The  conversion  of  men  reveals 
the  glory  of  God.    6.  In  both  there  is  the  production  of  the  new  in  a  gradual  way. 
Geology  and  the  Bible  show  that  the  work  of  creation  is  a  very  gradual  work.    It  is 
so  with  the  work  of  spiritual  reformation — very  gradual.    II.  The  dissimilabitt. 
1.  The  one  was  produced  out  of  nothing,  the  other  from  pre-existing  materials.    In 
conversion  no  new  power  is  given  to  the  soul,  but  the  old  ones  are  renovated  and 
wrought  into  right  action.     2.  The  one  was  effected  without  any  obstructing  force, 
the  other  is  not.     3.  The  one  was  produced  by  mere  fiat,  the  other  requires  the 
intervention  of  moral  means.     Nothing  in  the  creation  came  between  the  work  and 
the  Divine  will.    In  spiritual  reformation  it  does;  hence  God  had  to  bow  the 
heavens  and  come  down  and  become  flesh.     4.  The  one  placed  man  in  a  position 
material  and  insecure ;  the  other  placed  him  in  a  spiritual  and  safe  abode.     6.  The 
one  develops  and  displays  God  as  the  absolute  Spirit,  the  other  as  the  Divine  Man. 
{Homilist.)         The  renovation  of  all  things  : — 1.  The  Church  in  heaven  will  be  new 
in  respect  of  the  number  of  its  members.     2.  We  now  dwell  in  earthly  bodies. 
These  vile  bodies  will  be  changed,  and  fashioned  like  to  Christ's  glorious  body.     3. 
It  will  be  a  new  thing,  and  as  happy  as  it  will  be  new,  to  find  ourselves  freed  from 
sin,  and  mingling  with  those,  who,  like  us,  are  made  perfect  in  holiness.     4.  It  will 
be  a  new  thing  to  see  all  united  in  love.     There  will  be  no  interfering  passions, 
separate  interests  and  party  designs — no  evil  surmises  and  unfriendly  insinuations. 
There  will  be  one  common  interest,  and  one  universal  spirit  of  love  to  unite  the 
whole.     Jews  and  Gentiles,  yea,  angels  and  men  will  all  meet  in  one  assembly.     5. 
The  saints,  while  on  earth,  experience  a  sensible  delight  in  communion  with  God, 
and  in  the  stated  and  occasional  exercises  of  piety  and  devotion.     But  this  delight 
is  often  interrupted  by  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh  and  the  avocations  of  the  world. 
In  heaven  the  saints  will  be  continually  before  God's  throne,  and  will  serve  Him  day 
and  night.    6.  Here  we  need  the  Word  oi  God  to  instruct  and  quicken  as.     We 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxi. 

need  threatenings  to  awaken  us,  promises  to  allure  us,  and  precepts  to  guide  us. 
We  need  sensible  representations  to  affect  the  mind  through  the  eye,  and  living 
sounds  to  reach  the  heart  through  the  ear.  But  in  heaven  things  will  be  new. 
There  we  shall  be  all  eye,  all  ear,  all  intellect,  all  devotion  and  love.  7.  Here  we 
need  the  vicissitudes  of  day  and  night  for  labour  and  rest.  But  in  heaven  there  is 
no  need  of  a  candle,  for  there  is  no  night  there ;  and  no  need  of  the  sun,  for  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  doth  lighten  it,  and  Jesus  is  the  light  thereof.  8.  Here  we  have 
our  seasons  of  sorrow  and  affliction.  Our  joys  are  transient.  In  heaven  things 
will  be  new.  All  friendship  there  will  be  the  union  of  pure  and  immortal  minds  in 
disinterested  benevolence  to  one  another,  and  in  supreme  love  to  God.  {J.  Lathrop, 
D.D.)  The  gospel  of  the   new   life : — I.   It   is  a  saying  which  indicates  con- 

sciousness OF  Divine  fowek.  II.  It  is  a  saying  which  indicates  a  sublime 
PLAN.  III.  It  is  a  saying  which  indicates  transcendent  love.  Man  is  not  to 
remain  in  a  fallen  condition.  IV.  It  is  a  saying  which  indicates  the  most 
BLESSED  AND  TRIUMPHANT  ANTICIPATIONS.  {Family  Churchmau.)  The  symbolism 
of  the  throne  is  the  symbolism  of  stability.  It  is  the  planted  seat  of  power,  the 
settled  place  whence  authority  springs.  According  to  the  paternal  theory  of  govern- 
ment, the  throne  is  the  Father's  chair,  from  which  the  household's  law  goes  forth. 
Its  very  structure  is  suggestive.  The  throne  lies  upon  the  ground,  broad  and  square 
and  firm.  Perpetuity  is  of  the  very  essence  of  its  nature.  The  waves  of  popular 
wrath  rage  and  swell  around  it,  the  tides  of  public  opinion  ebb  and  flow  ;  it,  the 
centre  of  unity,  the  seat  of  authority,  stands  fast.  This  is  the  idea  of  the  throne ; 
and  who  shall  deny  that  it  is  a  most  majestic  one  ?  Take  the  idea  illustrated  as 
we  may  see  it  in  the  life  of  any  one  of  the  great  nationalities  that  have  preserved 
their  identity  through  long  periods  of  time — take  the  story  of  England,  with  which 
we  are  familiar,  and  than  which  there  could  be  no  better  for  our  purpose.  Start 
with  the  throne  on  the  day  William  the  Norman  set  it  up  in  the  open  space  his 
sword  had  cleared,  and  follow  its  history,  century  by  century,  down  to  the  present 
day.  Mark  how  it  stands  unshaken  as  storm  after  storm  of  change  sweeps  over  the 
face  of  the  nation.  Nobles  conspire  against  it,  ecclesiastics  try  to  undermine  it, 
popular  risings  threaten  it,  usurpers  claim  it,  once  democracy  put  it  aside  for  a 
season,  again  peaceful  revolution  transfers  it  to  a  collateral  line,  but  still  the  throne 
survives,  the  same  that  the  Conqueror  founded,  the  centre  of  authority,  the  centre 
of  national  unity,  the  centre  of  the  whole  people's  associations,  loyalties,  and  loves. 
What,  then,  is  the  truth  that  lies  behind  this  symbolism  of  the  throne  ?  Briefly 
this,  that  in  the  universe  of  which  we  make  a  part  there  are  two  great  principles  at 
work  ;  the  principle  of  stability  and  the  principle  of  change,  and,  furthermore,  that 
the  sovereignty — and  this  is  the  important  point — belongs  to  the  former  —to  the 
stability.     \W.   R.   Huntington,  D.D.)  Renewal : — When   the  Almighty   says, 

"  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new,"  He  is  giving  expression,  not  to  a  suddenly 
formed  purpose,  not  to  an  altered  intention,  but  simply  to  a  principle  of  action,  a 
law  of  conduct  by  which  we  daily  see  that  He  does  guide  Himself  now,  and  by 
which,  so  far  as  we  know,  He  has  guided  Himself  through  the  eternity  of  the  past. 
In  order  to  bring  out  the  thought,  let  me  lay  down  the  general  principle,  that 
whatever  thing  is  capable  of  life  and  growth,  must,  if  it  is  to  live  and  grow,  be 
made  the  subject  of  continual  renewal.  Consider  a  plant  growing  in  your  window- 
garden.  In  one  sense  it  is  the  same  plant  you  put  there  a  week  or  a  month  or  a 
year  ago ;  in  another  sense  it  is  not  the  same.  It  has  been  continually  taking  in 
from  the  soil  and  from  the  atmosphere,  through  its  roots  and  leaves,  new  material, 
and  as  continually  it  has  been  giving  forth  and  putting  away  from  itself  the  super- 
fluous and  dead  products  of  the  vital  processes.  As  this  is  true  of  vegetable  life,  so 
is  it  true  of  animal  life.  It  is  true  of  man  in  both  of  his  natures ;  true  of  him  in 
his  body,  true  of  him  in  his  soul.  Nay,  the  principle  is  of  still  wider  application. 
We  may  discern  its  working  in  the  history  of  institutions.  Societies,  Churches, 
governments,  all  come  under  the  law.  It  is  God's  law,  "Behold,  I  make — yes,  am  con- 
tinually making — all  things  new."  He  is  for  ever  the  Eenewer.  Life  is  God's  purpose, 
not  death;  and  this  is  the  meaning  of  His  renewals.  Clearly  as  the  Christian 
sees  that  this  is  a  dying  world,  still  more  clearly  is  he  bound  to  see  that  it  is 
a  world  continually  coming  into  possession  of  new  heritages  of  life.  {Ibid.) 
God's  work  of  renovation : — ^Some  boat  is  ashore.  The  timbers  are  fast  breaking  up. 
The  cargo  is  washed  away.  The  grim  rib- work  stands  out  on  the  horizon,  the 
melancholy  remnant  of  a  sound  and  well-appointed  vessel.  No  man  would  be 
proud  to  call  himself  the  master  of  such  a  craft.  A  pile  of  noble  buildings  is 
burnt  to  the  ground.    No  one  would  be  particularly  happy  to  call  himself  the  lord 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  645 

of  those  gaping  windows  and  dropping  timbers  and  unsafe  foundations.  If  the 
owner  had  not  capital  to  reconstruct  his  property,  he  would  very  soon  take  steps  to 
get  it  off  his  hands.  And  so  God  can  never  glory  in  His  sovereignty  over  a  nature 
that  is  dissolved  by  death.  The  declaration  of  His  continued  sovereignty  implies 
that  the  ruin  shall  yet  be  reversed.  "  He  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 
living."  (r.  G.  Selby.)  The  Christian  hope  respecting  the  world : — Shelley  calls 
this  "  a  wrong  world  "  ;  St.  Paul,  '*  a  present  evil  world."  They  saw  it  alike,  but 
the  apostle  put  into  the  word  "  present "  a  hope  that  the  wrong  and  evil  world  will 
at  last  yield  to  a  right  world,  (T.  T.  Hunger,  D.D.)  Finality  of  good  : — '•  Musio 
has  taught  us  that  it  is  impossible  to  end  upon  a  discord."  This  was  Dora  Green- 
well's  way  of  putting  the  expectation  expressed  by  the  poet  laureate,  in  the  familiar 
lines: — 

"  0  yet  we  trust  that  somehow  good 
Will  be  the  final  goal  of  iU." 

{J.   F.  B.   Tinting,  B.A.)  God^$   law   of  continuity : — His  making  all  things 

new  in  the  regeneration  will  not  be  His  making  them  out  of  nothing,  but 
rather  His  remaking  them.  Look  about  you  and  see  if  this  view  of  the 
matter,  fuU  of  comfort  as  we  shall  find  it,  be  not  substantiated  by  all  that 
we  are  able  to  observe  of  God's  methods  now.  Do  you  anywhere  find  a 
new  thing  that  is  not  in  some  way  a  product  and  result  of  an  older  thing? 
We  are  tempted  into  taking  the  despairing  view  of  God's  law  of  renewal, 
because  we  think  that  the  past  is  not  only  gone,  but  lost.  This  is  a  blunder. 
Nothing  is  lost  of  which  we  preserve  the  precious  results.  Your  childhood,  for 
example,  is  gone,  but  it  is  not  lost.  ^  You  could  not  be  the  man  or  the  woman  you 
are,  save  for  that  childhood's  having  been.  How  then  can  you  say  that  your  child- 
hood is  lost  ?  It  lives  on  in  your  mature  character.  No  other  childhood  could 
have  produced  precisely  the  man  or  woman  you  are  to-day.  This  continuity,  this 
keeping  up  of  the  chain  of  connection,  is  what  is  really  meant  by  that  much  used 
and  much  abused  word,  *•  evolution."  This  is  God's  way.  He  draws  the  new 
out  of  the  old,  not  violently  but  slowly,  gradually,  continuously.  The  old  that  is 
fading  away  and  ready  to  perish  does  not  actually  perish  until  the  new  one  has  been 
grafted  upon  it.  Take  that  very  best  of  aU  living  products  the  world  can  show,  a 
Christian  character  ;  how  did  it  become  what  it  is  ?  Suddenly  ?  Abruptly  ?  No ; 
but  by  the  quiet,  gradual,  patient  shaping  and  moulding  of  the  hand  of  the  Spirit. 
The  saintliness  of  St.  Paul  is  different  from  the  saintliness  of  St.  John.  Why  ? 
Because  John  differed  from  Saul  at  the  start ;  and  even  in  recreating  them  God 
would  not  neglect  His  own  law  of  continuity.  Sainted,  they  are  just  as  much  un- 
like each  other  as  they  were  unsainted.  In  making  all  things  new  for  both  of  them, 
He  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  has  respected  and  preserved  the  identity  of  each. 
We  see  the  same  law  holding  in  the  larger  life  of  the  whole  Church.  The  Christian 
Church  of  this  nineteenth  century  is  certainly  different,  in  very  many  ways,  from  the 
Church  of  the  Crusades,  for  instance,  as  that  in  its  turn  differed  from  the  Church 
of  the  catacombs  and  the  martyrs,  and  yet  it  was  one  holy,  Catholic,  and  Apostolic 
Church  through  all  the  generations,  the  same  body  from  first  to  last.  Nay,  we  may 
push  the  principle  further  still  in  the  same  direction,  and  affirm  that  from  the  dawn 
of  history  there  has  always  been  a  Church  on  earth,  always  an  elect  people  of  God, 
and  that  the  Church  of  the  gospel  is  joined  to  the  Church  of  the  law  and  the 
prophets  by  ties  and  ligaments  that  bleed  if  you  attempt  to  sever  them.  But  let  us 
lift  our  thoughts  to  their  grandest  and  best  fulfilment.  How  will  it  be  with  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth  ?  Will  they  be  cut  off  by  an  impassable  gulf  of  oblivion 
from  all  the  memories,  all  the  associations,  all  the  home  feeling  of  the  old  life  ? 
No,  we  do  not  so  read  the  mind  of  God  either  in  His  works  or  His  Word.  His  way 
of  making  all  things  new  is  not  by  the  utter  destruction  and  annihilation  of  the  old, 
but  rather  by  the  remoulding  and  readjustment  of  it.  Nothing  could  be  more  new 
than  was  the  resurrection  life  of  Christ,  and  yet  how  intricately,  how  indissolubly 
was  it  wrapped  up  with  the  old  life  out  of  which  it  came  forth.  And  as  with  the 
resurrection  body  of  the  Christ  so  with  His  body  mystical.  His  Church,  there  will  be 
change,  adaptation  to  new  conditions,  fitness  for  larger  and  fuller  life,  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  a  continuity,  a  remembrance  of  the  battles  and  the  victories — yes,  and 
of  the  defeats — of  the  far  back  militant  days,  when  on  the  old  earth  and  under  the 
old  heavens  and  before  the  former  things  had  passed,  it  lived  and  struggled 
and  endured.      (Ibid.)  The  course  of  Divine  justice  : — This  was  the  culmin- 

ation of  the  fearful  scenes  which  had  passed  before  the  apostle  as  the  vision 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

of  the  course  of  Divine  judgment  was  unrolled  before  him.      At  length,  when 
these  fearful  works  of  judgment  are  completed,  he  saw  the  great  white  throne  and 
Him  that  sat  upon  it,  and  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away.     Then  the  books 
were  opened,  and  the  dead,  both  small  and  great,  who  stood  before  God,  were  judged, 
every  man  according  to  his  works.     Then  it  is,  after  this  awful  consummation,  that 
the  apostle  sees  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  and  He  that  sat  upon  the  great 
white  throne  said,  "  Behold  I  make  all  things  new."    Such  in  brief  is  the  burden 
of  the  Book  of  Revelation.     It  will  be  observed  that  it  involves  these  two  cardinal 
points.    First  the  judgment  and  extirpation  of  all  that  is  evil  by  woes,  fearful 
struggles  and  agonies.    And  secondly,  after  all  these  terrible  experiences,  all  things 
are  made  new.     The  first  part  of  the  process  of  the  Divine  administration  consists 
of  a  series  of  scenes  of  misery,  distress,  and  bloodshed  than  which  nothing  more 
terrible  can  be  imagined.     Visions  of  the  destruction  of  the  elements  of  human 
society,  even  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  are  brought  before  us,  until  men  are 
reduced  to  cry  to  the  very  mountains  and  rocks  to  cover  them.    These  dread  scenes, 
these  fearful  judgments  are  depicted  as  inevitable  preliminaries  in  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  will,  the  establishment  of  the  Divine  kingdom.   The  New  Testament 
begins  with  a  promise  of  peace,  and  it  ends  with  a  vision  of  peace  and  glory,  in 
which  God  will  wipe  all  tears  from  off  all  faces.    But  the  warnings  conveyed  to  us 
through  the  last  apostle  are  that  this  blessed  consummation  cannot  be  reached 
except  through  the  manifestation  of  Divine  justice  on  the  earth,  which  will  bring  upon 
the  earth  and  mankind  inconceivable  miseries.    The  Book  of  Revelation,  in  its  fear- 
ful scenes,  is  but  a  true  description  of  the  actual  experience  of  mankind.     The 
slaughters,  plagues,  and  other  dreadful  visitations  which  that  book  depicts  have,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  been  realised.    It  is  through  s^nes  of  suffering  of  this  nature  that 
the  world  is  being  conducted  by  Divine  justice  to  its  ultimate  goal.    But  we  have 
the  more  reason  to  be  inexpressibly  thankful  that  the  goal  revealed  is  one  of  peace 
and  bliss.    When  we  bear  in  mind  the  miseries  and  agonies  of  the  Book  of  Revela- 
tion, we  recognise  the  full  force  of  the  promise  with  which  it  concludes.     *'  God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes,"  &c.     Seeing  what  the  world  has  been 
hitherto,  and  the  miseries  by  which  it  is  beset  now,  we  might  well  despair  of  such  a 
result  unless  we  had  the  express  assurance  of  Revelation  that  there  is  One  sitting 
upon  the  throne  who  gives  this  as  the  very  definition  of  His  work,  "  Behold  I  make 
all  things  new."    We  should  indeed  be  ungrateful  not  to  recognise  that  the  state  of 
things  around  us  tends  in  itself  to  give  us  some  earnest  of  this  blessed  renovation. 
Still  no  men  feel  more  gravely  than  those  who  have  the  conduct  of  human  affairs 
how  slight  would  be  our  hope  of  a  complete  peace  on  earth  did  it  depend  simply 
upon  the  wisdom  and  strength  of  even  the  wisest  leaders  of  mankind.    They  cannot 
extirpate  the  passions  which  are  the  real  ultimate  cause  of  the  miseries  wars  bring 
upon  us.    All  our  hope  lies  in  the  aosured  faith  that  all  the  terrible  scenes  which 
the  earth  has  witnessed  are  under  the  control  of  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne 
working  out  the  great  purpose  of  true  justice,  of  Him  who  counts  all  men,  small  and 
great,  as  subject  to  His  unerring  judgment.    Finally,  when  the  issues  of  right  and 
wrong  have  been  worked  in  this  world  in  a  way  vindicating  truth  and  righteousness, 
God  will  fulfil  that  good  work  on  which  He  is  even  now  engaged — the  making  of  all 
things  new.    We  are  not  able  with  our  limited  earthly  vision  to  discern  the  work  of 
God  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  His  mysterious  methods  for  establishing  His 
kingdom  and  making  His  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.     We  must  sub- 
mit to  take  our  part,  whatever  it  may  be,  in  His  mysterious  dispensations,  possessing 
our  souls  in  patience  with  such  assurance  as  the  words  of  His  Book  can  alone  supply. 
Our  personal  private  lives  reflect  in  greater  or  less  degree  the  stern  experiences  which 
this  book  describes  in  the  case  of  the  world  at  large.     We  have  our  sins,  and  as  the 
consequence  of  our  sins  our  sufferings,  and  sorrows,  hindrances,  and  fears.     We 
must  expect  to  bear  them  in  greater  or  less  degree  until  the  moment  of  our  depar- 
ture arrives,  and  by  God's  grace  we  are  allowed  in  some  measure  to  anticipate  the 
privilege  which  is  held  out  to  the  world.    This  is  our  own  ultimate  hope,  the  blessed 
promise  that  God  will  make  all  things  new,  not  merely  afterwards,  but  if  we  will 
trust  and  do  His  will  in  our  hearts  and  souls,  while  we  are  still  upon  earth.     {H. 
Wace,  D.D.)        It  is  done. — Life  done  : — It  is  very  solemn  to  tbink  that  we  shall 
one  day  look  back  to  our  own  hves,  and  all  on  earth  will  be  past  and  done.     "  It  is 
done."    How  the  word  brings  us  to  a  standstill,  taking  us  to  the  end  of  all  things  ! 
And  surely  here  is  the  only  true  way  to  look  at  life.     We  do  not  value  what  looks 
fair  to  the  eye,  but  what  is  real  and  enduring.     We  do  not  praise  a  promising  plan, 
but  a  successful  result.     Wisdom  is  that  which  gains  its  end.    In  a  burning  house, 


CHAP.XDC.]  REVELATION.  647 

this  whole  matter  was  planned,  arranged,  and  settled  by  the  foresight  and  decree  of 
eternity.  2.  It  was  next  as  the  Lamb  that  He  loved  us  and  proved  His  love.  He 
did  not  give  us  words  of  love  merely  when  He  came  from  heaven  to  earth  ;  but  He 
proceeded  to  deeds  of  truest  affection.  The  supreme  proof  of  His  love  was  that 
He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter.  3.  Love  in  marriage  must  be  on  both  sides, 
and  it  is  as  the  Lamb  that  we  first  came  to  love  Him.  I  had  no  love  to  Christ,  how 
could  I  have,  till  I  saw  His  wounds  and  blood  ?  This  is  the  great  heart-win- 
ning doctrine.  Christ  loves  us  as  the  Lamb,  and  we  love  Him  as  the  Lamb.  4. 
Further,  marriage  is  the  most  perfect  union.  Surely,  it  is  as  the  Lamb  that  Jesus  is 
most  closely  joined  to  His  people.  Our  Lord  came  very  close  to  us  when  He  took 
our  nature,  for  thus  He  became  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  5.  "We 
never  feel  so  one  with  Jesus  as  when  we  see  Him  as  the  Lamb.  IV.  The  prepabed- 
NESs  OF  THE  Bride  :  *'  His  wife  hath  made  herself  ready."  Up  tiU  now  the 
Church  has  always  been  spoken  of  as  His  bride,  now  she  is  "  His  wife  " — that  is  a 
deeper,  dearer,  more-matured  word  than  "  bride  " :  "  His  wife  hath  made  herself 
ready."  The  Church  has  now  come  to  the  fulness  of  her  joy,  and  has  taken 
possession  of  her  status  and  dower  as  "His  wife."  What  does  it  mean — "hath 
made  herself  ready  "  ?  1.  It  signifies,  first,  that  she  willingly  and  of  her  own 
accord  comes  to  her  Lord,  to  be  His,  and  to  be  with  Him  for  ever.  This  she  does 
with  all  her  heart :  "  she  hath  made  herself  ready."  She  does  not  enter  into  this 
engagement  with  reluctance.  2.  Does  it  not  mean  that  she  has  put  away  from  her- 
self all  evU,  and  all  connection  with  the  corruptions  of  the  harlot  church  has 
been  destroyed  ?  She  has  struggled  against  error,  she  has  fought  against  infidelity, 
and  both  have  been  put  down  by  her  holy  watchfulness  and  earnest  testimony  ;  and 
so  she  is  ready  for  her  Lord.  3.  Does  it  not  also  mean  that  in  the  great  day 
of  the  consummation  the  Church  will  be  one  ?  Alas,  for  the  divisions  among  us  ! 
4.  Notice  what  the  preparation  was.  It  is  described  in  the  eighth  verse  :  "  To  her 
was  granted."  I  will  go  no  further.  Whatever  preparation  it  was  that  she  made, 
in  whatever  apparel  she  was  arrayed,  it  was  granted  to  her.  When  we  shall  be 
united  to  Jesus,  the  ever  blessed  Lamb,  in  endless  wedlock,  all  our  fitness  to  be 
there  will  be  ours  by  free  grant.  Look  at  the  apparel  of  the  wife,  "  To  her  was 
granted  that  she  should  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white."  How  simple 
her  raiment  I  Only  fine  linen,  clean  and  white  I  The  more  simple  our  worship, 
the  better.     [C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  bride  of  Christ : — I.  The  Church's  final 

BLESSEDNESS  IS   FOUND   IN  AN  INDISSOLUBLE  UNION  WITH  ChBIST.      II.   FoB  THIS  THE 

Church  is  prepared  by  sanctity  and  fidelity.  III.  The  ultimate  blessedness 
OF  THE  saints  IS  THE  OCCASION  OF  JOY  TO  ALL.  "  Blcssed  are  they  that  are 
bidden  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  {R.  Green.)  The  righteousness 
of  saints. — Saintly  ideals : — A  very  slight  acquaintance  with  the  lives  of  those  who 
may  most  truly  be  called  saints  will  satisfy  us  that  they  are  not  all  cast  in  one 
mould.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  characterised  by  an  almost  infinite  variety, 
diversity,  and  even  contrariety  of  form.  But  beneath  all  this  contrariety,  diversity, 
and  variety,  there  may  be  traced  a  fundamental  unity,  a  substantial  identity. 
Features  and  form  are  endlessly  drfferent ;  tRe  spirit  is  one.  I  do  not  speak  now  of 
the  mere  surroundings  and  outward  circumstances  of  a  life.  Kiches  and  poverty, 
solitude  and  society,  sickness  and  health,  all  may  be  said  to  come  aUke  to  it ;  inas- 
much as  it  is  independent  of  all,  and  can  turn  all  to  good  account.  We  may 
represent  human  life,  the  life  of  each  one  of  us,  to  ourselves,  as  a  series  of  con- 
centric circles,  circle  within  circle,  all  having  the  same  centre,  and  that  centre  being 
the  "  I,"  the  soul,  the  spirit,  the  will,  the  very  substance  of  our  human  personality, 
call  it  by  what  name  we  will.  What  we  describe  as  the  "  circumstances  "  of  our 
lives  will  be  represented  by  the  outermost  of  these  concentric  circles.  But  we  may 
pass  inwards  from  one  to  another  on  our  way  to  the  centre  of  all,  and  still  find 
endless  variety  and  diversity,  and  yet  the  saintly  life  still.  Thus  we  will  take  what 
is  certainly  much  nearer  to  the  centre  than  the  circle  already  described,  which  was 
that  of  outward  circumstance  and  surrounding.  We  will  take  the  circle  of  ritual 
and  worship,  which,  you  will  all  agree,  touches  the  soul  much  more  nearly  than  the 
outward  form  or  fashion  of  our  lives  does  or  can  do.  Let  our  thoughts  range  back 
over  the  history  of  this  our  own  beloved  place  of  worship.  What  changes  and 
varieties  of  ritual  has  it  not  witnessed  in  the  course  of  the  many  centuries  that  have 
elapsed  between  its  first  conversion  from  a  pagan  temple  into  a  Christian  Church, 
and  the  present  moment  1  Each  generation  in  turn  has  worshipped  here  after  its 
own  fashion,  now  with  Roman  splendour,  and  now  with  Puritan  simphcity. 
Better  the  coldest,  barest,  ugliest  ritual,  with  spiritual  edification,  than  the  costhest 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end."  From  the  commencement  of  our  era,  the 
words  have  been  felt  to  form  one  of  the  sublimest  descriptions  of  Him  in  whom  we 
have  believed.  Let  us  see  how  and  with  what  results  they  may  be  adopted  as  a 
true  description  of  our  blessed  Lord.  1.  Now  there  is  a  habit  of  mind  common  in 
our  day  with  regard  to  religious  truth,  the  habit  of  dwelling  with  a  morbid  particu- 
larity upon  minute  objections,  and  forgetting  the  broad  evidence  upon  which  the 
general  structure  of  the  faith  is  built.  The  description  of  our  Lord  in  the  text,  as 
the  Alpha  and  Omega,  suggests  one  of  these  broader  lines  of  Evidence.  If  it  be  true 
that  Christ  Jesus  is  in  His  Person  and  in  His  doctrine  the  central  figure  in  the 
world's  history,  that  His  life  and  ministry  is  the  key  which  unlocks  the  mysteries 
of  God's  providence,  then  we  have  surely  here  a  solid  argument  that  we  have  not 
followed  cunningly  devised  fables.  We  may  begin  by  reminding  you  of  the  manifest 
preparation  for  Christ's  appearance  through  the  previous  ages  of  the  world.  We 
will  take  up  the  Old  Testament,  not  now  as  inspired,  but  simply  as  a  most  ancient 
history,  and  it  is  surely  unparalleled  how  in  the  multiplicity  of  books  which  make 
up  the  Bible,  through  all  the  varied  maze  of  narrative,  poetry,  philosophy,  runs  ever 
in  deep  undertone  the  idea  of  One  who  should  be  in  His  day  the  author  of  a  new 
era  of  holiness  and  truth.  The  world's  history,  so  marvellously  is  the  thread  of 
Jewish  life  woven  into  the  web  of  the  old  world's  life,  the  world's  history  before 
Christ  points  unto  Christ.  And  not  less  remarkable  is  that  which  follows.  There 
are  two  great  facts,  it  has  been  said,  which  are  standing  witnesses  to  the  truth  of 
the  Christian  revelation,  the  Israehtish  race  and  the  Catholic  Church.  The  former 
in  their  earlier  career,  in  their  disruption  and  dispersion  within  our  Lord's  genera- 
tion, exhibits  a  destiny  unmistakably  mixed  up  with  Him.  The  latter,  notwith- 
standing the  sullying  of  its  first  purity,  the  dissolution  of  its  first  unity,  notwith- 
standing the  slowness  of  its  progress  in  some  ages,  its  withdrawal  from  certain 
districts  in  others,  is  still  the  section  of  the  human  family  in  which  all  that  is 
noble  and  great  in  man  is  developed.  And  when  we  contemplate  the  life  of  Christ, 
still  more  markedly  does  He  vindicate  to  Himself  the  title  of  "  the  Alpha  and 
Omega,"  with  all  the  claims  therein  involved.  The  character  of  Christ  is  the  fulfil- 
ment and  embodiment  of  the  conscience  of  humanity.  A  marvellous  testimony  it  is, 
that  unbelief  ventures  not  to  touch  the  ark  of  that  immaculate  purity ;  on  the  con- 
trary, with  but  the  single  exception  of  a  single  infidel's  after-thought  (Vide  Notes  to 
Shelley's  Poems),  it  recognises  Him  frankly  as  the  pattern  man.  In  Him,  it  is 
granted,  and  in  Him  alone,  gentleness  never  degenerates  into  weakness,  nor  wisdom 
into  craft,  nor  severity  into  harshness.  And  it  adds  to  the  force  of  these  thoughts, 
that  although,  when  the  life  of  Christ  in  all  the  ineffable  beauty  of  its  Divine  linea- 
ments is  presented  to  it,  the  heart  of  humanity  throbs  at  once  in  sympathy ;  yet 
human  philosophy  never  imagined  beforehand  the  character.  And  not  less  observ- 
able is  it  that  no  man  has  ever  reproduced  that  image.  The  saints  have  copied  it 
in  their  measure  since  it  was  unveiled  to  mortal  vision ;  but  just  as  it  was  said  of 
the  heathen,  that  being  unable  to  comprehend  God  as  a  whole,  they  broke  up  the 
Deity  into  fragments,  and  worshipped  one  or  other  of  His  attributes  apart  from  the 
rest;  so, has  it  been  with  the  followers  «f  Christ.  They  have  seized  upon  portions 
of  His  character,  and  imitated  Him,  some  in  meekness,  some  in  boldness,  some  in 
patience,  but  not  one  of  all  the  mighty  assembly  of  the  saints  has  individually  pre- 
sented again  to  the  world  the  complete  likeness  of  his  Lord.  And  in  this,  the  very 
imperfection  of  their  discipleship,  have  they  been  witnesses  to  His  divinity.  "I  am 
Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last."  Is  it  indeed  so  that  in  Him  is  at  once 
the  source  and  limit  of  all  our  conceptions  of  the  holy  and  the  good,  the  measure  of 
truth,  and  purity,  and  love  ?  Then  what  an  argument  is  here  for  rendering  unto 
Him  our  worship,  and  building  on  Him  our  hopes.  2.  And  when  we  pass  from 
the  person  of  Christ  to  the  system  of  Christianity,  we  find  yet  another  illustration 
of  the  text.  The  sublime  title  there  claimed  belongs  to  Him  upon  this  ground  also, 
that  in  the  Christian  faith  is  to  be  found  the  alone  instrument  for  purifying  and 
consolidating  society.  There  are  two  characteristics  of  our  blessed  Lord's  teaching 
and  example,  which  are  well  worthy  of  note  under  this  head.  The  first  is,  that  those 
precepts  which  are  most  startling,  such  as  the  unconditional  forgiveness  of  injuries, 
non-resistance  of  evil,  benefiting  those  from  whom  no  return  is  possible,  whilst  like 
Christ's  own  character  they  were  never  anticipated  by  man,  are  yet  the  only  precepts 
which  we  can  conceive  the  Lord  God  to  give  His  creatures.  We  recognise  their 
Divinity  by  the  light  of  what  they  have  wrought.  The  second  speciality  of  the 
character  as  proposed  in  the  preaching  and  pattern  of  Christ,  is  its  universal  adapta- 
bility.   It  stands  equally  detached  from,  yet  equally  blended  with,  poverty  and 


CHAP,  m.]  REVELATION.  649 

■wealth,  youth  and  age,  learning  and  ignorance.     The  more  you  compare  Christ  as  a 
teacher  with  any  other  teacher,  the  more  conspicuously  does  He  stand  forth  as  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  aU  practical  righteousness.    And  this  view  of  our  Lord's  teach- 
ing, we  may  observe  in  passing,  throws  a  fresh  light  upon  His  miracles.     Those 
miracles  were  not  marvels  designed  simply  to  arrest  attention,  they  were  indications 
of  the  character  in  which  He  came.     That  He  is  the  Eenewer  of  all  that  is  broken 
and  worn  and  corrupt  in  humanity  ;  that  alike  for  the  moral  diseases  of  the  soul,  as 
for  the  miseries  of  this  earthly  life,  He  is  the  one  everhving  Physician  ;  that  in  His 
religion  Ues  the  only  cure  for  our  individual  and  social  ills,  the  only  sure  principle 
of  union  and  benevolence ;  this  is  the  truth  which  underlies  all  those  wonders  of 
omnipotence — the  healing  of  the  sick  and  the  raising  of  the  dead.     If  of  all  truth 
He  is  the  "  Beginning  and  the  End,"  superseding  or  concluding  in  His  religion  all 
other  methods  of  educating  man,  then  if  miracles  upon  men's  bodies  are  to  be 
shadows  of  His  work  upon  the  heart,  the  stamp  on  the  visible  of  His  ofl&ce  towards 
the  invisible,  I  should  expect,  that  whilst  in  former  ages  miraculous  cures  might  be 
worked  occasionally  by  great  renovators  of  society,  herein  types  of  Him,  yet  that  in 
His  life  this  miraculous  agency  would  culminate,  and  that  after  Him  (not  perhaps 
suddenly  and  sharply,  for  God's  providences  ever  shade  off  gradually  into  each 
other)  miracles  would  cease.    And  this  is  just  the  Scripture  account.     The  Bible 
recognises  a  miraculous  gift  in  prophets  and  apostles,  but  in  strict  subordination, 
both  in  number  and  authority,  to  His  wonder-working ;  leaving  Him  still  distinctly 
witnessed  unto  as  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  moral  healing.     "  I  have  seen  the 
end  of  all  perfection,  but  Thy  commandment  is  exceeding  broad."    Who  then  will 
not  bow  down  his   head  and  worship  before  Him — the   Alpha  and  the   Omega, 
the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last?     There  is  a  double  moral 
cowardice  amongst  us  from  which  the  cause  of  truth  equally  suffers,  first,  the  moral 
cowardice  of  those  who,  not  daring  to  proclaim  their  entire  unbelief  in  Kevelation, 
profess  to  receive  the  cardinal  doctrines  of  Christ,  and  question  and  cavU  at  those 
which  are  offshoots  therefrom ;  hiding  the  broader  scepticism  under  the  veil  of  a 
less.    The  second  exhibition  of  moral  cowardice  is  that  of  the  men  who  do  believe 
firmly,  but  shrink  from  confessing  their  faith,  and  so  love  to  speak  of  Christian 
doctrines  and  facts  under  a  sort  of  vague  philosophical  terminology,  thus  under- 
mining their  own  steadfastness  and  withholding  their  testimony  from  the  truth. 
Against  these  two  forms  of  evil  let  my  last  words  warn,  urging  you  to  a  manly  con- 
fession, in  your  speech,  and  in  your  lives,  of  Christ  Jesus  before  men,  as  the  Alpha 
and  the  Omega  of  all  that  has  been,  and  shall  be.     {Bp.  Woodford.)        Alpha  and 
Omega: — I.    The  description,   which  contains  the  speaker's   character.      1.   It 
regards  His  personal  nature,  and  shows  the  duration  and  immutability  of  His  being. 
2.  It  regards  agency,  and  is  intended  to  express  not  only  its  continuance,  but  its 
peculiarity  and  exclusiveness ;  that  He  is  the  commencer,  and  that  He  is  the  com- 
pleter ;  that  in  all  influences  He  is  all  and  in  all.    First,  let  us  look  at  creation. 
Here,  it  is  true.  He  is  the  "  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end." 
*'  Without  Him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."     Secondly,  let  us  look  at 
salvation ;  and  here  it  is  equally  true  that  He  is  "  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the 
beginning  and  the  end."     Thirdly,  in  providence.     Fourthly,  in  the  Church  He  is 
Alpha  and  Omega.    11.  Let  us  proceed  to  consider  the  promise,  in  which  we  shall 
find  the  sinner's  hope,  and  therefore  our  hope.     "I  will  give  unto  him  that  is 
athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely."     1.  The  excellence  of  the  blessing 
itself.     Observe  the  representation ;  it  is  water — it  is  water  from  the  fountain.     He 
is  a  fountain ;  always  full,  always  flowing,  always  fresh.     2.  The  manner  in  which 
it  is    to   be    imparted — "freely."       Worthiness  has  no    recommendation    here, 
and  unworthiness  has  no  barrier.     3.  The  distinction  by  which  the  recipients  are 
characterised.     *♦  I  will  give  to  him  that  is  athirst  of  the  water  of  life  freely." 
Enjoyment  does  not  arise  only  from  the  excellency  of  the  object,  but  from  its 
adaptation    to    our    state,   to    our    wants,  to    our   wishes,   and    to    our    hopes. 
Then    the    gratification    it    affords     is    satisfaction ;     and     this    is    the    case 
here.     Without  this  thirst,  what  is   even  the  water  of  life  itself?     {W.   Jay.) 
The  beginning  and  the  end. — The  beginning  and  the  end : — "  It  is  done,"    There  is 
often  a  difficulty  not  of  the  reason  so  much  as  of  the  imagination,  in  thinking  that 
anything  will  end,  or  at  least  anything  in  which  we  are  actively  interested.     Men 
look  out  for  a  graduated  sequence  in  the  course  of  events.     Catastrophes,  we  are 
told — catastrophes  are  discredited.     Why  events  ever  began  to  succeed  each  other  at 
all,  to  what  events  are  tending  as  their  final  goal — these  vital  questions  are  never 
raised ;  but  this  one-sided  way  of  looking  at  the  facts  of  life  is  seized  upon  greedily 


65'0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

by  the  imagination,  which  thus  will  clog  and  choke  the  equitable  action  of  the 
reason,  will  throw  unwelcome  facts  into  an  arbitrarily-chosen  background,  will 
involve  plain  conclusions  in  some  cloud  of  mystic  indefiniteness,  and  will  thus 
create  a  confidence  that,  somehow  or  other,  things  will  for  ever  go  on  very  much  as 
they  do.     Now  this  appears,  first  of  all,  in  the  power  we  many  of  us  have  of  putting 
aside  altogether  the  thought  of  death.     You  are  a  young  man  or  woman  just 
entering  life ;  will  you  be,  some  little  time  hence,  admired,  well  spoken  of,  or  the 
reverse  ?    You  do  not  know.    Will  your  family  life,  some  years  hence,  be  a  centre 
of  warm  affection,  or  a  scene  of  unspeakable  discomfort  and  misery  ?    You  do  not 
know.     You  do  not  know  how  you  will  die,  but  of  the  inevitableness  and  certainty 
of  death  itself  you  are,  or  you  ought  to  be,  as  well  assured  as  of  your  own  existence. 
Each  stroke  of  the  bell  echoes  the  voices  of  the  angels,  echoes  the  voice  of  God — 
"  It  is  done,"  "  It  is  done."    And  the  same  difficulty  of  entering  into  the  fact  that 
that  which  exists  now,  and  here,  will  come  to  an  utter  end,  appears  in  our  way  of 
thinking  about  organised  human  life,  about  society.     You  study  a  section  of  human 
history,  you  mark  man's  progress  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  stage,  you  observe  the 
steps  of  social  and  political  growth ;  the  task  of  imagination  in  conceiving  that  it 
will  all  utterly  end  becomes  increasingly  difficult.    It  looks  so  stable  and  so  strong, 
so  vigorous,  so  justly  self-reliant,  so  based  upon  high  courage,  upon  keen  sagacity, 
upon  hard  common-sense,  that  nothing,  it  seems,  can  avail  to  shake  it.    It  is  so 
easy  to  put  out  of  account  that  which  is  not  obtruded  upon  the  sight,  to  make  no 
allowance  for  the  unforeseen,  to  assume  that  the  apparent  is  the  real,  and  that  the 
real  of  to-day  is  always  permanent ;  and  so  men  drift  on  until  something  happens 
that  startles  the  world  out  of  its  dream  of  security.    And  still  more  difficult  do  men 
find  it  to  accustom  themselves  to  the  conviction  that  one  day  this  earthly  home  on 
which  we  live  will  itself  be  the  scene  of  a  vast  physical  catastrophe.     The  course  of 
nature — the  phrase  itself  helps  to  disguise  from  us  the  truth — the  course  of  nature 
seems  so  ascertained,  and,  within  certain  limits,  so  unvarying,  that  the  mind  recoils 
from  the  thought  that  one  day  all  this  ordered  sequence  of  movement,  of  life,  of 
growth,  and  of  decay,  will  suddenly  cease,  buried  in  the  ruins  of  a  vast  catastrophe. 
Law,  it  seems,  will  effectually  prevent  the  occurrence  of  any  such  catastrophe ;  it 
could  only,  we  are  told,  be  anticipated  even  by  an  apostle  in  the  unscientific  age. 
Now,  let  us  observe  that  such  a  catastrophe  need  by  no  means  imply  the  complete 
cessation  of  what  we  call  law,  but  only  the  suspension  of  some  lower  law  or  laws 
through  the  imperial  intervention  of  a  higher  law.     We  see  this  suspension  of 
lower  by  higher  laws  constantly  going  on  around  us ;   indeed,  it  is  an  almost 
necessary  accompaniment  of  man's  activity  on  the  surface  of  this  planet.    You  and 
I  never  lift  our  arms  without  so  far  suspending  and  defying  the  ordinary  operation 
of  the  law  of  gravitation.     St.  Peter,  when  arguing  against  the  scoffers  of  his  day 
that  because  all  things  continued  as  they  were  from  the  beginning,  therefore  the 
promise  of  Christ's  coming  had  become  practically  worthless,  points  to  the  flood, 
points  to  the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.    And  yet  these  catastrophes 
were  brought  about  by  the  operation  of  existing  laws;  and  if  this  was  so,  is  it 
inconceivable  that  He,  in  whose  hands  and  whose  workmanship  we  are,  should  have 
in  His  illimitable  universe  other  and  more  imperative  laws  beyond  even  those 
which  more  immediately  surround  our  puny  life  ? — moral  laws  which  have  their 
roots  in  the  necessities  of  His  eternal  being,  and  not  mere  physical  laws  which  He 
has  made  to  be  just  what  they  are  according  to  His  own  good  pleasure.    These  are 
the  three  elements  involved  in  the  Christian  representation  of  the  second  coming  of 
Christ :  the  end  of  all  human  probations,  the  final  dissolution  of  the  organised  or 
social  life  of  mankind,  the  destruction  of  man's  present  home  on  the  surface  of  the 
globe — there  is  nothing  in  them,  to  say  the  very  least,  violently  contrary  to  our 
present  experience,  nothing  more  than  an  extension  of  the  facts  of  which  we  have 
present  experience.    Individual  life  abounds  with  the  presages,  with  the  presenti- 
ments, of  death.     The  aggregate  life  of  man,  human  society,  contains  within  itself 
many  a  solvent  which  threatens  its  ruin,  and  the  planet  which  we  inhabit  is  a  ball 
of  fire,  which  may  easily  one  day  pour  out  over  its  fair  surface  the  pent-up  forces 
which  already  surge  and  boil  beneath  our  feet.    And  when  all  is  over,  what  will 
remain ?     "He  said  unto  me.  It  is  done  ;  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning 
and  the  end."     God,  the  Almighty,  the  AU-wise,  the  Compassionate  ;  God,  the 
Infinite,  the  Immeasurable,  the  Eternal  Father,  Son  and  Spirit,  undivided  essence ; 
God  remains.      There    are   two  principal  reflections  which  you  should  try  to 
take  home  with  you.     One  is  the  insignificance  of  our  present  life.    It  is  natural 
that,  80  long  as  they  can,  those  who  believe  in  no  future  life  should  exagger- 


CHAP,  xxi.]  REVELATION.  651 

ate  the  worth  of  this;  it  is  indeed  their  all,  and  when  before  their  eyes  it 
begins  to  break  up,  they  have  no  resource  but  despair.  But  we  Christians 
have  a  hope,  sure  and  steadfast,  of  a  future  which  is  infinitely  greater  than 
the  present,  and'  which  can  assure  to  our  immortal  spirit  true  union  with  Him 
who  is  the  true  end  of  its  existence,  a  satisfaction  which  is  here  impossible  for  us. 
The  instability  and  perishableness  of  all  human  things  are  but  a  foil  to  the  eternal 
life  of  God.  And  the  other  reflection  is  the  immense  importance  of  life.  Yet,  this 
life,  so  brief,  so  transient,  so  insignificant,  so  made  up  as  it  is  of  trifles,  of  petty 
incidents,  of  unimportant  duties,  is  the  scene  upon  which,  in  the  case  of  every  one 
of  us,  issues  are  decided,  the  importance  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate, 
issues  immense,  issues  irreversible.  (Canon  Liddon.)  I  will  give  unto  him  that 
is  athirst  of  the  foxintain  of  the  water  of  life  freely. — The  free  invitation  of  the 
gospel : — I.  The  blessings  hebe  offered — "  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life,"  The 
figure  is  descriptive  of  the  inestimable  worth  and  efficacy  of  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  which  is  a  living  stream,  flowing  from  the  throne  of  God,  through  the 
waste  howling  wilderness  of  this  world.  II.  The  persons  to  whom  the  offer  is 
MADE.  •'  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the  water  of  life."  He  who  is 
athirst  is  just  the  individual  who  is  destitute  of,  and  ardently  longing  for,  happiness. 
ni.  The  freeness  by  which  the  gospel  offer  is  characterised.  "I  will  give  unto 
him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  Such  is  the  munifi- 
cence of  our  gracious  Benefactor,  that  He  will  not  sell  His  benefits.  (P.  Grant.) 
The  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  : — I.  The  character  under  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
represents  Himself.  The  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief  is  "  the  Alpha 
and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end."  Ascended  up  on  high,  far  above  all  princi- 
palities and  powers.  He  is  constituted  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church ;  and  from 
Him,  as  an  inexhaustible  fountain,  all  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings  flow.  II.  The 
PERSONS  to  whom  A  BLESSING  IS  HERE  PROMISED  by  the  Alpha  and  Omega  are  those  who 
are  athirst.  They  alone  will  receive  with  gratitude  the  boon  which  He  so  graciously 
offers,  in.  The  blessing  to  be  bestowed  is  water — the  water  of  life.  This 
expression  denotes  the  various  benefits  procured  for  man  by  the  adorable  Redeemer, 
and  which  are  distinctly  set  forth  in  the  Gospel ;  more  especially  the  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  alone  that  mighty  transformation  is  produced  on  the 
human  soul.  IV.  The  manner  in  which  this  blessing  will  be  bestowed  next 
demands  our  consideration — "  freely."  The  precious  benefits  here  referred  to  are 
a  free,  unmerited  boon,  wholly  undeserved  on  the  part  of  man,  and  graciously  of 
His  free  favour  bestowed  by  God.  It  is  when,  as  a  helpless  debtor,  he  has  not  one 
farthing  to  pay,  that  he  is  frankly  forgiven  all.  {T.  Bissland,  M.A.)  Good  news 
for  thirsty  souls : — ^I.  Explanation.  1.  All  souls  by  nature  are  in  great  and  dire 
want.  Our  Lord  here  speaks  of  those  who  are  "  athirst,"  and  thirst  is  the  index  of 
one  of  our  most  pressing  necessities.  If  this  thirst  be  not  quenched  you  are  in  a 
desperate  plight  indeed.  2.  Some  persons  begin  to  be  conscious  of  their  soul's  great 
need,  and  these  are  they  of  whom  the  Saviour  speaks  as  "  athirst "  :  they  have  a 
dreadful  want,  and  they  know  it.  I  would  have  you  know  that  frequently  those 
are  the  most  thirsty  who  thirst  to  thirst.  3.  Thirst  is  a  desire  arising  out  of  a 
need.  Now,  so  long  as  you  have  that  desire,  you  need  not  stop  to  question  your 
right  to  take  Christ.  A  man  is  thirsty,  even  if  he  cannot  explain  what  thirst  is  and 
how  it  comes.  4.  The  text  promiseth  water  from  the  fountain  of  life  to  the  man 
that  is  athirst ;  but  thirst  cannot  quench  thirst.  Some  seekers  act  as  if  they  thought 
it  would.  "  Oh,"  say  they,  "  I  am  not  thirsty  enough ;  I  wish  I  felt  my  need 
more"  :  but  your  thirst  wiU  not  be  quenched  by  being  increased.  "  I  should  have 
some  hope,"  says  one,  "  if  I  were  more  sensible  of  my  danger."  Yet  that  is  not  a 
gospel  hope.  Why  should  a  man's  despairing  because  of  his  danger  operate  to 
deliver  him  from  danger  ?  As  long  as  you  stop  where  you  are  you  may  get  more 
and  more  sensible  of  danger  until  you  reach  the  sensitiveness  of  morbid  despondency ; 
but  you  will  be  no  nearer  salvation.  It  is  not  your  sense  of  need,  it  is  Christ's 
power  to  bless  you,  and  your  yielding  yourself  up  to  Christ,  that  will  bring  you 
salvation.  H.  Encouragement.  1.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  keeps  open  house  for  all 
thirsty  ones.  "  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come  ;  and  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the 
water  of  life  freely."  2.  Now,  as  if  it  were  not  enough  to  keep  open  house,  our 
Lord  Jesus  goes  further ;  for  He  issues[many  invitations  of  the  freest  kind  (Isa.  Iv.  1). 
3.  Does  any  one  say,  "  Well,  I  know  that  the  ever-blessed  Saviour  keeps  open  house, 
and  that  He  invites  men  freely  ;  but  still  I  am  afraid  to  come  "  ?  Peradventure,  we 
may  overcome  your  diffidence  if  we  remind  you  that  our  Lord  makes  a  proclamation, 
which  has  the  weight  of  His  personal  dignity  about  it,  and  comes  as  from  a  king 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

(John  vii.  37).  4.  Peradventure  a  trembler  replies,  "Ay  !  here  is  a  proclamation  ; 
but  I  should  be  more  comforted  if  I  could  read  promises."  Our  text  is  one  of  the 
freest  promises  possible,  "  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the 
water  of  life  freely."  Come  and  test  the  promise  now,  and  see  if  it  be  not  true.  But 
if  you  require  another,  turn  to  Isa.  xli.  17.  5.  Our  gracious  Lord,  still  further  to 
encourage  souls  to  come  to  Him,  has  been  pleased  to  give  many  gracious  expla- 
nations of  what  He  meant.  You  will  find  one  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  John.  How 
sweetly  He  explained  to  the  woman  at  the  well  what  living  water  is,  and  what 
drinking  of  it  is.  6.  Furthermore,  our  Lord,  in  order  to  make  this  very  plain,  has 
set  before  us  lively  emblems.  Eock  in  wilderness.  Also  see  Psa.  cvii.  5.  7.  Our 
Lord  has  given  us,  besides,  many  encouraging  instances  of  men  who  have  thirsted 
for  grace  (Psa,  xlii.,  Ixii.).  8.  Our  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  give  His  own  special 
blessing  to  the  thirsty  ones  ;  for,  when  He  opened  His  mouth  upon  the  mountain 
and  gave  out  the  benedictions  which  commence  His  memorable  sermon,  He  said, 
♦•  Blessed  are  they  that  do  hunger  and  thirst,"  &c,  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
fountain  of  the  water  of  life : — I.  The  promiseb  is  also  the  Giver.  II.  The  gift  is 
Himself.  HI.  The  effects.  Water  softens,  fertilises,  satisfies.  IV.  The 
BECEiVEB.  1.  There  is  one  qualification  needful  in  order  that  we  may  share  the 
gift,  and  only  one — desire.  2.  There  is  great  wisdom  in  God's  mentioning  this 
qualification.  (1)  Those  who  have  nothing  but  this  desire  would  be  likely,  in  very 
humility,  to  abstain  from  asking  unless  they  had  special  encouragement.  But  this 
very  cause  of  despondency  is  made  a  ground  of  hope.  (2)  None  others  could  value 
the  gift.  {Homilist.)  He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things. — Over- 
coming:— The  Bible  closes  with  a  great  outburst  of  hope  and  courage.  The 
words  I  have  quoted  are  words  that  correspond  to  many  others  which  are  to  be 
found  in  the  Book  of  Kevelation — promises  to  him  that  overcometh.  I  ask  at  once 
what  is  meant  by  the  overcoming  that  is  spoken  of  again  and  again  in  the  earlier 
chapters  as  well  as  in  this  later  chapter  of  the  great  Book  ?  There  is  no  special 
difficulty,  there  is  no  peculiar  struggle  of  the  life  spoken  of.  It  takes  life  as  a  trial, 
and  represents  the  great  relationship  which  man  is  to  hold  to  life.  He  that  over- 
cometh, not  this  or  that  special  difficulty,  not  this  or  that  peculiar  struggle  in  which 
he  is  engaged,  but  he  that  in  his  whole  life  comes  forth  as  victor,  it  is  to  him  that 
the  great  promises  are  given.  And  we  recognise  at  once,  and  think  something 
which  occurs  to  us  in  all  our  observation  of  the  world,  in  all  the  experience  of  our 
life — the  way  in  which  man  is  either  overcome  by  this  world  or  overcomes  this 
world.  Either  it  becomes  his  master  or  it  becomes  his  slave ;  he  gets  it  under  his 
feet  or  is  trampled  under  its  feet.  We  do  not  know  what  may  be  beyond,  what  new 
experiences,  what  other  trials,  what  other  chances  and  new  opportunities  may  be 
offered  to  the  soul  that  has  failed  in  this  world,  but  we  do  know  that  there  are 
failures  in  this  world  and  we  do  know  that  there  are  successes.  And  every  man  has 
it  in  his  power  to  conquer  the  world,  for  man  is  stronger  than  circumstance,  because 
man  is  the  child  of  God  and  circumstance  is  only  the  arrangement  of  God  for  the 
service,  the  development,  and  education  of  His  children.  What  is  it  to  overcome  ? 
It  is  to  know  that  the  one  great  power  that  is  in  this  universe  is  our  power.  We 
talk  about  power,  and  men  may  grow  conceited  as  they  lift  themselves  up  and  say, 
"  I  will  be  strong  and  conquer  the  world."  Ah !  it  is  not  to  be  done  so.  There 
is  one  real  and  true  strength  in  this  universe,  and  that  is  God's  strength,  and  no 
man  ever  did  any  strong  thing  yet  that  God  did  not  do  that  strong  thing  in  him. 
A  man  makes  himself  full  of  strength  only  as  the  trumpet  makes  itself  full,  by 
letting  it  be  held  at  the  lips  of  the  trumpeter ;  so  only  man  lets  himself  be  made 
strong  as  he  lets  himself  be  held  in  the  hand  of  God.  As  the  chisel  is  powerless — 
if  it  tries  to  carve  a  statue  by  itself  it  goes  tumbling  and  stumbling  over  the 
precious  surface  of  the  stone — as  the  chisel  becomes  itself  filled  and  inspired  with 
genius  when  it  is  put  into  the  hand  of  the  artist ;  so  man,  putting  himself  into  the 
hand  of  God,  loses  his  awkwardness  as  well  as  his  feebleness,  and  becomes  full  of 
the  graciousness  and  the  strength  of  the  perfect  nature,  Elnow  God  your  Father ; 
recognise  what  your  baptism  means,  that  it  was  the  claiming  of  your  soul  for  the 
Father-soul  of  God;  give  yourself  to  Him  in  absolute,  loving  obedience.  Give 
yourself  to  Him  as  the  chUd  gives  himself  to  the  father  as  the  most  natural  and 
true  thing  in  all  your  life ;  and  then,  His  power  glowing  through  your  power,  the 
world  shall  become  yours  as  it  is  His,  and  in  overcoming  you  shall  inherit  all  things 
— inherit,  because  they  are  your  Father's,  so  they  shall  become  yours.  {Bp.  Phillips 
Brooks.)  The  character  and  blessing  of  him  that  overcometh: — What,  then, 
are  the  qualifications  of  him  who  would  fight  successfully  ?    1.  The  first  is  faith ; 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  653 

such    is    the   express   and    repeated   declaration   of     Scripture.      "  This   is    the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world,"  &c.     2.  Secondly,  he  who  overcometh  must 
exercise  constant  and  unremitting  watchfulness.      In  the  spiritual,  as  in  mortal 
warfare,  the  hour  of  fancied  security  is   that   of    most   evident  danger.      When 
you    blindly   indulge    the   wishes   which    arise    in    your    hearts,    or   follow   un- 
guardedly the  maxims  and  example  of  the  world,  you  wilfully  expose  yourselves  to 
the  most  imminent  hazard  of  being  betrayed  into  sudden  misery  and  danger.     3. 
A  third,  and  the  most  important  weapon  in  the  hand  of  him  who  overcometh,  is 
prayer.     Weak,  indeed,  are  the  children  of  men,  wavering  in  their  opinion,  incon- 
stant in  their  affections,  inconsistent  in  their  conduct.     To  vessels,  thus  weak,  thus 
insufficient,  thus  destitute  of  power  in  themselves,  there  is  strength  from  on  high. 
4.  Another  of  the  requisites  in  him  that  overcometh  is  self-denial.     We  are  seldom 
just  judges  of  what  is  truly  for  our  own  benefit.     Even  in  the  plainest  cases  of  duty 
we  are  often  miserably  misled  by  passions,  prejudices,  or  evil  incUnations.     The 
ruling  passion,  the  favourite  inclination,  of  every  man  is,  in  fact,  his  weak  side, 
through  which  he  is  most  apt  to  be  betrayed  into  the  sin  that  doth  most  easily  beset 
him.     Here,  therefore,  the  prudent  man  is  particularly  on  his  guard,  lest  he  should 
be  betrayed  by  it,  and  brought  to  experience  the  truth,  that  for  all  things  God  will 
bring  him  to  judgment.     5.  Lastly,  it  is  essential  to  him  that  overcometh,  that  he 
persevere.     There  are  many  who  set  out  in  life  with  a  fair  outward  appearance  of 
success.     They  contend  for  truth  with  energy  and  zeal,  but,  by  degrees,  their  zeal 
waxes  cold,   their  energies  abate,   lassitude  and  indifference  creep   upon  them, 
rehgion  wearies  and  disgusts.     They  begin  by  entertaining  doubts  as  to  some  of  its 
doctrines,  and  by  throwing  off  all  respect  for  its  precepts.     (The  Scottish  Pulpit.) 
The  battle  of  sonship  and  the  inheritance  of  the  conqueror : — The  great  hindrance  to 
our  full  belief  of  all  such  words  as  these  lies  in  the  very  grandeur  of  the  truth  to  be 
believed.     We  turn  from  the  mighty  inheritance  promised  to  the  Christian  con- 
queror to  survey  our  own  lives  ;  and  because  amidst  their  poverty  and  insignificance, 
their  low  earthly  tendencies  and  deep  spiritual  infirmities,  we  can  discover  no  traces 
of  a  battle  whose  results  will  be  so  sublime,  we  find  the  promise  hard  to  be  believed. 
But  yet  the  very  position  of  this  promise  at  the  end  of  the  last  book  of  God's  revela- 
tion, shows  that  it  is  simply  the  natural  and  necessary  result  of  redemption,  and 
therefore  belongs  with  all  its  greatness  to  every  redeemed  man.     It  is  not  an  end 
to  be  sought  by  the  greatest  souls  alone,  but  is  the  birthright  of  every  faithful  man. 
And  the  lowest,  poorest  Christian  on  earth  may  see,  by  looking  beneath  the  outward 
things  of  life  into  life's  spiritual  meaning,  that  he  is   actually  fighting  a  battle, 
which,  if  he  do  but  fight  out  faithfully,  will  render  him  an  heir  of  all  that  God  can 
give,  or  immortality  bestow.    I.  Why  does  oub  sonship  demand  a  conflict  ?    We 
must  begin  by  laying  down  two  facts,  which  prepare  the  way  for  the  answer,  and 
avoid  two  errors  into  which  we  are  prone  to  fall.    1.  The  struggle  is  not  to  become 
sons  of  God  ;  it  results  from  our  being  so  already.    The  grace  by  which  God  makes 
us  feel  that  we  are  His  sons — that  we  could  not  have  made  ourselves  such — gives 
rise  to  a  conflict  in  the  soul.     The  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  acting  on  our  nature 
creates  at  once  a  spiritual  war.     The  faith  that  closes  the  weary  effort  to  make 
ourselves  God's  children,  in  the  belief  that  we  are  such,  creates  at  once  a  deep 
life-long  struggle.     The  love  that  flows  into  our  hearts  from  God  witnessing  to  our 
adoption,  transforms  our  hearts  into  fields  of  battle.     2.  The  conflict  rising  from 
sonship  is  not  created  by  any  outward  circumstances,  but  by  the  state  of  the  soul 
itself,  in  all  conditions  of  life  and  ages  of  time.     Take  the  first  moment  in  which  a 
man  hears  God's  voice,  and  becomes  conscious  of  the  Divine  summons,  and  you 
will  see  how  the  battle  begins.    Aroused,  perhaps,  by  trial,  sorrow,  the  sense  of 
life's  vanity,  he  sets  out  as  a  pilgrim  of  the  eternal.    In  the  first  dim  twilight  of 
spiritual  life  there  comes  to  him  the  voice  of  God.    At  once  it  seems  to  isolate 
him ;  he  feels  alone  with  God  and  his  sin  ;  he  discovers  the  awf ulness  of  individ- 
uality.    Then  commence  the  first  clashings  of  the  spiritual  war  of  which  his  soul 
is  the  battle-field.     The  earthly  and  the  heavenly,  the  human  and  the  Divine,  the 
selfish  and  the  holy,  conflict  in  one  loud  storm  of  emotion.    II.  Why  must  the 
CONFLICT  BE  PEBPETUAL  ?    Is  there  uo  earthly  state  in  which  it  will  cease  ?     Can  we 
achieve  the  victory  only  on  the  heavenly  side  of  the  grave  ?    I  answer,  it  must  be 
long  as  life,  because  the  old  war  between  the  two  natures  manifests  itself  in  three 
forms,  from  which  there  is  no  escape.     1.  The  spirit  pants  for  the  invisible — the 
flesh  for  the  visible  world.     Is  it  not  manifest  that  there  can  be  no  pause,  no  safety, 
no  repose,  till  God  crowns  us  as  victors  in  His  heaven  ?     2.  The  spirit  lives  in  God 
— the  flesh  creates  temptation  to  oppose  Him.    If  it  be  true  that  all  life's  oiroum- 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 


stances — solitude  or  companionship,  wealth  or  poverty,  joy  or  sorrow,  ease  or  labour, 
are  filled  with  temptations,  through  the  shadowy  power  of  the  carnal,  where  can 
there  be  a  pause  in  the  battle  but  on  the  deathless  side  of  the  grave?  3.  The 
tendency  of  the  flesh  is  to  be  a  creature  of  circumstances :  that  of  the  spirit  is  to  be 
their  king.  Carnal  men  move  in  masses,  are  swayed  by  every  influence,  lose  their 
individuality,  and  become  slaves  to  the  spirit  of  the  world.  All  spiritual  men  have 
found  that  this  loneliness,  this  separation  with  God,  formed  part  of  their  life-struggle. 
And  this,  too,  is  an  undying  form  of  our  battle  as  sons  of  God.  "  Worship  success, 
gold,  power,"  is  the  cry  of  the  carnal.  "  Worship  God  and  measure  life  by  heavenly 
laws,"  is  the  voice  of  the  spiritual.  Translate  your  commonplace  toils  into  this 
meaning,  and  they  become  transfigured.  You,  in  your  obscure  sphere  of  work,  if 
you  are  true  to  heavenly  laws,  are  in  spirit  a  great  warrior.  You  are  taking  a  part 
in  the  spiritual  battle  of  the  ages,  and  if  faithful  imto  death,  the  full  glory  of 
perfected  sonship  will  be  yours.  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  be  My  son."  III.  The 
INHERITANCE  OF  THE  CONQUEROR.  "  He  shall  inherit  all  things."  The  very  conquest 
of  the  carnal  nature  brings  us  so  near  to  God  that  all  things  become  our  own. 
1.  Our  struggles  become  our  possessions.  2.  Inheriting  God,  we  inherit  all  things. 
{E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)        The  conqueror's  reward  and  the  coward's  doom: — I.  The 

FOUNTAIN  FOR  THE  SONS  OF  MEN.      11.    ThE  CONQUEROR  AND  HIS   REWARD.      As  bclieVerS 

we  are  saved,  as  conquerors  we  get  the  recompense.  1.  The  inheritance  of  all 
things.  We  are  heirs  of  God;  joint-heirs  with  Christ.  2.  The  Divine  portion. 
*'  I  will  be  his  God  " — a  repetition  of  Abraham's  blessing  (Gen.  xvii.  7).  Does  not 
this  include  everything?  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  23).  3.  The  Divine  adoption.  The  con- 
queror becomes  a  son,  and  all  that  is  contained  in  sonship  is  his,  all  the  paternal 
love,  all  the  Divine  patrimony,  all  the  endless  glory.  III.  The  coward's  doom 
(ver.  8).  Though  the  "  fearful  "  or  coward  is  specially  singled  out  here,  yet  there 
are  others  associated  with  him  in  his  awful  doom.  They  ^re  all  of  earth,  sons  of 
Adam,  men — not  devils.  1.  The  fearful.  This  means  the  cowards  who  refused  to 
come  out  from  the  world  and  join  Christ,  though  their  consciences  urged  them ; 
who  shrunk  from  confessing  Christ ;  who,  through  fear  of  men,  of  the  world,  of 
their  good  name,  of  earthly  honour  and  gain,  either  kept  their  religion  to  them- 
selves or  threw  it  away.  2.  The  unbelieving.  These  are  the  rejecters  of  Christ. 
Oh  the  hatef ulness  of  unbelief !  What  must  it  be  to  refuse  God's  testimony  to  His 
Son !  to  refuse  that  Son  Himself  I  3.  The  abominable.  Those  who  were  partakers 
of  the  abominations  and  filthiness  mentioned  before  (xvii.  4) — revellings,  banquet- 
ings,  riots,  blasphemies.  4.  Murderers.  Whose  hands  are  red  with  blood ;  whose 
heart  is  full  of  angry  passions,  envy,  malice,  revenge,  grudging ;  whose  lips  give 
vent  to  irritating  and  angry  words.  6.  Whoremongers.  All  who  give  way  to  their 
lusts,  who  live  in  uncleanness ;  those  whose  eyes  are  full  of  adultery,  and  who 
cannot  cease  from  this  sin.  6.  Sorcerers.  They  who  have  taken  part  in  Babylon's 
sorceries  and  witchcrafts ;  all  allies  of  the  evil  one,  and  workers  of  the  lying  wonders 
of  the  last  days.  7.  Idolaters.  Not  only  the  heathen  worshippers  of  graven  images, 
but  all  who  have  chosen  another  god ;  who  love  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator ; 
who  worship  mammon,  pleasure,  art,  splendour,  or  gold,  for  "  covetousness  is 
idolatry."  8.  All  liars.  All  who  speak  falsely  in  any  way ;  who  practise  dishonesty ; 
who  care  not  for  truth.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  saints  inheriting  all  things  : — 
The  little  child  believes  that  all  things  belong  to  it,  and  claims  everything  it  can 
touch,  book,  or  toy,  or  picture,  stretching  out  its  hands  for  the  moon  with  a 
divine  sense  of  ownership.  And  the  child  is  not  wrong  :  the  child  is  never  wrong 
in  its  spontaneous  conduct,  acting  out  what  God  puts  into  it,  reflecting  the 
thought  of  the  face  that  its  spirit  beholds.  All  things  do  belong  to  it,  and  are 
withheld  only  while  it  is  in  its  spiritual  minority  for  purposes  of  discipline, 
and  until  it  learns  to  distinguish  between  the  good  and  the  evil.  But  at 
last  God's  children  become  heirs,  inherit,  and  all  things  become  theirs.  {T.  T. 
Munger.)  I  will  be  Ms  God,  and  he  shall  be  My  son. — The  restored  sonship  : — 
I.  Let  us  think  of  what  is  conveyed  to  us  here,  when  God  promises  that  He 
WILL  BE  OUR  God.  He  is  the  God  of  all  the  world  now,  for  He  rules  it,  and  is 
calling  men  out  of  it ;  and  whether  they  honour  Him  or  not.  He  presides  over 
them,  and  directs  their  destinies  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  almighty  will.  Still, 
God  is  not  the  same  to  man  now  as  He  was  to  him  before  he  fell  from  his  first 
estate  in  paradise.  Whosoever  has  a  hard  thought  of  God,  disowns  His  Deity ;  and 
it  is  thus  with  many  a  sinner  now.  But  we  shall  have  no  hard  thoughts  of  Him 
when  we  "  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  He  shall  be  our  God,  our  very  own;  and  it 
shall  be  in  this  respect,  as  it  is  with  men  on  earth,  we  shall  love  what  belongs  to 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  655 

ourselves.  Let  it  be,  therefore,  that  God  is  not  in  one  sense  the  God  of  the  sinner. 
He  is,  and  shall  be,  of  His  people ;  the  place  which  He  does  not  occupy  in  the 
hearts  of  the  one.  He  shall  in  the  hearts  of  the  other.  Every  thought  which  the 
saints  have  shall  confirm  Him  in  the  high  position  which  He  holds.  And  how 
could  it  be  otherwise?  When  we  have  inherited  "  all  things,"  shall  we  not  see  the 
fruits  of  His  beneficence  all  around?  "God  "shall  be,  as  it  were,  written  upon 
all;  and  because  "  God"  is  written  upon  all,  therefore  all  shall  be  for  man;  for 
man  shall  then  be  in  the  possession  of  all  things  which  belong  to  God.  And  shall 
not  this  supremacy  of  the  Deity  be  delightful  for  us  to  own  ?  Then  also  shall  we 
understand  the  dispensations  which  perplex  us  now  so  much ;  we  shall  no  longer 
wonder  at  the  short  triumph  which  the  ungodly  had  for  a  season,  at  the  momentary 
gloom  which  for  a  while  seemed  to  eclipse  the  Christian's  sun ;  all  these  shall 
appear  weU  connected  parts  of  one  great  plan,  which  was  to  issue,  as  now  indeed  it 
shall  be  seen  to  have  done,  in  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  happiness  of  the  saints. 
But  to  see  and  to  understand  are  not  enough  to  satisfy.  Far  more  than  these  is 
conveyed  in  the  promise  that  the  Most  High  will  be  our  God — the  saints  shall 
possess  and  enjoy  the  liberahty  of  His  heart :  there  shall  be  positive  ownership 
exercised  by  the  redeemed;  they  shall  make  all  these  things  their  own.  And 
keeping  in  mind  the  point  on  which  we  are  now  immediately  engaged — namely, 
that  God  on  His  part  will  restore  man  to  his  high  original,  and  indeed  to  something 
more,  we  might  remind  you  again  that  such  as  "  overcome"  shall  dwell  in  His  very 
presence  for  ever.  But  what  more,  it  might  be  asked,  is  contained  in  the  promise, 
that  *•  the  Lord  will  be  our  God  "  ?  We  answer,  all  those  especial  developments  of 
the  Deity  which  God  has  withdrawn  from  us  because  of  our  sin.  He  will  then 
openly  make ;  and  amongst  these  we  might  notice  this,  that  He  will  display  His 
omnipotence  in  us.  Let  us  think  what  that  power  can  do.  Can  it  not  make  us 
noble,  and  rich,  and  perfect,  and  exalt  us  beyond  the  ordinary  advancement  of 
man  ?  Undoubtedly  it  can.  And  as  God  will  not  have  any  around  Him  who  are 
not  fitted  for  His  court,  we  may  reasonably  expect  that  aU  this  shall  be  done  for  us. 
The  Master  is  noble,  and  the  servant  shall  be  as  his  Master ;  he  shall  be  free  from 
the  taint  of  everything  that  defaces  or  defiles.  Then  there  shall  be  no  more  predis- 
position to  sin,  no  more  contraction  of  heart,  no  more  sordidness  of  thought, 
nothing  that  is  unworthy  of  God  Himself.  And  our  attainment  of  this  wiU  be  a 
display  of  Divine  omnipotence  ;  nothing  less  than  that  could  accomplish  anything 
with  such  intractable  hearts  as  ours.  But  nothing  shall  be  impossible  with  God. 
II.  We  tubn  now  to  that  which  is  said  concebning  oubselves.  One  blessing, 
then,  to  which  we  may  look  forward  in  the  promise  that  "  we  shall  be  His  sons,"  is 
this,  that  the  unfilial  feeling  of  terror  shall  be  done  away.  Let  the  peace  of  sonship 
here  be  an  earnest  of  how  sweet  the  communion  of  sonship  shall  be  hereafter.  And 
let  us  not  forget,  that  not  only  shall  all  un-son  like  feelings  of  terror  pass  from  the 
bosom  of  the  saints,  but  that  filial  delight  shall  return,  dehght  keener,  sweeter,  than 
that  which  Adam  had  in  paradise.  "  He  shall  be  My  son  !  "  Does  not  this  speak 
volumes  of  what  we  shall  feel  in  heaven  ?  With  whom  were  we  so  happy  when 
we  were  in  the  state  which  approaches  the  nearest  to  innocence?  To  whom 
did  we  cling  the  most?  In  whose  smile  did  we  bask  with  the  greatest  joy? 
Is  not  a  parent's  figure  almost  the  only  one  which  we  can  see  in  the  long 
perspective  of  the  past?  From  this  we  can  learn  what  Adam  felt  in  Eden, 
what  we  shall  feel  in  heaven.  This  long  lost  feeling  shall  return,  our  sonship 
shall  act,  we  shall  see  that  there  is  none  equal  to  our  Father,  that  from 
Him  everything  flows,  in  Him  all  blessing  centres,  that  He  is  All  in  All.  And 
one  great  element  of  our  blessing  shall  be  this ;  the  consciousness  of  con- 
nection with  Him  shall  come  back  to  us  again.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.) 
But  the  fearflQ  and  unbelievine:  .  .  .  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake. — 
Who  are  "  the  fearful "  ? — "  The  cowards  "  would  express  the  sense  more 
accurately,  at  least  in  modern  English.  Those  condemned  are  those  who  are 
afraid  to  do  their  duty,  not  those  who  do  it,  though  timidly  and  in  spite  of  the 
fears  of  nature  :  still  less  those  who  do  it  "  with  fear  and  trembling  "  in  St.  Paul's 
sense.  {W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.)  The  cowards  : — We  learn  from  the  context  where 
they  failed.  1.  The  irreligious  or  unbelieving  found  that  a  religious  life  required 
hardness,  restraint,  restrictions ;  whereas  it  was  easier  for  them  to  float  with  the 
tide  of  inclination  than  against  it.  2.  The  dishonest  man  found  it  easier  to  be 
dishonest  than  honest :  his  gains  were  quicker ;  he  had  not  to  wait  and  struggle 
with  poverty  as  the  honest  man  had.  3.  The  Har  had  not  the  courage  to  tell  the 
truth  and  face  the  consequences  ;  but  shirked  it.    4.  The  sensualist  found  it  easier 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxi. 

and  pleasanter  to  live  a  life  of  unrestrained  self-indulgence,  than  to  keep  his  body 
under,  and  bring  it  into  subjection,  by  reining  in  his  unruly  appetites.  These  are 
the  lost,  moral  wrecks,  the  cowards  in  life's  hard  battle,  who  had  not  the  courage  to 
do  right.  For  these  there  is  no  promise — they  had  no  thirst  after  God — their  lot, 
or  portion,  is  the  second  death.  Whatever  this  may  mean  more,  it  is  here  placed 
in  direct  contrast,  and  as  the  opposite  to  the  promise  made  to  the  conquerors. 
They  are  within,  these  are  without.  They  are  the  sons  of  God,  these  are  dogs. 
They  inherit  heaven,  these  drop  into  the  abyss.  They  are  fit  company  for  God 
and  the  holy  inhabitants  of  the  heavenly  city,  these  for  that  of  devils.  {Proctor^s 
Gems  of  Thought.)  The  final  doom  of  impenitent  sinners  : — I.  The  Persons. 
They  are,  in  short,  all  kinds  of  sinners,  unless  they  timely  repent  and  instantly 
forsake  their  sins.  1.  Of  these  we  have  a  long  catalogue  in  the  text,  beginning 
with  the  "  fearful,"  who  place  their  fear  on  a  wrong  object,  and  dare  not  venture  to 
run  any  hazard  for  the  sake  of  religion  and  a  good  conscience.  These  lead  the  van 
in  this  long  list  of  sinners,  as  being  the  largest  in  number,  and  of  all  others  the 
most  egregious  and  insolent  offenders.  For  no  manner  of  good  can  be  done  by 
persons  of  so  mean  a  character,  who  are  left  destitute  of  manly  courage  and  rational 
conduct,  and  have  quite  perverted  the  order  of  things  by  estimating  the  loss  of 
wealth  and  grandeur  to  be  the  only  formidable  accidents,  and  the  loss  of  innocence 
and  integrity  readily  to  be  dispensed  with  in  hopes  of  gaining  them.  Keligion,  but 
above  all  our  strict  and  pure  rehgion,  requires  that  we  undergo  cheerfully  the  greatest 
temporal  losses  in  the  service  of  our  Lord  and  Master,  to  whom  we  have  vowed 
dutiful  allegiance  and  persevering  obedience.  Now,  this  criminous  fear  we  are 
speaking  of  makes  us  desert  and  prove  traitors  upon  the  least  intimation  of 
approaching  ill.  The  most  valiant  and  courageous  men  are  those  who,  fearing 
God  above  all,  dare  run  any  hazards  in  order  to  serve  Him.  2.  The  "  unbelieving  " 
come  next  to  be  considered.  By  these  undoubtedly  are  meant — (1)  Such  as  did  not 
yield  a  full  assent  to  the  truths  revealed  in  the  gospel.  (2)  Such  as  neglected  to 
live  according  to  that  belief.  3.  The  "  abominable."  By  the  abominable  we  are 
to  understand  those  polluted  wretches  who  have  given  up  their  bodies  to  the 
commission  of  the  foulest  and  most  unnatural  lusts.  4.  "  Murderers."  He  is  one 
that  has  no  regard  to  the  image  of  God  stamped  upon  our  nature,  n6  concern  for 
the  welfare  of  his  neighbour  and  brother.  5.  "  Whoremongers."  Their  guilt,  I 
suppose,  is  legible  enough  in  that  most  awful  threatening  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  Temper- 
ance, soberness,  and  chastity  are  the  most  sweetly-becoming  ornaments  of  the 
Christian  life ;  intemperance,  sensuality,  and  incontinence,  the  lasting  blemishes 
and  utmost  scandal  of  it  (Jude,  ver.  13).  6.  The  "sorcerers."  They  are  such  as 
deal  by  magic  and  unlawful  arts  with  the  devil.  7.  "  Idolaters."  8.  "  All  liars  " 
it  seems  must  come  in  for  their  share  among  the  rest.  All  that  upon  any  pretence 
or  occasion  willingly  and  deliberately  offend  against  the  truth,  or,  in  other  words, 
such  as  speak  not  the  truth  from  their  hearts.  11.  Their  punishment.  "Fire  and 
brimstone."  1.  It  contains  our  being  deprived  of  the  beatific  vision,  and  of  all  that 
is  good.  2.  Our  being  tortured  with  the  miseries  of  hell,  and  all  that  is  evil. 
(jR.  Warren,  D.D.)  The  doom  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked: — I.  The  first 
prejudice  which  we  intend  to  attack  is  this  :  A  life  spent  in  ease  and  idleness  is  not 
incompatible  with  salvation,  if  it  be  free  from  great  crimes.  Against  this  we  oppose 
this  part  of  our  text,  "  He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit."  In  order  to  inherit,  we 
must  overcome.  Here  vigilance,  action,  and  motion  are  supposed.  11.  The  second 
prejudice  is  this  :  A  just  God  will  not  impute  to  His  creatures  sins  of  infirmity  and 
constitution,  though  His  creatures  shall  be  subject  to  them  during  the  whole  course 
of  their  lives.  Against  this  we  oppose  these  words  of  the  apostle,  "  The  fearful  and 
whoremongers  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brim- 
stone." in.  The  third  prejudice  is  this :  Speculative  errors  cannot  be  attended  with, 
any  fatal  consequences,  provided  we  live  uprightly,  as  it  is  called,  and  discharge  our 
social  duties.  Against  this  we  oppose  this  word,  the  "  unbelieving."  The  unbe- 
lieving are  put  into  the  class  of  the  miserable.  IV.  The  fourth  prejudice  is  this: 
Eeligions  are  indifferent.  The  mercy  of  God  extends  to  those  who  live  in  the  most 
erroneous  communions.  Against  this  we  oppose  the  word  "  idolaters."  Idolaters 
are  considered  among  the  most  criminal  of  mankind.  V.  The  last  prejudice  is 
this :  None  but  the  vulgar  ought  to  be  afraid  of  committing  certain  crimes.  Kings 
will  be  judged  by  a  particular  law :  the  greatness  of  the  motive  that  inclined  them 
to  manage  some  affairs  of  state  will  plead  their  excuse,  and  secure  them  from  Divine 
vengeance.  Against  this  we  oppose  these  words,  "  abominable,"  "  sorcerers,"  and 
"  aU  liars,"  which  three  words  include  almost  all  those  abominations  which  are 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  657 

called  illustrious  crimes.     {J.  Saurin.)     The  character  and  condition  of  the  lost : — 

I.  The  character  of  the  lost.  There  is  but  one  way  to  heaven,  but  there  are 
many  ways  to  hell.  It  is  true  that  "  all,  like  sheep,  have  gone  astray,"  but  "  every 
one  has  turned  to  his  own  way."  There  are  "  the  fearful  "  who  have  followed  the 
way  of  cowardice.  There  are  "  the  unbelieving  "  or  "  the  faithless  "  who  could  not 
take  God  at  His  word.  There  are  "  the  abominable  "  or  "  the  abominated,"  who 
through  association  with  wickedness  and  sin  are  defiled  in  mind  and  conscience. 
Unbelief  and  wrong-doing  are  more  nearly  connected  together  than  many  people 
think.  There  are  "murderers"  also,  not  merely  those  who  have  imbrued  their 
hands  in  the  blood  of  their  fellow-men,  but  those  also  whose  hearts  have  been  dead 
to  the  voice  of  pity  and  love,  who  have  shut  up  their  bowels  of  compassion  from  the 
poor  and  needy.  The  "fornicators"  are  there  also,  those  sinners  against  the  laws 
of  moral  purity  which  teach  us  to  keep  our  bodies  in  temperance,  soberness,  and 
chastity.  "  Sorcerers  "  are  there  likewise,  who  have  used  curious  arts  and  familiar 
spirits,  intruding  into  those  things  which  they  havtl  not  seen,  vainly  puffed  up  by 
their  fleshly  mind.  Following  Satan's  deceit,  they  find  at  last  their  lot  with  him, 
"  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  "  Idolaters,"  too,  are 
there,  who  have  followed  the  example  of  King  Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  24).  There 
are  idols  of  the  heart  as  well  as  idols  of  the  hand.  "  All  liars,"  also,  are  there. 
The  word  literally  is  "  lies,"  and  it  includes  all  forms  of  deceit,  hypocrisy,  fraud, 
"  whatsoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie,"  counterfeits  and  shams,  self-deceit,  tongue- 
craft,  the  lying  life.  The  phrase,  indeed,  may  be  intended  not  so  much  to  indicate 
a  distinct  class  of  sins  and  sinners  as  to  stamp  the  falseness  of  the  seven  kinds  of 
iniquity  already  enumerated.  The  catalogue  is  like  that  of  the  works  of  the  flesh 
named  in  Gal.  v.  19-21,  and  it  sets  forth  the  tale  of  man's  disobedience  to  the 
whole  law  of  God.  Moreover,  we  may  trace  in  this  succession  of  sins  a  gradation 
of  wickedness.  Men  shrink  from  the  trouble  and  effort  of  a  godly  life,  and  take 
refuge  in  unbelief.  This  brings  them  into  willing  association  with  sin,  and  those 
who  sin  against  their  brethren  become  sinners  against  their  own  souls,  and  intruders 
into  the  secret  counsels  of  the  Most  High.  They  have  practically  denied  the  God 
that  is  above,  and  the  result  is  the  idolatry  of  the  creature  ;  and  thus  (Kom.  i.  25). 

II.  The  condition  op  the  lost.  A  similar  description  of  the  lot  of  the  wicked  is 
that  given  by  St.  Paul  (2  Thess.  i.  7-9).  1.  First,  the  loss  which  the  finally  im- 
penitent will  undergo  will  be  the  loss  of  God  indicated  in  that  awful  phrase,  '•  the 
second  death."  This  language  is  evidently  intended  to  distinguish  this  state  from 
another  which  may  be  called  "  the  fiirst  death."  But  what  is  the  first  death  ?  Not, 
it  would  seem,  the  separation  of  body  and  spirit  in  natural  death.  The  context 
tells  us  that  there  shall  be  no  more  death  in  this  sense  (ver.  4) ;  and  the  period  to 
which  our  text  refers  is  subsequent  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  Rather  does 
the  term,  "  the  second  death,"  lead  us  to  think  of  the  first  death  as  the  present 
spiritual  state  of  those  who  are  not  renewed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Such  are,  to  use 
St.  Paul's  language,  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  &c.  (Eph.  ii.  1,  2,  and  iv.  18). 
Separation  from  God,  which  sinners  chose  on  earth,  they  find  in  hell,  and  what 
they  thought  so  desirous  here  they  find,  with  their  quickened  sensibilities,  to  be 
their  sorrow  there.  Cut  off  from  their  former  opportunities  of  sin  and  facilities  for 
ignoring  spiritual  things,  they  are  face  to  face  with  their  real  position,  and  they  find 
in  it  the  bitterness  of  death.  The  dream  of  vanity  and  folly  and  sin,  from  which 
no  word  or  judgment  could  rouse  them  here,  has  vanished,  and  they  wake  up  now 
to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  2.  For  this  second  death  is  an  actual  judgment 
as  well  as  a  woeful  loss.  The  golden  sceptre  of  grace  shall  be  exchanged  there  for 
the  iron  rod  of  discipline.     {Jas.  Silvester,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9-14.  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife. — TJie  glorious 
bride : — I.  Who  and  what  she  was  before  she  became  the  bride.  She  had 
no  high  descent  to  boast  of.  Her  lineage  was  not  royal,  but  low  and  mean. 
Without  goodness,  without  beauty ;  without  personal  or  family  recommendation ; 
unloving  and  unlovable ;  an  alien,  a  captive,  a  rebel.  Such  were  you  once, 
O  saint;  such  are  you  still,  0  sinner!  II.  How  and  why  she  was  fixed  upon. 
Of  the  "  how "  and  the  "  why "  of  this  sovereign  purpose,  what  can  we  say 
but  this,  that  in  one  so  unlovable  and  worthless  it  found  opportunity  and  scope 
for  the  outflow  and  display  of  free  love,  such  as  could  be  found  in  no  other  ?  It 
was  the  Father's  free  choice,  and  the  Son's  free  choice,  that  made  her  what  she  is 
now,  the  bride,  and  what  she  is  through  eternity  to  be,  "  the  Lamb's  wife."  TTT, 
How  SHE  WAS  obtained.    She  is  a  captive,  and  must  be  set  free.    This  the  Bride- 

42 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

groom  undertakes  to  do  ;  for  her  sake  becoming  a  captive.  She  is  a  criminal,  under 
wrath,  and  must  be  delivered  from  condemnation  and  death.  This  also  the  Bride- 
groom undertakes ;  for  her  sake  submitting  to  condemnation  and  death,  that  so 
her  pardon  may  be  secured,  her  fetters  broken,  and  life  made  hers  for  ever.  IV. 
How  SHE  WAS  BETROTHED.  The  Bridcgroom  Himself  came  down  in  lowly  guise  to 
woo  and  win  her  for  Himself.  But  now  He  is  carrying  on  His  suit  in  absence, 
through  the  intervention  of  others,  as  Isaa-c's  proposals  to  Rebekah  were  carried  on 
through  the  faithful  Eliezer  of  Damascus.  We  tell  of  our  Isaac's  noble  lineage, 
His  riches.  His  honours.  His  worth.  We  tell  of  all  that  He  has  done  to  win  your 
love,  and  set  before  you  the  glory  of  His  person,  that  you  may  see  how  worthy  He 
is  of  all  this  love  ;  how  blessed,  how  honourable  it  would  be  for  you  to  be  the  bride 
of  such  a  Bridegroom  ;  and  we  say,  "  Wilt  thou  go  with  the  Man  ?  "  V.  How  she 
IS  PREPARED  AND  ADORNED.  It  is  through  the  Holy  Spirit  that  this  is  carried  out. 
This  Spirit  having  overcome  her  unwillingness,  and  persuaded  her  to  consent  to  the 
glorious  betrothment,  immediately  commences  His  work  of  preparation.  He  strips 
her  of  her  rags,  and  puts  on  royal  apparel.  He  cleanses  her  from  her  filthiness, 
and  makes  her  whiter  than  snow.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  bridal  city  : — Not 
heaven  itself,  but  "  the  holy  city.  New  Jerusalem,  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from 
God,  made  ready  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband."  Not  the  palace-home,  but 
the  bride  herself,  the  Church  of  the  firstborn  made  perfect,  presented  under  the 
gorgeous  imagery  of  a  magnificent  temple-city — an  ideal  of  perfect  glory  and 
beauty,  safety  and  fitness — this  is  the  true  subject  described  by  John.  "  Gome 
hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  wife  of  the  Lamb."  1.  Often,  in  the  old 
days,  John  had  heard  from  his  Master  teaching,  parabolic  and  otherwise,  which 
suggested  the  thought  that  His  saved  people  should,  in  their  corporate  capacity, 
constitute  His  bride.  This,  in  turn,  would  recall  to  the  reverent  student  of  the  Old 
Testament  all  the  bridal  imagery  of  the  prophecies — notably  of  Isaiah  and  Jere- 
miah— imagery  so  curiously  and  suggestively  interlaced  with  the  whole  circle  of 
paradise,  city,  and  temple  symbolism.  Out  of  all  this  material,  so  familiar  to  him, 
John  had  no  difficulty  in  constructing  a  distinct  picture  of  the  New  Jerusalem, 
the  virgin  daughter  of  Zion,  married  as  a  bride  to  her  Lord.  Already  Ezekiel, 
with  extraordinary  elaboration  of  detail,  had  pourtrayed  this  ideal  bridal-city,  and 
not  a  few  of  Ezekiel's  details  are  transferred,  with  but  little  change,  to  this  New 
Testament  picture.  2.  It  requires  no  stretch  of  fancy  to  believe  that  John,  during 
his  residence  in  Ephesus,  had  frequently  read  the  famous  circular-letter  which  Paul 
sent,  first  to  Ephesus.  And  it  is  a  significant  fact,  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians  we  have  precisely  the  same  combination  of  temple-city  and  bride  which 
meets  us  in  this  chapter.  It  is  a  highly  figurative  picture  of  a  perfected  Christ — 
ideal  at  present,  but  an  ideal  one  day  to  be  realised.  The  practical  use  to  which 
the  vision  may  legitimately  be  turned  is  twofold.  1.  It  is  an  inspiration  of  hope. 
You  see  what  is  the  hope  of  your  calling.  To  this  ye  are  to  come.  This  is  the 
final  destiny  of  the  saints.  2.  It  is  also — and  this  I  believe  to  be  its  main  purpose 
— a  •*  pattern  in  the  Mount."  One  of  the  great  peculiarities  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  this,  that  its  golden  age  does  not  lie  in  the  past,  but  in  the  future.  And 
when  we  desire  an  example — a  pattern  up  to  and  after  which  we  may  work — we  find 
it  in  the  revealed  future ;  and  that  is  the  only  justification  of  the  revelation  of 
the  future — to  supply  us  with  a  "  mark  for  the  prize  of  our  high  calling."  I. 
"  Having  the  glory  of  God."  The  first  thing  noted  is  .the  radiant  beauty  of  the 
bride  —a  beauty  which  consists  in  the  striking  resemblance  between  her  and  her 
Lord.  The  Church,  in  her  ideal  condition,  has  been  so  long  with  her  Lord,  coming 
up  through  the  wilderness,  that  she  has  caught  the  beauty  of  His  face  and  form, 
and  is  a  "  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,"  and  falls  only  a  little  way  short  of 
"  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  His  fulness."  This  is  her  golden  wedding-day — 
the  jubilee  of  her  redemption.  We  may  read  earlier  in  the  Book  how  she  was 
caught  up  into  heaven  out  of  the  wilderness,  and  now  she  is  "  coming  down  from 
God  out  of  heaven,"  arrayed  in  garments  white  and  glistening,  "  having  the  glory 
of  God."  The  first  impression  often  produced  on  Church  review  days — at  con- 
ferences, and  congresses,  and  unions — is  not  altogether  so  noble  as  this.  What  an 
influential  Church  !  So  many  hundred  thousand  members  !  What  perfect  organi- 
sation !  What  resources  of  wealth  and  culture !  What  buildings  I  But  in  the 
great  review-day — the  day  of  "  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  " — the  first  thought  wiU 
be  this,  "  having  the  glory  of  God."  This  is  the  ideal  at  which  we  are  to  aim.  If 
you  desire  to  form  a  distinct  idea  of  the  glory  of  God,  read  the  descriptions  of 
God's  glory  as  seen  in  ancient  times  by  Moses  or  Isaiah ;  as  revealed  in  God's 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  659 

name,  or  in  ancient  song  ;  as  shining  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ ;  as  manifested  in 
His  life  and  works ;  as  revealed  in  words  fallen  from  His  lips,  or  written  by  St. 
Paul,  or  pictured  in  the  visions  of  this  Book.     Think  of  the  purity,  the  holiness, 
and  righteousness,  of  the  mercy  and  truth,  of  the  faithfulness  and  lovingkindness, 
of  our  God  and  Father  I     This  is  "the  image  of  God"  in  which  we  are  to  be 
renewed.     This  is  to  be  "  the  mark  for  the  prize."    H.  •'  Having  a  wall  great 
AND  HIGH."    Walls,  in  ancient  times,  were  for  three  purposes :  1.  Defining.     The 
position  of  the  Church  in  relation  to  the  world  must  be  clearly  defined.    Everywhere 
throughout  the  Bible  this  is  taught.     "  Having  a  wall  great  and  high," — a  clearly 
defined  creed,  resting  on  foundations  of  precious  stones,  bearing  the  names  of  the 
twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb ;   an  equally  clearly  defined  discipline ;   a  distinct 
organisation  of  fellowship — "  A  wall,"  built  of  good  stones — well  bounded — "  great 
and  high."     Not  that  the  Church  is  to  be  narrow,  little,  without  elbow-room, 
stifled,  "  cribbed,  cabined,  or  confined."    The  Holy  City  which  John  saw — the  ideal 
Church — was  vast  beyond  our  poor  power  to  conceive — twelve  thousand  stadii — all 
the  cities  of  the  earth  are  mere  villages  in  comparison.    By  the  same  measurement, 
London  would  be  but  a  small  and  straightened  dwelling-place.     2.  Walls  were  for 
purposes  of  enclosure.    We  are  to  be  an  enclosed  people.    Not  nomadic — mere 
wilderness  wanderers,  heedlessly  roaming  hither  and  thither,  like  unclean  spirits, 
"walking  through  waterless  places,  seeking  rest  and  fijiding  none  "  ;  but  a  people 
with  a  home,  "  a  city  of  habitation,"  and,  therefore,  with  a  work,  living  for  a 
definite    purpose,  sharing    a   common  life,  helping  one  another,   "bearing  one 
another's  burdens."     3.  Walls  were  for  defence.    If  they  prevent  lawless  wander- 
ing, they  also  prevent  lawless  incursions.     The  success  of  Christian  work  depends 
very  much  on  the  Churches'  power  to  protect.     And  a  Church  cannot  protect  im- 
less  it  has  this  "  wall "  of  sound  doctrine  and  faithful  discipline,  and  clearly  defined 
fellowship — "  a  wall  great  and  high."    One  feature  of  the  Bride's  resemblance  to 
her  Lord — one  true  sense  in  which  she  may  have  "  the  glory  of  God  " — is  this, 
that  she  is  able,  not  only  to  save,  but  also  to  keep.    Like  her  Lord,  she  may  say, 
"  Of  all  whom  Thou  hast  given  me  I  have  lost  none,  save  the  son  of  perdition." 
"  I  have  lost  none."    A  Church  cannot  say  that,  if  she  carelessly  allows  any 
part  of  her  protecting  walls  to  be  mere  mud-heaps,  "  daubed  with  untempered 
mortar."      And  do  not   lose  sight  of   the  adornment  —  "  with   all   manner  of 
precious  stones."     Do  not  frighten  the  people  away  from  the  Church  by  duU, 
heavy,  rough,  ugly  buildings.    You  are  not  rearing  a  prison,  or  a  criminal  lunatic 
asylum ;  but  a  temple,  a  palace,  a  bridal  city.    III.  Having  twblvb  gates.     The 
Church    is   not  to    be  imprisoned,  nor  is  it  to  imprison    its    members,  or  its 
influence,  its  light,  its  melody.      But,  at  aU  times,  and  on  all  sides,  it  is   to 
have  perfect  power  to  "  go  through  the  gates."     {N.  Curnock.)        A  sight  of  the 
bride :  —I.  Now  you  know,  idle  curiosity  prompts  a  great  many  persons  to  go 
and  see  great  sights  ;  and  frequently,  when  persons  have  been  into  the  metropohs 
from  distant  parts  of  the  country,  the  neighbours  ask  when  they  return,  "  Did  you 
see  such  a  sight?  "    Well,  what  are  they  after  all?  "  the  things  which  are  seen 
are  temporal "  ;  "  the  eye  is  never  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  with  hearing  " 
them.    But  when  the  soul  gets  a  sight  of  Christ,  he  never  wants  to  turn  from 
it.    I  advise  you,  as  the  angel  did  John,  to  "  come  hither  "  along  with  me  to  this 
"great  and  high  mountain,"  that  we  may  get  this  lovely  and  enamouring  sight. 
The  advice,  you  see,  is  that  of  an  aspirant — to  get  away  from  the  position  which 
he  was  occupying — the  low  ground  of  earthly  attractions ;  one  of  the  most  impor- 
tant points  ia  our  whole  Christianity,  to  get  away  from  things  on  earth,  to  rise,  and 
aspire,  and  soar  on  high.     Moreover,  this  advice  calls  for  the  obedience  of  faith — 
obedience  to  the  Divine  call.    This  messenger  was  one  of  God's  messengers,  an 
angel  sent  with  a  direct  errand  to  John,  to  tell  him  to  "  come  hither."    Now, 
wherever  this  obedience  is  yielded,  there  is  a  mighty  deliverance,  because  we  are  by 
nature  so  entangled  with  the  things  of  the  world,  so  entangled  with  self-righteous- 
ness, so  entangled  by  sin  and  Satan,  that  it  requires  a  mighty  deliverance  to  get  us 
away,  to  draw  us  from,  and  bring  us  out  of,  our  love  and  practice  of  the  things 
that  are  only  earthly.    But  I  hasten  to  remark,  that  decision  is  all-important  in 
this  act  of  obedience  to  the  Divine  call.     There  must  be  no  hesitating  about  the 
matter.     There  must  be  no  looking  back,  with  a  lingering,  longing  look,  upon 
Sodom.     "  Get  thee  out  hence."    When  Jehovah  calls  by  His  messenger,  and  says, 
"  Come  hither,"  delay  is  dangerous,  decision  is  important.    And  then  this  coming 
up  hither,  this  aspiring  after  heavenly  things,  must  be  devotional.    It  is  that  which 
is  created  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul,  and  amounts  to  nothing  less 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

than  the  aspiring  of  all  the  graces  in  lively  exercise.  Faith  will  aspire,  and  hope 
will  aspire,  and  love  will  aspire,  and  all  the  graces  of  the  spirit  must  aspire,  as 
moved,  supplied,  acted  upon,  and  constrained  by  the  omnipotence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Now  glance  at  this  aspiring  soul,  and  see  his  progress.  He  is  rising  and 
rising,  higher  and  higher  every  hour ;  just  as  you  see  the  skylark  ascending  from 
its  nest  where  it  had  been  grovelling  ;  when  it  first  warbles,  it  seems  but  a  Uttle 
above  your  head,  but  it  sings  and  mounts,  and  sings  and  mounts,  till  it  is  almost 
out  of  sight.  Once  more  observe,  that  as  we  rise  in  knowledge,  we  shall  rise  also 
in  enjoyment,  we  shall  rise  in  love  to  Him.  Then  mark,  we  shall  rise  in  anticipa- 
tion. "  Come  hither  "  to  the  top  of  this  great  and  high  mountain,  and  anticipate 
the  bliss  that  is  to  be  revealed,  that  glory  that  is  about  to  open  to  view.  H.  Now 
upon  this  position  we  may  expect  the  sight  which  follows,  '•  Come  hither,  I 
will  show  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."  What  a  sight!  Now  I  want  to 
show  you  the  bride,  because  there  are  a  great  many  persons  who  presume 
to  assume  the  name  to  whom  it  does  not  belong.  1.  And,  in  the  first  place, 
you  may  know  her  by  her  wedding  dress.  What  do  you  think  it  is?  Why, 
the  imputed  righteousness  of  her  loving  Lord.  And  therefore  she  sings  as 
Isaiah  taught  the  Church  to  sing  in  olden  time — "  My  soul  shall  rejoice  in  the 
Lord  and  be  joyful  in  my  God,  for  He  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of 
righteousness  and  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation,  as  a  bride  adorneth 
herself  for  her  husband."  2.  Moreover,  "  I  will  show  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's 
wife,"  in  her  indissoluble  tmion.  The  husband  that  is  really  married  has  not  only  a 
bride,  but  a  wife.  Now,  before  time  began,  before  the  world  was  formed,  before 
angels  fell,  before  sin  existed,  Jesus  and  His  bride  were  betrothed  in  love,  and 
engaged  in  eternal  union.  Moreover,  this  indissoluble  union  is  effected  by  Him  in 
the  fulness  of  time.  I  confess  I  like  to  talk  about  this  courtship,  and  this  marriage 
too.  3.  Well,  let  us  go  on  a  step  further — it  is  enjoyed.  This  union  which  is  in- 
dissoluble between  Christ  and  His  Church,  is  enjoyed  in  communion,  enjoyed  in 
fellowship,  enjoyed  in  association,  enjoyed  in  every  possible  expression  of  affection, 
enjoyed  in  mutual  help.  There  are  pangs  frequently  felt  in  ihe  most  affectionate 
unions  upon  earth  at  the  idea  of  separation  ;  but  "  I  am  persuaded,"  says  St.  Paul, 
that  in  this  union  there  can  be  no  separation ;  "  for  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor 
height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  Is  not  she  a  happy  bride,  then  ?  {J.  Irons.) 
The  Holy  City,  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb  : — Our  great  work  is  to  build  the  city  of  God 
upon  the  earth,  and  this  can  be  done  only  through  the  organised  life  of  the 
world.  We  must  not  be  content  to  go  one  way,  and  to  allow  what  we  call  secular 
institutions  to  go  another  way.  We  are  the  salt  of  the  earth.  We,  through  the 
Spirit  of  God,  are  the  makers  of  the  new  city,  and  God  has  given  us  the  old  city  as 
the  material  out  of  which  we  are  to  make  the  new.  It  is  ours  to  transform  the 
earthly  city  so  that  it  shall  be  glorified  into  the  heavenly.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is 
clear  that  the  ideal  city  in  this  character  of  "  Bride  "  is  in  living  union  with  God. 
So  that  the  figure  of  the  "  Bride  "  as  conceived  in  the  New  Testament  is  one  of 
loving  dependence  and  living  unity.  She  finds  her  joy,  her  fulness,  her  splendour, 
her  very  life,  in  Him  for  whom  she  is  adorned.  She  is  a  very  part  of  His  life,  and 
finds  her  true  glory  in  losing  herself  in  Him.  Such  is  the  relation  to  God  of  that 
city  that  would  realise  God's  ideal.  This  is  precisely  what  is  implied  in  the  picture 
before  us — namely,  that  all  the  vast  secular  organisations  of  society  must  find  their 
ideal  in  being  the  "  Bride  of  the  Lamb."  What  is  thought  to  be  the  peculiar 
characteristic  of  a  number  of  people  that  have  certain  religious  and  spiritual 
affinities  must  come  to  be  recognised  as  the  best  thing  for  all  the  busy  world,  and  as 
the  normal  attitude  of  the  city  or  State  that  would  attain  true  and  abiding  pros- 
perity. We  cannot  keep  the  higher  ideal  in  its  strength  by  our  religious  combina- 
tion's and  assemblies  unless  we  insist  upon  its  maintenance  in  and  for  the  busy  hum 
of  life.  The  worshipping  attitude  of  the  sanctuary  is  also  the  ideal  attitude  for  the 
mart,  the  exchange,  the  council  chamber,  and  the  senate.  But  let  the  Church 
realise  that  it  is  not  the  ideal  of  a  select  coterie,  however  worthy  and  however 
divinely  elected,  but  the  ideal  that  must  sweep  the  world,  and  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
every  State,  an  ideal  that  is  as  good  for  the  market-place  as  for  the  sanctuary. 
Then  it  will  have  new  power  and  influence,  and  our  (lurches  will  rise  to  higher 
levels  of  worship  and  consecration.  The  old  Puritans  realised  this  when  they  knelt 
together  for  prayer  in  the  British  House  of  Commons.  They  believed  that  the 
grandest  thing  a  State  could  do  was  to  worship  God,  provided  it  were  done  in  spirit 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  661 

and  in  truth,  and  not  by  the  mockery  of  mechanical  enactments.  The  city  that 
will  not  be  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb  shall  perish.  2.  This  condition  of  living  union 
with  God  involves  the  development  of  holy  affinities  with  God.  The  ideal  city  must 
construct  its  life  and  frame  its  ends  according  to  the  pattern  on  the  Mount.  If  it  is 
to  be  in  living  union  with  God,  it  must  live  according  to  the  divinest  motives  and 
ideals.  The  Bride  must  be  adorned  for  her  Husband  in  the  jewels  that  He  loves. 
Many  teU  us  that  the  heavenly  and  spiritual  ideas  that  we  place  before  them  are 
not  necessary  or  suited  for  the  great  life  and  problems  of  the  city.  They  say  that 
the  city  has  to  do  with  earth,  not  with  heaven  ;  that  its  development  and  prosperity 
and  elevation  depend  upon  philanthropies  and  social  revolutions  and  political  changes. 
For  this  worship  is  not  necessary,  thoughts  and  hopes  of  heaven  are  hampering, 
and  ideas  of  spiritual  renewal,  holiness,  and  Divine  peace  are  altogether  Utopian. 
They  tell  the  Church,  in  effect,  that  its  ideas  are  altogether  out  of  place  in  this 
world  of  states  and  cities.  And  some  good  men  have  unfortunately  fallen  victims 
to  this  modern  falsehood.  They  have  forsaken  the  Christian  ideal,  and  accepted 
the  ideal  of  the  social  revolutionist  and  the  secular  politician.  What  they  think 
the  gospel  cannot  do  they  hope  to  do  by  some  loud-sounding  Ism,  and  proclaim 
this  as  the  world's  salvation,  rather  than  the  Divine  ideals  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
scornful  wisdom  of  the  world  will  again,  as  in  times  past,  be  brought  to  confusion. 
The  present  glorification  of  material  things  and  material  ends  and  methods  will 
end  in  failure.  The  ideal  city  will  be  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb.  {John  Thomas, 
M.A.)  The    bride: — I.    Come    hither    and    see    the    bridb    as    thou    hast 

NEVER  seen  her  BEFORE.     1.  In  the  enjoyment  of  nearer  communion.    2.  Partici- 
pating in  the  highest  honours.     3.  Possessing  enlarged  knowledge.     4.  Entirely 
absorbed  in  contemplation  of  Him.    11.  Come  hither  and  see  the  bride  where 
SHE  NEVER  WAS  BEFORE.     1.  Bcyoud  the  tempter's  power.     2.  Beyond  the  rags  of 
poverty  and  the  experience  of  famine.    3.  Far  removed  from  the  darts  of  the  enemy. 
4.  Away  from  the  vineyard.     Toil  a  thing  of  the  past.     The  curse  revoked.    III. 
Come  hither,  and  see  the  bride  as  she  herself  never  expected  to  be.    IV. 
Come  hither,  and  see  her  as  she  was  decreed  to  be.     V.  Come  hither,  and 
SEE  HER  AS  SHE  SHALL  FOR  EVER  REMAIN.     1.  Her  Husbaud  has  paid  her  debts.    2. 
Her  Husband  is  unchangeable.    3.  No  fear  of  divorce.    4.  No  fear  of  estrange- 
ment on  her  part.    5.  No  death.    VI.  Come  hither  and  see  her  as  she  should 
NOW  AIM  to  be.     {R.  a.  Griffin.)        That  great  city,  tlie  holy  Jerusalem.— r/ie  new 
Jerusalem : — One  of  the  most  remarkable  paradoxes  of  the  Church  of   our  times 
is  its  abhorrence  of  materiality  in  connection  with  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  the 
eternal  future,  whilst  practically  up  to  its  ears  in  materialism  and  earthiness.     No 
wonder  that  professed  believers  of  our  day  are  anxious  to  put  off  getting  into 
the  heaven  they  believe  in  as  long  as  the  doctor's  skill  can  keep  them  out  of  it,  and 
finally  agree  to  go  only  as  a  last  despairing  resort.    It  has  no  substance,  no  reality, 
for  the  soul  to  take  hold  on.     It  is  nothing  but  a  world  of  shadows,  of  mist,  of  dim 
visions  of  blessedness,  with  which  it  is  impossible  for  a  being  who  is  not  mere  spirit, 
and  never  will  be  mere  spirit,  who  knows  only  to  live  in  a  body,  and  shall  live  for 
ever  in  a  body,  to  feel  any  fellowship  or  sympathy.    But  such  are  not  the  ideas  of 
our  futurity  which  the  Bible  holds  out  to  our  faith  and  hope.     Did  men  but  learn 
to  know  the  difference  between  a  paradise  of  sense  and  a  paradise  of  sensuality, 
the  truth  of  God  would  not  suffer  in  men's  hands  as  it  does,  and  their  souls  would 
not  suffer  as  they  do  for  something  solid  to  anchor  to  amid  the  anxious  perturba- 
tions of  life  and  death.     Did  men  but  rid  themselves  of  the  old  heresy  that  matter 
means  sin,  and  learn  to  know  and  feel  that  there  was  a  material  universe  before  sin 
was,  and  that  a  material  universe  will  live  on  when  sin  shall  have  been  clean 
washed  away  from  the  entire  face  of  it,  they  would  be  in  better  position  both  to 
understand  and  to  enjoy  the  fore-announcements  of  the  futurity  of  the  saints  which 
God  has  given  for  their  consolation  amid  these  earthly  vicissitudes  and  falsities. 
The  New  Jerusalem,  which  we  now  come  to  consider,  is  in  the  line  of  these  ideas. 
It  stands  in  antithesis  to  the  final  Babylon.     That  a  real  city  as  well  as  a  perfected 
moral  system  is  here  to  be  understood,  I  see  not  how  we  can  otherwise  conclude. 
All  the  elements  of  a  city  are  indicated.      It  has  specific  dimensions.     It  has 
foundations,  walls,  gates,  and  streets.     It  has  guards  outside  and  inhabitants 
within,  both  distinct  from  what  characterises  it  as  a  real  construction.    Among  the 
highest  promises  to  the  saints  of  all  ages  was  the  promise  of  a  special  place  and 
economy  answering  to  a  heavenly  city,  and  which  is  continually  referred  to  as  an 
enduring  and  God-built  city.     I.  Its  derivation.    John  sees  it  "  coming  down  out 
of  heaven  from  God."    It  is  of  celestial  origin.    It  is  the  direct  product  of  Almighty 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

power  and  wisdom.  He  who  made  the  worlds  is  the  Maker  of  this  illustrious  city. 
No  mortal  hand  is  ever  employed  upon  its  construction.  The  saints  are  all  God's 
workmanship.  They  are  all  begotten  of  His  Spirit,  and  shaped  and  fashioned  into 
living  stones  from  the  dark  quarries  of  a  fallen  world,  and  transfigured  from  glory 
to  glory  by  the  gracious  operations  of  His  hand.  They  reach  their  heavenly 
character  and  places  through  His  own  direct  agency  and  influence.  And  He  who 
makes,  prepares,  and  places  them,  makes,  prepares,  and  places  their  sublime 
habitation  also.  II.  Its  location.  This  is  not  specifically  told,  but  the  record  is 
not  without  some  hints.  John  sees  it  coming  down  out  of  heaven.  The  idea  is 
that  it  comes  close  to  the  earth,  and  is  intended  to  have  a  near  relation  to  the  earth ; 
but  it  is  nowhere  said  that  it  ever  alights  on  the  earth,  or  ever  becomes  part  of  its 
material  fabric.  Though  coming  into  the  vicinity  of  the  earth,  it  is  always  spoken 
of  as  the  "  Jerusalem  which  is  above  "  (Gal.  iv.  26).  III.  Its  splendoub.  Here  the 
specifications  are  numerous  and  transcendent,  as  we  would  expect  in  a  city  erected 
and  ornamented  by  Jehovah,  and  coming  forth  direct  from  the  heavens.  Every- 
thing built  by  God's  direction  is  the  very  best  and  most  splendid  of  its  kind.  And 
this  city  has,  and  is  invested  with,  the  glory,  light,  brightness,  and  radiating 
splendour  of  God.  IV.  Its  amplitude.  There  is  no  stint  or  meanness ,  in  God's 
creations.  When  He  set  Himself  to  the  making  of  worlds.  He  filled  up  an  im- 
measurable space  with  them.  When  He  created  angels  He  added  myriads  on 
myraids,  and  orders  on  orders,  tiU  all  earthly  arithmetic  is  lost  in  the  counting  of 
them.  When  He  started  the  human  race  it  was  on  a  career  of  multiplication  to 
which  we  can  set  no  limit.  When  He  began  the  glorious  work  of  redemption,  and 
commenced  the  taking  out  and  fashioning  of  a  people  to  become  the  companions  of 
His  only  begotten  Son  and  co-regents  with  their  Eedeemer,  these  pictures  of  the 
final  outcome  tell  of  great  multitudinous  hosts,  in  numbers  like  the  sands  of  the 
seashore.  And  the  city  He  builds  for  them  is  of  corresponding  dimensions. 
Amplitude — amplitude  of  numbers,  as  well  as  glorious  accommodations — is  unmis- 
takably signified,  in  whatever  way  we  contemplate  the  astonishing  picture.  V.  Its 
SYSTEM  OF  ZLLUMINATION.  What  is  a  city  without  light !  The  glory  of  God's 
brightness  envelopes  it  like  an  unclouded  halo,  permeates  it,  and  radiates  through 
it  and  from  it  so  that  there  is  not  a  dark  or  obscure  place  about  it.  VI.  Its  lack 
OP  A  TEMPLE.  "  A  temple,"  says  the  seer,  "  I  saw  not  in  it."  What  a  vacuum  it 
would  create  in  every  earthly  city  if  its  temples  were  taken  away  I  What  would 
ancient  Jerusalem  have  been  without  its  temple  ?  But  it  is  no  privation  to  the 
New  Jerusalem  that  there  is  no  temple  in  it.  Nay,  it  is  one  of  its  sublimest 
peculiarities.  Deity  will  then  have  come  forth  from  behind  all  veils,  all  mediating 
sacraments,  all  previous  barriers  and  hidings  because  of  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh 
or  the  weaknesses  of  undeveloped  spirituality.  Himself  will  be  the  temple  thereof. 
The  glorious  worshippers  there  hold  direct  communion  with  His  manifested  glory, 
which  encompasses  them  and  all  their  city  alike.  As  consecrated  high  priests 
they  will  then  have  come  into  the  holiest  of  all,  into  the  very  cloud  of  God's  over- 
shadowing glory,  which  is  at  once  their  covering,  their  temple,  their  God.  VII.  Its 
BELATioN  TO  THE  WORLD  AT  LARGE.  Of  old,  the  song  of  the  Psalmist  was : 
"  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  is  Mount  Zion,  the  city  of  the 
Great  King  "  (Psa.  xlviii.  2).  In  every  land  into  which  the  Jewish  people  wandered, 
there  was  a  glad  thrill  upon  their  souls  when  they  remembered  Jerusalem. 
We  cannot  look  back  upon  those  times,  even  now,  without  a  degree  of  fascination 
which  draws  hke  a  magnet  upon  every  feeling  of  the  heart.  And  what  was 
tiien  realised  on  a  small  and  feeble  scale,  in  the  case  of  one  people,  is  to  be 
the  universal  experience  with  regard  to  this  blessed  city.  It  is  to  be  the  centre 
and  illuminator  of  the  world.  VHI.  Its  supreme  holiness.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 
The  city  of  God  : — I  believe  that  it  was  a  purpose  of  God  in  making  the  world  that 
it  should  have  in  it  great  cities.  Wisdom,  in  the  beginning  of  God's  ways, 
"  rejoiced  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the  earth,  and  her  delights  were  with  the  sons 
of  men."  A  peopled  earth — a  city-covered  earth — was,  I  have  no  doubt,  from  the 
beginning  part  of  what  God  meant  should  be.  Ages  of  great  cities  are  of  His 
appointment.  But  sin  has  spoiled  all.  Here's  the  mischief.  The  only  thing  to  be 
complained  of  in  London,  or  any  other  city,  is  sin.  Now,  the  thing  that  sin  has 
spoiled  here — the  life  of  great  cities — is  to  be  perfectly  shown  in  another  world. 
There  is  "a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  God 
is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  the  God  of  His  saints,  for  "  He  hath  prepared  for  them 
a  city."  I.  The  city — what  it  is.  Talk  of  great  London  !  Rome  1  Nineveh  I 
Babylon  1 — the  vision  of  St.  John  conveys  the  idea  of  something  much  more  vast 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  663 

and  beautiful  in  the  last  home  of  the  saints.  City  and  country,  street  and  garden, 
Jerusalem  and  Eden,  are  mixed  in  the  picture  here,  to  show,  I  suppose,  that  heaven 
will  have  in  it  all  that  is  fairest  in  nature  with  all  that  is  richest  in  civilisation. 
The  city  is  built  of  "  precious  stones  " — all  manner  of  precious  stones  piled 
together.  Precious  stones  are  in  themselves  more  astonishing  than  any  form, 
however  curious  and  beautiful,  into  which  they  can  be  carved.  In  their  nature 
they  are  images  of  heavenly  things.  Just  think  :  no  objects  last  so  long  as  precious 
stones:  they  are  the  oldest  and  the  strongest  things  in  nature.  No  objects 
are  so  pure  and  clear  as  precious  stones.  The  crystal  is  purer  than  the  water, 
when  the  water  is  said  to  be  like  crystal.  No  objects  are  so  free  from  corruption 
and  decay,  so  utterly  beyond  the  reach  of  inward  stain.  And  no  objects  are  at 
once  so  richly  dyed,  so  rainbow-like  in  colour,  and  yet  so  well  seen  through,  so 
ready  to  get  and  to  give  light.  Are  they  not  striking  images  of  the  things  of 
heaven  ?  The  lasting  nature  of  heaven !  the  bright  clearness  of  heaven !  the 
impossibility  of  staining  heaven !  the  truth,  the  faithfulness,  the  love,  the  justice 
that  dwell  and  reign  in  the  city  of  heaven  I  The  life  lost  by  Adam's  sin  is  brought 
back,  and  perfected  and  made  to  last  by  Christ's  obedience.  Eedemption  more 
than  repairs  the  fall ;  the  Lamb  has  slain  the  serpent ;  simplicity  has  got  the  better 
of  subtlety ;  the  patience,  self-denial,  and  sacrifice  of  the  atoning  Mediator  have 
destroyed  the  mischief  of  the  tempter's  pride,  selfishness  and  cruelty ;  for  a  heaven 
better  than  Eden  is  opened  to  men  driven  from  Eden.  In  the  New  Jerusalem  there 
are  none  of  the  drawbacks  and  evils  of  an  earthly  condition.  Especially  we  are 
taught  that  the  city  is  "  holy."  The  tabernacle  and  the  temple  were  patterns  of 
things  in  the  heavens.  Now,  in  every  possible  way  they  showed  the  quality  of 
holiness.  In  the  other  world,  as  much  as  in  this,  physical  purity  as  well  as  moral, 
moral  purity  as  well  as  physical,  are  indispensably  needful.  A  clean  heart  in  a 
clean  house — that  is  wanted  for  comfort  in  this  world  and  in  that.  Clean  hands, 
pure  worship,  and  a  soul  full  of  health  and  joy — that  was  the  order  of  things  in 
Jerusalem ;  so  it  is  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  will  be  in  heaven.  Heaven  is  pure : 
it  must  be  so ;  the  necessity  is  grounded  on  the  deepest  reasons.  It  follows, 
from  its  being  the  habitation  of  God ;  of  God  the  holy ; — whose  eyes  are  called 
the  eyes  of  His  holiness ;  whose  arm  is  called  His  holy  arm;  whose  name  is 
a  holy  name :  who  swears  by  His  holiness  ;  who  cannot  look  upon  sin ;  whom  to 
rob  of  His  moral  perfection,  in  our  thoughts,  is  to  insult  even  more  than  by  the 
denial  of  His  being.  It  follows,  from  the  perfection  of  the  saints.  Any  defilement 
in  them  would  destroy  their  perfection.  Any  defilement  in  their  companions  would 
endanger  their  perfection.  It  follows,  from  its  being  a  world  of  bliss.  Sin  would 
spoil  the  bliss.  The  consciousness  of  it  would  unmake  heaven.  {John  Stoughton.) 
Heaven  : — This  figure  of  heaven  suggests — I.  Its  kelation  to  God's  empire.  What 
the  Metropolis  is  to  a  country,  heaven  is  to  the  universe.  1.  The  central  influence  of 
the  kingdom.  2.  The  dweUing-place  of  its  chiefest  and  strongest.  3.  The  resi- 
dence of  its  sovereign,  n.  Its  marvellous  construction.  1.  Heaven  is  a  vast 
city — a  city,  not  a  mere  hamlet  for  a  handful  of  the  elect.  2.  Heaven  is  a  secure 
city.  Its  walls,  its  gates,  &c.  "Nothing  can  hurt  or  destroy."  3.  Heaven  is  a 
magnificent  city.  Nothing  impoverished,  no  by-ways  of  shame,  no  lurking  places 
of  misery ;  its  very  streets  are  of  gold.  HI.  Its  famous  population.  The  popu- 
lation is — 1.  Immense  in  number;  "a  great  multitude,"  &c.  2.  Honourable  in 
occupation.  Jerusalem  a  city  of  priests ;  Athens,  of  sages ;  Eome,  of  soldiers ; 
London,  of  shopkeepers :  heaven,  of  saints,  who  serve  God  day  and  night. 
3.  Holy  in  character.  This  the  glory  of  the  population  ;  they  are  robed  in  white. 
Their  moral  lustre  is  their  beauty.  (Hoviilist.)  The  holy  city  : — This  city  is 
not  earthly,  but  heavenly,  and  is  among  the  heavenly  things  said  by  the  apostle  to 
be  purified  by  the  •*  better  sacrifices  "  (Heb.  ix.  23).  Why  did  such  a  city  need  '•  puri- 
fying "?  Not  because  unclean,  but  because  sinners  were  to  dwell  in  it;  and  they 
would  have  defiled  it,  had  it  not  been  for  the  great  sacrifice.  For  the  blood  does 
two  things — it  makes  the  unclean  clean,  and  it  keeps  the  clean  from  being  defiled. 
1.  It  is  a  great  city.  There  has  been  no  city  like  it.  It  is  the  city,  the  one  city, 
the  great  metropolis  of  the  mighty  universe.  2.  It  is  a  well-built  city.  Its  builder 
and  maker  is  God.  Its  foundations  are  eternal ;  its  walls  are  jasper ;  its  gates 
pearls  ;  its  streets  paved  with  gold.  It  is  "  compactly  buUt  together,"  lying  four- 
square, and  perfect  in  all  its  parts,  without  a  break  or  flaw,  or  weakness  or 
deformity.  3.  It  is  a  well-lighted  city.  Something  brighter  than  sun  and  moon 
is  given  to  fill  its  heaven.  The  glory  of  God  lightens  it ;  the  Lamb  is  its  "  light  " 
or  "lamp,"  so  that  it  needs  no  candle,  no  sunlight.     4.  It  is  a  well-watered  city.    A 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

pure  river  of  the  water  of  life  flows  through  its  streets,  proceeding  from  the  throne  of 
God  and  the  Lamb.  What  must  its  waters  be  !  What  must  be  the  rivers  of  pleasure 
there  !  5.  It  is  a  well-provisioned  city.  The  tree  of  life  is  there,  with  its  twelve 
variety  of  fruits  and  its  health-giving  leaves.  It  has  more  than  Eden  had.  It  is 
paradise  restored ;  paradise  and  Jerusalem  in  one ;  Jerusalem  in  paradise,  and 
paradise  in  Jerusalem.  6.  It  is  a  well-guarded  city.  Not  only  has  it  gates,  and 
walls,  and  towers,  which  no  enemy  could  scale  or  force  ;  but  at  the  gates  are  twelve 
angels  keeping  perpetual  watch.  7.  It  is  a  well-governed  city.  No  misrule  is  there, 
no  disorder,  no  lawlessness,  no  rebellion.  8.  It  is  a  well-peopled  city.  It  has 
gathered  within  its  walls  all  generations  of  the  redeemed.  Its  population  is  as  the 
sands  or  the  stars ;  the  multitude  that  no  man  can  number ;  the  millions  of  the 
risen  and  glorified.  9.  It  is  a  holy  city.  Nothing  that  defileth  shall  enter ;  no 
spot  or  speck  or  shadow  of  evil.  All  is  perfection  there.  Divine  perfection.  10.  It  is  a 
glorious  city.  The  glory  that  fills  it  and  encircles  it  is  the  glory  of  God.  Every- 
thing resplendent  is  there.  It  shines  like  the  sun.  11.  It  is  a  blessed  city.  It 
is  truly  "  the  joyous  city."  It  is  the  throne  of  the  blessed  One,  and  all  in  it  is 
like  Him.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Twelve  grates. — The  manifold  Christ: — Three 
gates  on  each  side  of  the  celestial  quadrangle.  So  much  as  to  the  accessibility  of 
the  heavenly  city.  Christ  is  Himself  gateway  impersonated,  what  Scripture  calls 
"  open  door."  Three  gates  in  each  wall.  Christ  is  not  only  one  gate  ;  He  is  all  the 
gates,  and  His  multiplicity  matches  our  diversity.  So  that  each  man  to  be  saved 
will  be  saved  by  his  own  particular  Christ,  and  enter  the  kingdom  through  his  own 
special  private  portal.  We  beUeve  in  the  same  Christ,  and  yet  we  have  not  the 
same  belief  in  Christ — ^like  two  men  standing  on  the  opposite  side  of  a  hill,  who 
have  a  view  of  the  same  hill,  but  not  the  same  view  of  the  hill.  We  are  in  that 
respect  like  different  kinds  of  flowers  growing  out  in  the  sunshine ;  one  flower 
when  it  is  touched  by  white  Ught  will  extract  from  the  white  light  one  particular 
tint,  another  flower  will  extract  another  particular  tint  from  the  same  white 
light.  So  while  we  all  in  a  way  believe  in  Christ  we  each  beUeve  in  our  own 
way,  and  He  is  not  the  same  to  any  two  of  us.  This  leads  on  to  say  that  Christ 
as  you  apprehend  Him — not  as  I  apprehend  Him,  not  as  your  neighbour  apprehends 
Him,  but  Christ  as  you  apprehend  Him — is  your  open  door.  Doubtless,  as  we 
come  to  know  Him  better  and  to  enter  more  deeply  into  the  intimacies  of  His 
character  and  spirit,  our  conceptions  of  Him  will  have  more  and  more  in  common, 
and  we  shall  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  each  other  in  our  views  and  experience  of 
Him.  Three  gates  on  a  side.  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that  call  upon  Him." 
Christ,  in  the  conception  that  you  already  have  of  Him,  is  your  gate  ;  no  hunting 
necessary  in  order  to  find  it ;  no  waiting  requisite.  The  Bible  would  not  say, 
"  Choose  ye  this  day  "  if  there  were  anything  to  wait  for.  Such  words  as  "  now" 
and  " to-day"  would  have  to  be  left  out  if  the  gate  were  anywhere  but  directly  in 
front  of  you.  This  Bibhcal  idea  of  "  to-day  "  just  matches  this  apocalyptic  idea  of 
three  gates  on  a  side,  every  man's  gate  close  to  him.  The  object  of  this  is  not  to 
encourage  the  notion  that  it  makes  no  difference  how  little  idea  a  man  has  of  Christ. 
Our  only  point  is  that  the  veriest  scintilla  of  an  idea,  if  made  available,  is  enough 
to  begin  with.  Supposing  in  a  dark,  starless  night  you  become  lost  in  the  woods. 
The  glimmer  of  a  distant  candle  reaches  your  eye,  and  you  are  not  lost  any  longer. 
There  may  not  be  light  enough  about  it  to  show  you  where  you  are,  but  you  are  not 
lost  any  more  because  there  is  light  enough  about  it  to  give  you  a  direction.  Any 
smallest,  feeblest  conception  you  may  have  of  Christ  will  answer  every  purpose  if 
only  you  will  treat  it  in  the  same  way  that  you  would  treat  what  appeared  to  be 
the  glimmer  of  a  distant  candle  faDing  upon  your  eye  by  night  in  the  midst  of  a 
black  forest.  Light  is  a  sure  guide,  because,  unlike  sound,  it  goes  in  straight  hues. 
And  wherever  and  howsoever  far  out  upon  the  circumference  of  Christ's  character 
you  take  your  position  and  begin  threading  inward  any  one  of  its  radiating  lines, 
you  are  moving  by  a  line  as  straight  as  a  sunbeam  toward  the  heart  and  centre  of 
the  entire  matter.  When  the  disciples  were  bidden  by  Christ  to  follow  Him,  clearly 
that  meant  to  them  at  the  outset  little  more  than  patterning  their  lives  after  Him, 
going  where  He  went,  and  doing  what  He  did.  That  was  where  they  first  took 
hold  of  the  matter.  Anything  like  mere  imitation  seems  mostly  to  disappear  from 
their  life  in  its  later  manifestations  and  farther  developments ;  but  it  was  not  much 
but  imitation  to  begin  with.  They  commenced  by  obeying  Him  and  trying  to  be 
like  Him.  Christ's  early  instruction  to  them  was  in  this  line.  Now,  it  must  needs 
be  said  that  this  obediently  doing  what  God  in  Christ  enjoins  upon  us,  important 
and  indispensable  as  of  course  it  is,  is  by  no  manner  of  means  ^e  best  and  most 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION. 


distinctive  part  of  the  Christian  matter.  At  the  same  time  there  are  two  things  to 
be  said  about  it  that  are  practical  and  that  are  in  close  line  with  our  present 
thought.  The  first  is  that  while  studiously  doing  as  Christ  bids  us  is  not  the  best 
part  of  the  Lord's  matter,  it  is  singularly  educating,  and  contributes  with  wonderful 
facility  to  initiate  us  into  the  best  part  of  the  Lord's  matter.  Obedience  to  Christ 
is  only  gateway  so  far  as  relates  to  the  full  meaning  of  Christ  and  of  Christian 
life,  but  it  is  gateway  that  portals  one  of  the  central  avenues  conducting  directly 
to  meanings  that  are  more  essential  and  complete.  The  other  point  is  that  this 
matter  of  taking  Christ's  commands  and  doing  them  is  not  only  gateway,  but 
gateway  that  opens  itself  immediately  in  our  face.  We  have  not  to  search  around 
in  order  to  find  it.  The  door  is  directly  in  front  of  us.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 
The  many  gates  : — I.  The  vakiousness  of  men's  manner  of  approach  to  the  heavenly 
CITY.  The  "  gates  "  open  in  all  directions,  because  an  almost  infinite  variety  of 
travellers,  and  journeying  from  most  dissimilar  regions,  are  to  be  gathered  there. 
Said  our  Saviour  to  His  disciples,  "  Other  sheep  I  have,  who  are  not  of  this  fold.'* 
The  gospel  He  proclaimed  was  not  for  one  nation  only,  but  for  the  world.  And  so 
this  New  Jerusalem,  to  which  that  gospel  points  the  way,  must  be  accessible  to  men 
of  all  languages  and  lands.  But  it  is  not  this  geographical  variousness  of  approach 
to  the  New  Jerusalem  alone  which  the  fourfold  aspect  of  the  heavenly  gates  suggests 
to  us.  There  is  a  moral  variousness  still  greater  than  any  geographical  one.  The 
people  who  gather,  are  gathered  not  only  out  of  unlike  regions,  but  out  of  unlike 
faiths,  ideas,  habits,  deficiences.  Those  must  needs  be,  in  many  respects,  very 
different  pathways  of  approach,  intellectually  and  morally,  which  are  traversed  to 
the  heavenly  city  by  one  who  comes  thither  out  of  African  ignorance,  out  of  Oriental 
mysticism,  out  of  Indian  savagery,  and  out  of  European  refinement.  How  unlike, 
after  all,  are  the  dwellers  who  Uve  door  to  door  in  a  city  like  this  ;  or  sit  side  by 
side  in  this  Sabbath  sanctuary !  What  diverse  dispositions,  inclinations,  experi- 
ences, characters  !  And  in  leading  men  and  women  so  variously  constituted  to  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  Spirit  of  God  conducts  them  in  most  diverse  ways.  Here 
is  one  who  arrives  thither  through  the  throes  and  agonies  of  an  experience  as  stormy 
as  that  of  Luther  or  of  Paul.  Here  is  another  whose  Christian  experience  is  like 
that  of  F6n^lon  or  John.  Almost  natural  it  seems  for  this  man,  when  he  heard  the 
words,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  to  turn  and  follow  Him.  Here  are  those  on 
whom  in  their  journey  Zionward  the  sun  always  seems  to  smile.  Others  come,  but 
it  is  always  under  a  stormy  sky.  More  and  more  alone  as  they  go  forward,  heavier 
and  heavier  weighted  with  suffering  and  with  care,  they  arrive  at  last,  spent  and 
buffeted,  like  a  shipwrecked  sailor,  smitten  by  a  thousand  seas,  stripped  and  ex- 
hausted, at  the  heavenly  refuge.  II.  The  unexpectedness  of  the  arrival  of  many 
THERE.  As  many  of  the  travellers  to  the  city  were  on  their  way  thither,  they  often 
seemed  at  least  to  be  journeying  in  different  directions.  Their  pathways  some- 
times ran  not  parallel  but  crosswise,  and  even  in  contrary  courses,  according  as 
each  was  led  by  the  Good  Spirit  which  guided  him  to  one  or  another  of  the  opposite 
gates.  And  it  would  not  be  strange  if,  while  they  thus  crossed  and  traversed  one 
another,  doubt  should  arise,  and  even  controversy,  as  to  the  probability  of  one 
another's  arrival.  Sometimes  the  road  insisted  on  has  been  the  road  of  a 
particular  church  organisation.  Sometimes  the  prescribed  pathway  has  been  & 
particular  form  of  some  Christian  ordinance.  How  reassuring,  in  view  of  an 
almost  interminable  catalogue  of  controversies  like  these,  to  remember  the  many 
and  opposite-looking  gates  of  the  heavenly  city  1  How  comforting  to  know 
that  not  one  road,  but  many  roads,  leads  thither !  And  what  a  suggestion  this 
affords  of  the  surprises  which  will  await  those  who  finally  enter ;  the  unex- 
pectedness to  multitudes  of  the  arrival  of  multitudes  besides.  {Leon  Walker,  D.D.) 
The  gates  of  heaven: — The  Cashmere  Gate  of  Delhi,  where  converged  a  heroism 
that  makes  one's  nerves  tingle ;  the  Lucknow  Gate,  still  dented  and  scarred  with 
Sepoy  bombardment;  the  Madeline  Gate,  with  its  emblazonry  in  bronze;  the 
hundred  gates  of  Thebes,  the  wonder  of  centuries,  all  go  out  of  sight  before  the 
gates  of  my  text.  I.  Examine  the  architecture  of  those  gates.  Proprietors 
of  large  estates  are  very  apt  to  have  an  ornamented  gateway.  Gates  of  wood  and 
iron  and  stone  guarded  nearly  all  the  old  cities.  Moslems  have  inscribed  upon  their 
gateways  inscriptions  from  the  Koran  of  the  Mohammedan.  There  have  been  a 
great  many  fine  gateways,  but  Christ  sets  His  hand  to  the  work,  and  for  the  upper 
city  swung  a  gate  such  as  no  eye  ever  gazed  on,  untouched  of  inspiration.  There 
is  no  wood,  or  stone,  or  bronze  in  that  gate,  but  from  top  to  base,  and  from  side  to 
Bide,  it  is  all  of  pearl.    Not  one  piece  picked  up  from  Ceylon  banks,  and  another 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

piece  from  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  another  from  the  Island  of  the  Margarette ;  but 
one  solid  pearl  picked  up  from  the  beach  of  everlasting  light  by  heavenly  hands, 
and  hoisted  and  swung  amid  the  shouting  of  angels.  The  glories  of  alabaster  vase 
and  porphyry  pillar  fade  out  before  this  gateway.  Julius  Caesar  paid  a  hundred  and 
twenty-five  thousand  crowns  for  one  pearl.  The  Government  of  Portugal  boasted 
of  having  a  pearl  larger  than  a  pear.  Cleopatra  and  Philip  II.  dazzled  the  world's 
vision  with  precious  stones.  But  gather  all  these  together  and  lift  them,  and  add 
to  them  all  the  wealth  of  the  pearl  fisheries  and  set  them  in  the  panel  of  one  door, 
and  it  does  not  equal  this  magnificent  gateway.  An  Almighty  hand  hewed  this, 
swung  this,  polished  this.  Against  this  gateway,  on  one  side,  dash  all  the  splendours 
of  earthly  beauty.  Against  this  gate,  on  the  other  side,  beat  the  surges  of  eternal 
glory.  II.  Count  the  number  of  those  gates.  Imperial  parks  and  lordly  manors 
are  apt  to  have  one  expensive  gateway,  and  the  others  are  ordinary  ;  but  look  around 
at  these  entrances  to  heaven  and  count  them.  One,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven, 
eight,  nine,  ten,  eleven,  twelve.  Hear  it  all  the  earth  and  all  the  heavens.  Twelve 
gates.  Gate  the  first :  the  Moravians  come  up  ;  they  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
they  pass  through.  Gate  the  second :  the  Quakers  come  up  ;  they  have  received 
the  inward  light ;  they  have  trusted  in  the  Lord ;  they  pass  through.  Gate  the 
third :  the  Lutherans  come  up ;  they  had  the  same  grace  that  made  Luther  what 
he  was,  and  they  pass  through.  Gate  the  fourth :  the  Baptists  pass  through.  Gate 
the  fifth :  the  Free-will  Baptists  pass  through.  Gate  the  sixth :  the  Reformed 
Church  passes  through.  Gate  the  seventh:  the  Congregationalists  pass  through. 
Gate  the  eight :  the  Episcopalians  pass  through.  Gate  the  ninth :  the  Methodists 
pass  through.  Gate  the  tenth  :  the  Sabbatarians  pass  through.  Gate  the  eleventh : 
the  Church  of  the  Disciples  pass  through.  Gate  the  twelfth :  the  Presbyterians  pass 
through.  But  there  are  a  great  number  of  other  denominations  who  must  come  in, 
and  great  multitudes  who  connected  themselves  with  no  visible  Church,  but  felt  the 
power  of  godliness  in  their  heart  and  showed  it  in  their  life.  Where  is  their  gate  ? 
Will  you  shut  all  the  remaining  host  out  of  the  city  ?  No.  They  may  come  in  at 
our  gate.  III.  Notice  the  points  of  the  compass  towabd  which  these  gates 
LOOK.  They  are  not  on  one  side,  or  on  two  sides,  or  on  three  sides,  but  on  four 
sides.  What  does  that  mean  ?  Why,  it  means  that  all  nationalities  are  included. 
On  the  north  three  gates.  That  means  mercy  for  Lapland,  and  Siberia,  and 
Norway,  and  Sweden.  On  the  south  three  gates.  That  means  pardon  for 
Hindostan,  and  Algiers,  and  Ethiopia.  On  the  east  three  gates.  That  means 
salvation  for  China,  and  Japan,  and  Borneo.  On  the  west  three  gates.  That 
means  redemption  for  America.  It  does  not  make  any  difference  how  dark- 
skinned  or  how  pale-faced  men  may  be,  they  will  find  a  gate  right  before  them. 
Hear  it !  oh,  you  thin-blooded  nations  of  eternal  winter — on  the  north  three  gates. 
Hear  it !  oh,  you  bronzed  inhabitants  panting  under  equatorial  heats — on  the  south 
three  gates.  But  I  notice  when  John  saw  these  gates  they  were  open — wide  open. 
They  will  not  always  be  so.  After  awhile  heaven  will  have  gathered  up  all  its 
intended  population,  and  the  children  of  God  will  have  come  home.  And  heaven 
being  made  up,  of  course  the  gates  will  be  shut.  IV.  The  gatekeepers.  There  is 
one  angel  at  each  one  of  those  gates.  You  say  that  is  right.  Of  course  it  is.  You  know 
that  no  earthly  palace,  or  castle,  or  fortress  would  be  safe  without  a  sentry  pacing 
up  and  down  by  night  and  by  day ;  and  if  there  were  no  defences  before  heaven, 
and  the  doors  set  wide  open  with  no  one  to  guard  them,  all  the  vicious  of  earth 
would  go  up  after  awhile,  and  all  the  abandoned  of  hell  would  go  up  after  awhile, 
and  heaven,  instead  of  being  a  world  of  light,  and  joy,  and  peace,  and  blessedness, 
would  be  a  world  of  darkness  and  horror.  So  I  am  glad  to  tell  you  that  while  these 
twelve  gates  stand  open  to  let  a  great  multitude  in,  there  are  twelve  angels  to  keep 
some  people  out.  Robespierre  cannot  go  through  there,  nor  Hildebrand,  nor  Nero, 
nor  any  of  the  debauched  of  earth  who  have  not  repented  of  their  wickedness. 
There  will  be  a  password  at  the  gate  of  heaven.  Do  you  know  what  that  pass- 
word is  ?  Here  comes  a  crowd  of  souls  up  to  the  gate,  and  they  say :  "  Let  me  in. 
Let  me  in.  I  was  very  useful  on  earth.  I  endowed  colleges,  I  built  churches,  and 
was  famous  for  my  charities ;  and  having  done  so  many  wonderful  things  for  the 
world,  now  I  come  up  to  get  my  reward."  A  voice  from  within  says :  "  I  never 
knew  you."  Another  great  crowd  comes  up,  and  they  try  to  get  through.  They 
say  :  •*  We  were  highly  honourable  on  earth,  and  the  world  bowed  very  lowly  before 
us.  We  were  honoured  on  earth,  and  now  we  come  to  get  our  honours  in  heaven ;  " 
and  a  voice  from  within  says :  "  I  never  knew  you."  Another  crowd  advances  and 
Bays :  "  We  were  very  moral  people  on  earth,  very  moral  indeed,  and  we  come  up 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  667 

to  get  appropriate  recognition."  A  voice  answers :  "  I  never  knew  you."  After 
awhile  I  see  another  throng  approach  the  gate,  and  one  seems  to  be  spokesman 
for  all  the  rest,  although  their  voices  ever  and  anon  cry,  "  Amen  !  amen  !  "  This 
one  stands  at  the  gate  and  says :  Let  me  in.  I  was  a  wanderer  from  God.  I 
deserved  to  die.  I  have  come  up  to  this  place,  not  because  I  deserve  it,  but 
because  I  have  heard  that  there  is  a  saving  power  in  the  blood  of  Jesus."  The 
gatekeeper  says  :  "  That  is  the  password — '  Jesus !  Jesus ! '  "  (T.  Be  Witt  Talmoge.) 
The  gates  of  the  city : — Bearing  in  mind  still  that  this  is  a  description  of  the  ideal 
Church,  we  have  here  four  suggestive  features  presented  to  our  attention.  I.  The 
Chubch  is  a  walled  city  with  many  gates.  "  And  had  a  wall  great  and  high, 
and  twelve  gates,  and  at  the  gates  twelve  angels."  Evidently  there  is  no  exclusive- 
ness  here,  but  there  is  protection  from  unsanctified  and  unlicensed  intruders.  The 
wall  is  for  a  bulwark,  but  not  for  a  barricade ;  it  separates  from  the  world,  but  it 
does  not  shut  out  the  world.  And  angels  stand  at  the  gates — large-hearted,  loving 
angels,  not  bigoted  priests,  not  stern  and  crabbed  formulators  of  creeds,  but  angels 
with  the  sweet  face  of  charity ;  and  they  stand  there,  not  so  much  to  challenge 
intruders,  as  to  trumpet  forth  into  every  corner  of  the  world  their  summons,  "  Come 
in  and  welcome."  A  walled  city,  but  with  an  abundance  of  open  gates.  That  is 
the  true  idea  of  the  Church.  Separate  from  the  world,  yet  always  uniting  the 
world ;  ofifering  freedom  of  access  to  all,  but  license  to  none.  But  men  have 
always  been  trying  to  improve  on  this  idea.  Heaven's  methods  are  too  simple 
for  their  self-conceited  ingenuity.  The  pattern  in  the  mount  wants  accommodating 
to  the  state  of  things  below.  Men  have  always  been  trying  to  improve  on  this  idea 
of  the  Church,  and  in  improving  have  defaced  and  marred  and  impoverished  and 
corrupted  it.  On  the  one  side  we  have  the  gates  of  the  city  closed,  and  nothing  left 
but  some  narrow  back  stairs  entrance,  and  that  so  covered  over  with  a  network  of 
forms  and  creeds  and  subscriptions  and  questions  that  only  the  most  pliable  and 
yielding  souls  can  worm  their  way  through.  But  on  the  other  side — and  this  is  by 
far  the  greater  danger  at  present — we  have  not  only  the  gates  multiplied,  but  the 
very  walls  thrown  down,  and  the  guardian  angels  dismissed,  as  though  they  were  no 
longer  needed.  Come  in  where  you  like,  how  you  like,  believing  what  you  like,  or 
as  little  as  you  like.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  abuse  not  in  this  way  the  sacred  name 
of  charity.  I  am  willing  to  pay  a  great  price  for  brotherly  love,  but  to  buy  it  at  the 
cost  of  truth  is  a  losing  bargain.  There  are  twelve  gates  lying  open  to  all  the  world, 
and  voices  on  every  watch-tower  singing  the  song  of  welcome  :  "  Come  in,  come  in. 
But  come  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour."    11.  A  city  with  gates  on  every 

SIDE  :  not  only  protesting  against  EXCLUSrVENESS  BY  THEIR  NUMBERS,  BUT  PRO- 
CLAIMmO   THE   GRAND    CATHOLICITY   OF    THE    ChURCH   BY   THEIR    POSITION.        "  On   the 

east  three  gates,  on  the  north  three  gates,  on  the  south  three  gates,  and  on 
the  west  three  gates."  It  is  another  rendering  of  the  Saviour's  words,  "  They  shall 
come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from  the  north  and  south,  and  sit  down 
with  Abraham  in  the  kingdom  of  God  " ;  and  a  picture  of  the  same  kind  as  that 
magnificent  vision  which  floated  before  the  Saviour's  eyes  when  He  stood  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Cross  and  looked  through  the  scorn  and  mockery  of  universal  rejection 
at  a  world  bowing  at  His  feet,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men 
unto  Me."  All  the  ages  travail  for  its  fulfilment.  The  gates  of  this  city  which 
point  north  and  west  have  been  crowded  for  a  thousand  years.     HI.  Every  gate 

HAS  ITS  OWN   PECULIAR  BEAUTY  AND  ATTRACTIVENESS.      "  The  gatCS   of   the   city  weiB 

twelve  pearls,  every  several  gate  of  one  pearl " ;  that  is,  there  are  no  two  gates  alike, 
but  they  are  all  alike  beautiful.  Here,  firstly,  is  the  carrying  out  of  the  thought 
which  runs  through  the  whole  description — that  the  Church  below,  like  heaven 
above,  manifests  its  life,  and  power,  and  graces  in  infinite  variety.  There  are 
all  manner  of  precious  stones ;  all  manner  of  fruits ;  all  manner  of  gates ;  all 
imaginable  colours  and  forms.  It  is  God's  vindication  of  individuality;  God's 
protest  against  cramping  uniformity — against  all  attempts  to  fashion  Christians 
in  the  same  mould  and  turn  them  out  after  the  same  pattern.  It  means  that 
Christ,  in  fashioning  men,  never  repeats  a  design;  that  no  two  Christians  are 
beautiful  in  exactly  the  same  way  ;  that  no  two  Christians  have  the  same  training, 
the  same  experience,  the  same  thoughts  and  feelings,  but  that  God  sends  every  one 
to  a  different  school  and  subjects  every  one  to  a  different  discipline,  that  at  last  He 
may  present  every  one  perfect  after  a  different  fashion.  All  the  pictures  of  heaven 
which  I  have  seen  are  gross  caricatures,  for  they  represent  rows  of  saints  and  angels 
as  much  alike  as  rows  of  pins.  God  does  not  fashion  His  jewels  in  that  way.  All 
very  well  for  pins,  but  God's  elect  are  not  machine-made,  turned  out  by  the  gross. 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

They  all  glow  with  the  same  Christ-light,  but  each  of  them  is  cut  after  a  unique 
pattern.  But  further :  there  is  a  special  meaning  in  the  distinction  and  variety  of 
the  gates.  It  means  that  men  enter  the  Church  by  different  ways,  and  are  drawn 
to  Christ  by  various  attractions.  The  promise  which  brought  me  peace  as  I  knelt 
at  the  Master's  feet  would  perhaps  hardly  have  touched  you  at  all ;  and  the  word 
which  thrilled  you  would  perhaps  have  fallen  dull  and  meaningless  on  my  ears. 
Christ  has  a  separate  song  for  every  heart.  Here  is  a  youth,  restless,  fiery,  full  of 
activity,  eager  for  some  great  field  of  battle.  Christ  chants  this  battle-song  to  him : 
"  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  Here  is  a  student  panting 
for  Imowledge,  fired  with  a  passion  for  truth,  ready  to  suffer  martyrdom  for  it.  He 
hears  a  voice  behind  him  saying,  "  In  Christ  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge."  Here  is  a  mystic,  who  longs  to  break  the  veil  of  the  unseen, 
dreamy,  idealistic,  half  inclined  to  believe  in  spiritualism,  courting  fellowship 
with  invisible  souls.  Christ  sings  to  him  thus  :  "  Ye  are  come  unto  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and  to  Jesus,  the 
Mediator  of  the  new  covenant."  IV.  The  gates  are  always  open.  "  The  gates 
shall  not  be  shut  by  day."  Yes,  the  gates  are  open  !  You  have  heard  of  that  girl 
who  had  left  her  father's  house  and  wandered  into  paths  of  sin ;  and  one  night 
there  came  over  her  a  flood  of  shameful  remorse  and  the  agony  of  a  great 
repentance,  and  she  thought  she  would  go  back  and  look  at  the  old  home 
again,  but  not  to  enter.  Ah,  no  !  those  doors  were  closed  for  ever.  Just  to 
look — one  stolen  look — at  the  old  Paradise,  and  then  back  into  darkness  and 
despair !  And  with  tear-blinded  eyes  and  wearied  feet  she  crept  up  to  the  door 
in  the  silent  midnight  hours,  and  half  mechanically  put  her  hand  upon  the  latch ; 
and  lo,  the  door  opened,  and  she  entered.  For  the  father  had  said,  "  It  shall  be  left 
open  night  and  day;  it  may  be  that  she  will  come  back  again."  And  there  she  lay 
until  the  morning,  and  awoke  to  find  him  kneeUng  by  her  side,  kissing  her  with 
the  sweet  kiss  of  forgiveness.  {J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.)  The  heavenly  Jerusalem : — 
Let  us  take  up  two  gr  three  points  in  the  inspired  description  of  the  city  in  this 
chapter  and  consider  what  they  really  mean.  1.  Consider  first  what  is  said  in 
ver.  13  "  on  the  east  three  gates,"  &c.  What  do  these  twelve  gates  mean  then, 
three  on  each  side?  What,  save  that  the  city  lieth  open  and  accessible  to  aU 
quarters,  and  to  all  quarters  alike?  Now  let  us  not  fail  to  notice  how  strongly 
this  contrasts  with  the  character  of  aU  human  institutions.  How  obvious  it  is  that 
they  are  accessible  to  the  few  only,  and  almost  in  exact  proportion  to  the  advantages 
they  offer  is  the  smallness  of  the  number  of  those  who  are  admitted  to  share  in 
them.  The  prizes  of  this  life  are  only  for  the  rich,  the  successful,  the  talented,  the 
favourites  of  fortune ;  only  its  miseries,  its  sicknesses,  its  bereavements,  seem  the 
common  heritage  of  all,  of  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low,  one  with  another.  But  it 
is  not  thus  with  the  glories  of  the  holy  city ;  they  lie  equally  open  towards  every 
quarter,  equally  accessible  to  men  of  every  race  and  clime,  and  colour,  and  circum- 
stance. Therefore  take  courage,  0  traveller  Zionwards;  if  only  thy  face  be  set 
towards  the  holy  city,  thou  too  shalt  surely  find  a  gate  open  to  admit  thee,  from 
whatever  direction  thou  shalt  come.  2.  Consider  next  what  is  written  about  the 
city  in  ver.  15  that  it  "  lieth  foursquare,"  &c.  The  city  is  the  same  in  every 
direction — thoroughly  symmetrical,  with  no  inequality  about  it;  all  is  full, 
complete,  utterly  satisfactory,  nothing  falls  behind  the  mark  of  the  rest.  How 
great  and  striking,  again,  is  the  contrast  between  this  and  any  human  happiness, 
any  earthly  good,  so  unequal,  so  incomplete  as  that  always  is  I  If  well  in  one 
direction,  so  certainly  ill  in  another ;  if  pleasant  for  the  body,  so  generally  bad 
for  the  soul ;  if  wholesome  for  the  spirit,  so  generally  grievous  to  the  mind.  But 
in  heaven  nothing  will  be  wanting  ;  perfect  and  equal  extension  will  be  the  law  of 
being ;  life  will  have  its  threefold  expansion,  in  fulness  infinite,  in  intensity  perfect, 
in  duration  eternal.  3.  Consider,  again,  how  it  is  written  in  ver.  18  that  "  the  city 
was  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass."  We  shall  remember  at  once  that  no  gold  on 
earth  is  like  this,  for  it  is  one  of  the  qualities  of  gold  to  be  opaque,  however  thin 
it  may  be  beaten  out ;  even  gold-leaf  is  not  transparent :  the  beauties  of  pure  gold 
and  of  clear  glass  are  never  combined  in  this  world.  Nor,  if  they  were,  would  the 
result  be  at  all  desirable  for  building  purposes.  For  what  would  be  the  consequence 
if  a  city  were  made  of  such  material  ?  Why,  that  every  house  and  every  chamber 
would  be  transparent,  and  that  one  could  look  through  the  whole  city  from  side  to 
side.  But  what  does  this  universal  transparency  signify  in  heaven,  save  that  there 
will  be  nothing  to  hide,  nothing  to  keep  secret,  but  that  all  will  be  open  to  all, 
because  nothing  will  be  shameful  and  nothing  selfish  ?    And  now,  since  we  have 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  6G9 

gone  round  about  our  Sion,  and  marked  well  her  bulwarks  and  considered  her 
palaces,  tell  me,  0  my  fellow-pilgrims,  shall  this  be  really  our  home?  It 
is  ours,  no  doubt  :  wo  are  heirs  of  it,  joint  heirs  with  Christ  of  all  that  He 
as  man  hath  won  for  man ;  but  shall  we  certainly  come  into  our  inheritance  ? 
Oh,  my  fellow-pilgrims,  travellers  together,  as  ye  say,  towards  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem  ;  this  holy  city,  this  happy  city  is  certainly  ours ;  its  joy  is  our 
joy,  its  glory  is  our  glory.  Shall  a  little  toil,  a  little  need  for  earnestness, 
a  little  necessity  for  patience,  daunt  us  and  defeat  us  ?  Shall  we  fall  short  of 
so  great  and  full  salvation  for  want  of  a  few  years'  careful  watching,  a  few 
years'   resolute   striving?     {R.    Winterbotham,   M.A.)  The  gates  of  heaven  : — 

I  cannot  help  thinking  that  there  is  more  meaning  in  the  vision  than  the 
mere  quarter  of  the  earth  from  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  Jerusalem  are 
to  come.  I  believe  the  gates  refer  also  to  the  different  periods  of  life  at  which 
persons  go  to  heaven.  The  gates  on  the  east  side  admit  those  who  enter 
heaven  in  the  morning  of  life,  when  the  sun  is  just  rising,  and  the  dew  is  on  the 
grass,  and  all  is  fair  and  bright,  and  full  of  beautiful  promise.  The  gates  on  the 
west  side  admit  those  who  enter  heaven  with  heavy  step,  at  the  close  of  a  long  life, 
when  the  sun  is  setting,  and  the  sad  twilight  shadows  are  gathering  and  deepen- 
ing, making  the  path  dim  and  indistinct,  so  that  there  is  danger  of  missing  the 
gates  altogether.  The  gates  on  the  cold,  dark,  wintry  north  side  admit  those  who 
have  had  few  advantages  in  life,  who  have  been  poor  and  friendless,  whose  circum- 
stances have  been  unfavourable,  and  perhaps  through  much  persecution  and 
tribulation  entered  the  kingdom.  While  the  gates  on  the  warm  and  sunny  south  side 
admit  those  who  had  prospered  in  life,  to  whom  everything  had  been  favourable 
and  pleasant,  who  had  no  difficulties  to  overcome,  and  no  trials  to  endure.  Such, 
I  believe,  is  a  deeper  meaning  implied  in  the  position  of  the  gates  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.     {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.,  LL.B.) 

Yer.  14.  And  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  foundationa,  and  in  them  the 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb. — Names  on  the  stones : — The  twelve 
apostles  of  the  Lamb  are  for  the  most  part  obscure  and  hidden  figures  in  the  later 
gospel  history.  We  have  often  wondered  what  became  of  them,  and  why  the  record 
of  their  toilsome,  suffering  lives  was  not  preserved.  We  find  them  together  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost  and  a  few  subsequent  days,  and  then  persecution  scatters  them 
abroad,  and  their  names,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  appear  no  more.  Paul,  Peter, 
and  John  are  the  only  members  of  the  holy  brotherhood  whose  services  are  honoured 
with  historical  recognition,  and  the  rest  are  passed  over  in  silence.  Tradition, 
indeed,  partly  fills  up  the  blank,  and  imaginative  works  have  elaborated  romances 
to  supply  the  place  of  history.  But  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  of  the  labours  of 
the  great  majority  of  the  apostles  there  is  no  trustworthy  record  whatever.  It  may 
be  that  some  of  them  suffered  martyrdom  at  an  early  period  of  their  ministry; 
some,  perhaps,  were  prevented  from  achieving  great  success  by  imprisonment 
or  banishment;  while  others,  like  Andrew,  may  have  been  men  of  unobtrusive 
and  retiring  nature,  and  withal  of  such  inferior  power,  that  the  results  of  their 
labours  were  too  insignificant  to  gain  public  notice.  Be  that  as  it  may,  at  the  very 
commencement  of  the  Church's  history  their  names  drop  out.  The  names,  which 
no  human  historian  thought  worth  inscribing,  are  gathered  together  by  God's  own 
hand,  the  dust  swept  from  their  obscurity,  and  stamped  in  jewelled  letters  on  the 
foundations  of  the  everlasting  walls.  The  meanest  and  the  humblest  names  are 
made  equal  to  the  greatest  and  most  honoured.  I.  Christ,  the  Master  Builder, 
WRITES  THE  NAMES  OF  His  SERVANTS  ALONGSIDE  His  OWN.  He  takes  care  that  those 
who  have  been  willing  to  forget  themselves  for  His  sake  shall  be  eternally  remem- 
bered, and  that  if  they  have  been  in  a  very  small  degree  companions  in  His  patience, 
they  shall  be  in  a  very  large  degree  sharers  in  His  kingdom.  The  jasper  super- 
structure on  which  His  name  shines  does  not  overshadow  and  obscure  the  meaner 
stones  on  which  their  names  are  written.  It  rather  illumines  them  by  its  more 
brilliant  light,  and  makes  the  obscure  names  splendid.  "  Because  He  lives,  they 
live  also."  They  have  been  co-labourers  with  Him  in  His  humiliation,  and  they 
are  joint-heirs  with  Him  in  His  glory.  Now  the  "  Ideal  Church  "  is  in  this  respect 
quite  unique.  There  is  nothing  like  it  in  the  works  and  fashion  of  the  world.  On 
the  great  buildings  which  men  raise  only  one  name  is  inscribed.  The  founder  or 
architect  is  immortalised,  the  helpers  sink  into  speedy  oblivion.  Christopher  Wren, 
says  history,  built  St.  Paul's  Cathedral ;  Michael  Angelo,  St.  Peter's ;  and  with 
superb  disdain  it  sweeps  all  their  co-labourers  into  the  dust  of  forgetfulness. 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

In  every  battle  of  the  warrior  it  is  the  general  alone  who  carries  off  the  palm. 
And  even  in  great  moral  and  religious  works  the  same  rule  holds.  On  the 
basement  of  the  Reformation  building  we  find  only  the  names  of  Wycliffe, 
Huss,  Luther,  and  one  or  two  others.  The  rest,  if  they  were  ever  written,  have 
been  worn  away  by  the  slow  abrasion  of  time.  Now  were  this  rule  carried  out  in 
the  building  of  the  Church,  we  should  find  no  name  on  the  foundation  walls  but 
Christ's.  For  He  was  the  designer.  His  throughout  was  the  directing  and  inspiring 
mind.  It  is  a  city,  as  John  tells  us,  not  earth-built,  but  coming  down  out  of  heaven 
from  God,  prepared  and  adorned  throughout  by  the  Divine  hand  of  its  builder. 
His  name,  therefore,  is  alone  worthy  to  be  inscribed  on  its  walls.  But  the 
Master  casts  aside  human  rules,  and  honours  His  servants  after  a  fashion  of 
His  own.  II.  The  obscure  and  unrecorded  work  abides  in  deathless  character, 
AND  REAPPEARS  IN  IMMORTAL  GLORY.  When  the  work  of  faithful  souls  is  too  insig- 
nificant to  attract  the  attention  of  human  scribes,  God  takes  the  part  of  historian, 
and  writes  the  record,  not  on  melting  wax  or  fading  paper,  but  on  everlasting 
stones;  or  rather.  He  makes  the  work  live  and  tell  its  own  tale.  Each  one  of 
these  disciples,  whether  obscure  or  renowned,  has  added  one  precious  stone  to 
the  eternal  building.  Their  sorrows  and  tears  and  secret  prayers,  their  pleadings 
of  love  and  self -forgetf ulness,  their  charity  and  faith  and  patience,  have  been  thrown 
into  God's  alembic,  into  God's  refining  furnace ;  and  there  comes  forth  in  each  case 
a  precious  stone,  with  the  name  of  the  worker  inscribed  on  it,  and  it  remains  for 
ever  "  a  spectacle  unto  angels  and  unto  men."  It  has  taken  its  place  as  one  of  the 
never-to-be-forgotten  facts ;  and  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away  sooner  than  one 
jot  or  tittle  of  its  glory  shall  be  diminished.  It  is  well  that  Christian  workers  of 
every  kind  should  lay  to  heart  this  joyful  lesson,  and  especially  those  who  are  ever 
complaining  that  they  are  labouring  in  vain,  and  spending  their  strength  for  nought. 
Such  a  thing  is  not  possible  in  the  holy  building  of  Christ.  No  statistics  have 
chronicled  our  exploits,  no  human  praise  has  flattered  our  vanity — that  is  often  all. 
But  God  writes  success  where  men  write  failure.  Heaven  sees  triumphs  in  what 
the  world  calls  blanks.  The  only  true  history  is  that  which  God  writes,  and  His 
history  is  made  up  for  the  most  part  of  unrecorded  facts.  Here  are  the  stones 
on  which  you  laboured,  which  seemed  like  clay  there,  but  are  now  sapphire  and 
chalcedony,  all  beautiful  and  complete,  the  human  marks  in  them  made  Divine, 
the  lines  of  mingled  light  and  darkness  transfigured  into  perfect  glow  ;  and  if  you 
look  on  them  carefully  you  will  find  that  where  you  wrote  only  Christ's  name  He 
has  written  yours.  Most  men  are  trying  to  write  their  own  names.  IH.  In  the 
Ideal  Church  the  lowly  and  obscure  workers  have  equal  recognition  with 
THE  GREAT  AND  RENOWNED.  The  most  unknown  of  the  apostles  are  placed  in 
line  with  the  best  known.  No  one  would  be  surprised  to  find  the  name  of  Paul 
in  the  foundation  stones.  We  should  look  for  that  writ  in  largest  characters  of  gold. 
For  we  know  that  with  mighty  signs  and  wonders  he  preached  the  gospel  from 
Illyricum  unto  Jerusalem,  won  great  trophies  for  the  Master's  kingdom,  and  laid 
more  stones  upon  the  building  than  any  other  worker.  But  we  should  hardly  look 
for  the  names  of  Andrew,  and  Thomas,  and  Philip,  and  Bartholomew,  and  the  rest, 
or  if  we  did  we  should  expect  to  find  them  writ  in  letters  so  small  and  indistinct 
as  to  be  scarcely  legible.  For  the  part  which  they  took  in  the  great  building,  if 
measured  by  visible  results,  was  quite  insignificant.  James  suffered  martyrdom 
almost  as  soon  as  he  had  put  his  hand  to  the  work.  Andrew  was  too  retiring  to  do 
great  things.  But  our  text  shows  that  the  Divine  Master  has  a  grand  disdain  of 
all  these  differences.  The  great  and  small,  the  known  and  unknown,  are  equally 
recognised.  The  world  measures  men  by  their  visible  triumphs.  "All  history," 
says  Carlyle,  "  is  at  bottom  the  history  of  great  men,"  and  that  means  the  history 
of  men  who  have  made  most  noise  in  the  world,  and  achieved  the  greatest  successes. 
"  It  is  natural,"  says  Emerson,  "  to  believe  in  great  men.  The  knowledge  that  in 
the  city  is  a  great  man  raises  the  credit  of  all  the  citizens  ;  but  enormous  popula- 
tions, if  they  be  all  beggars  or  all  obscure,  are  disgusting — the  more  the  worse.  Our 
religion,"  says  he,  "  is  the  love  and  cherishing  of  these  great  men."  And  this  is  the 
best  gospel  that  the  world  has  for  those  of  us  who  are  obscure,  who  do  our  work  in 
quiet  places.  But,  thank  God,  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  gospel  for 
common  and  obscure  men.  Its  promises  of  honour  are  given  to  the  humblest.  All 
that  Christ  requires  is  that  the  one  talent  should  be  used  as  faithfully  as  the  five ; 
that  being  done,  the  honour  at  the  end  is  equal.  {J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.) 
Foundations  of  precious  stones  : — By  engraving  upon  the  "  foundations  "  the 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb,  John  emphasises  that  standpoint,  from 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  671 

which  we  view  these  foundations  as  representing  the  life  and  power  of  the  Christ  as 
received  and  manifested  by  His  redeemed  people,  of  whom  the  twelve  apostles  are 
here  representative.  The  Christ  becomes  the  foundation  of  the  city  only  as  He 
enters  in  all  the  fulness  of  His  power  and  glory  into  the  lives  of  men.  The  Incar- 
nation, the  Atonement,  and  the  Resurrection  uphold  and  upraise  a  new  world  only 
as  they  are  transformed  into  vital  truth  and  living  force  in  the  waking  heart  of 
human  life.  These  precious  stones  have  a  human  setting,  and  the  brightness  of 
them  should  and  can  be  found  in  the  lives  of  men.  In  brief,  they  denote  all  those 
Diviner  qualities  and  forces  that  enter  into  the  life  of  man  from  the  Christ  of  the 
Cross.  Thus  we  are  led,  as  we  anticipated,  to  see  that  John  views  the  "  founda- 
tions "  as  an  adequate  cause  for  the  production  of  the  ideal  city.  It  not  only 
supports  the  city,  but  the  city  must  spring  forth  from  it.  It  already  contains  the 
Divine  energies  by  which  the  New  Jerusalem  shall  be  erected.  If  these  foundations 
are  present  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  conceiving  a  time  when  the  completed  city 
shall  stand — the  joy  of  the  earth.  1.  The  preciousness  of  the  foimdations  is  very 
emphatic.  The  most  precious  material  things  in  the  world  are  chosen  to  symbolise 
it.  John  is  clear  on  the  point  that  the  ideal  city  cannot  be  raised  except  on 
foundations  of  the  Divinest  quality,  on  a  base  where  man's  deepest  life  enters  into 
fellowship  with  the  glory  of  God.  When  we  apply  this  principle  to  modem 
schemes  for  the  construction  of  an  ideal  social  life,  we  find  that  they  disastrously 
fail  to  stand  the  test.  For  what  are  the  foundations  on  which  many  would  raise 
the  temple  of  human  glory?  They  would  raise  it  on  the  foundations  of  intel- 
lectual advance,  of  scientific  achievement  and  progress,  of  industrial  invention,  of 
the  growth  of  moral  science  and  art,  of  the  increase  of  material  resources,  and  of 
political  changes.  Alas !  the  foundations  are  brass,  iron,  wood,  hay,  stubble.  No 
temple  of  true  glory  can  ever  be  raised  on  such  a  base.  The  poverty  of  the 
foundations  would  be  repeated  in  an  intenser  degree  in  the  poverty  of  the  city.  The 
ideal  city  can  stand  only  on  a  base  of  precious  stones.  2.  Another  thought  that 
forces  itself  upon  us  is  the  vastness  and  comprehensiveness  of  the  foundations  of 
the  city.  Not  only  does  this  city  rise  like  a  living  growth  out  of  a  Divine  root, 
where  the  most  precious  forces  are  encentred,  but  the  preciousness  of  its  base  is 
equalled  by  its  incomparable  immensity.  "  I  determined,"  said  Paul,  "  not  to 
know  anytiiing  among  you  save  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified."  There  are  some 
that  would  call  this  a  narrow  sphere  of  action,  but  that  is  because  they  are  blind, 
and  cannot  see  the  wonder  of  God.  In  Jesus  Christ  the  fulness  of  the  infinite 
stretches  around  us,  beneath  us,  and  above  us.  He  that  would  see  and 
feel  the  power  of  the  immeasurable,  let  him  come  hither.  There  are  those  that 
would  explain  away  the  incarnation  of  God  by  calling  it  a  beautiful  fiction.  And, 
having  done  this  they  desire  to  have  credit  for  breadth  I  They  reduce  the 
unspeakable  wonder  of  the  Atonement  to  a  human  exemplification  of  heroic 
fortitude.  And  then  they  desire  to  pose  as  men  of  expansive  views  !  Poor  fools  I 
Their  little  horizon  has  narrowed  around  them  until  they  can  touch  it  with  their 
outstretched  hands.  The  length,  and  breadth,  and  height,  and  depth  of  the  world 
has  disappeared  for  them.  Their  little  foundation  will  not  bear  the  weight  of  a 
single  human  soul,  much  less  the  city  of  God's  coming  ages  of  glory.  3.  The  mani- 
f oldness  and  variety  of  the  city's  foundations  are  also  set  forth  graphically  in  this 
picture.  They  are  adorned  with  "  all  manner  "  of  precious  stones.  Not  only  must 
there  be  room  in  the  structure  of  the  city  of  God  for  a  host  of  variant  types,  but 
such  variety  must  of  necessity  be  present  in  order  to  give  it  perfection  and  fulness. 
One  uniform  monotony  would  be  an  eternal  weariness.  So  on  far-extending  and 
diverse  foundations  a  rich  manifoldness  of  life  is  based,  and  true  lives  of  every 
mould  shall  be  upreared  on  the  city's  twelve  foundations.  4.  Our  last  thought  is 
the  homogeneity  of  the  city's  foundations.  They  are  far-extending  and  various,  yet 
through  it  all  they  possess  a  common  nature.  They  are  all  "precious  stones." 
They  all  pertain  to  that  which  is  most  precious — that  is,  to  that  which  is  Divinest 
in  human  life.  John  will  have  no  admixture  of  the  lower  plements  of  life  in  the 
foundations  of  the  city.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  will  to  rate  no  admixture  of 
worldly  wisdom  or  achievement.  Such  admixture  would  wiily  destroy  its  power. 
Some  very  clever  people  have  what  they  call  an  eclectic  religion.  They  put  together 
stray  bits  from  different  religions  and  call  this  a  collection  of  treasures.  Such  a 
gathering  of  odds  and  ends  can  never  be  the  foundation  of  the  holy  city.  All  that 
we  need  is  found  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  the  Jesus  Christ  whom  the  apostles 
proclaimed.     {John  Thonuu,  M.A.) 


672  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

Vers.  15-17.  A  golden  reed  to  measure  the  city. — A  talk  with  children — 
measures : — What  should  we  do  in  life  without  measures  ?  This  beautiful 
building  could  not  have  been  erected  as  well  as  it  has  been  if  there  had  not  been 
a  good  deal  of  very  precise  measuring,  so  that  everything  should  fit  into  its 
proper  place,  without  a  chink  or  crack  to  be  seen  anywhere.  So,  every  house 
that  is  built,  every  road  that  is  laid  out,  and  especially  every  railroad,  requires 
a  great  deal  of  measuring.  When,  too,  you  have  to  draw  a  map,  or  plan,  you 
must  be  very  precise  about  your  measurements  to  do  it  properly.  Then,  again,  the 
singers'  measure.  They  have  so  many  beats  to  the  bar.  Even  poetry  ia 
governed  by  different  measures.  John  says  the  heavenly  city  had  been  measured 
carefully — "And  the  city  lieth  four-square,  .  .  .  and  he  measured  the  city  with  the 
reed."  The  first  measure  that  people  used  was  just  a  reed  out  of  the  hedge :  a 
very  rough  and  ready  sort  of  thing  ;  but  it  answered  the  purpose  if  it  was  exactly 
the  right  length.  But  as  we  get  more  and  more  respectable,  we  adopt  more  costly 
measures.  They  are  not  necessarily  a  bit  more  correct;  but  they  are  more 
imposing.  We  have  our  wooden  measures ;  then  comes  the  ivory  measure ;  and 
in  this  instance  we  have  the  costliest  of  all  materials,  namely,  gold — a  measure  to 
measure  the  city  which  is  a  golden  reed.  Everything  was  measured  with  great 
precision — "the  gates  thereof,  and  the  walls  thereof,"  &c.  Now  I  want  to  show 
that  it  is  God's  will  that  you  should  do  everything  in  this  way  systematically  and 
punctually — not  by  rule  of  thumb,  as  we  call  it.  Some  of  the  old  people  used  to 
measure  with  their  thumbs.  You  know  there  are  some  who  do  that  to-day.  They 
reckon  an  inch  between  the  point  of  the  thumb  and  the  first  joint.  That  is  the  rule 
of  thumb,  and  is  not  very  exact.  Now  what  God  would  have  us  do  in  life  is  not  to 
measure  anything  in  that  haphazard  way,  but  everything  by  a  certain  and  infallible 
standard.  Now,  this  Book  is  God's  law  from  heaven  for  life  on  earth  ;  and  there 
is  one  great  standard  of  whom  this  Book  speaks,  namely,  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Apostle  Paul  teaches  us  that  it  is  possible  for  us  by  the  grace  of  God  to  come  up  to 
the  stature  of  the  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  is  our  infallible  standard ;  and 
nobody  else  is  infallible.  There  are  some  very  good  people  whose  example  it  is 
well  for  us  to  imitate,  in  so  far  as  they  follow  Christ,  but  no  further.  Whenever 
even  they  fall  short,  we  must  not  imitate  them.  We  are  to  go  back  to  the  original 
standard,  even  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  This  Book  further  teaches  us  what  we 
ought  to  do.  "  Ah,"  you  say,  "  we  so  often  fail."  Yes  you  do  ;  and  there  forgive- 
ness comes  in.  There  are  many  sins.  Some  fall  through  ignorance :  they  do  not 
know  any  better,  and  the  Lord  forgives  them  freely.  Others  sin  through  sheer 
wickedness ;  and  if  even  they  repent,  the  Lord  will  forgive.  But  our  aim  should 
be  to  come  up  to  the  standard ;  and  the  Saviour  will  give  us  every  needful  grace 
to  do  so.  We  could  not  do  much  without  Him  ;  but  we  can  do  a  great  deal  through 
Him.  (D.  Davies.)  Two  cities : — The  book  of  the  Eevelation  is  full  of  con- 
trasts:— e.g.,  Michael  and  the  dragon;  the  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the 
woman  clothed  in  scarlet ;  the  beast  and  his  mark,  and  the  Lamb  and  His  mark. 
One  might  almost  re-arrange  the  contents  in  a  series  of  contrasts  or  antitheses, 
culminating  in  the  great  antithesis  of  Babylon  and  the  New  Jerusalem.  I.  The 
APPEARANCE  OF  THE  TWO  CITIES.  Both  lie  foursquarc,  but — In  Babylon  there  are 
no  natural  heights ;  such  heights  as  there  are,  are  artificial,  and  barely  rise  to  the 
level  of  the  walls.  In  the  New  Jerusalem,  on  the  other  hand,  the  height  and  the 
length  and  the  breadth  are  equal.  Surely  this  well  represents  the  difference  which 
exists  between  the  world  and  the  Church.  Worldly  ambition  can,  at  most,  rear  for 
itself  some  mound  of  fame;  the  saints  progress  by  an  upward  pathway  which 
winds  towards  the  summit  of  the  holy  mountain.  "Ye  are  come  unto  Mount 
Zion."  H.  The  rivers  which  water  the  two  cities.  Babylon  was  watered  by 
the  Euphrates,  of  which  the  source  lay  without  the  walls.  The  city  was  taken 
through  this  radical  defect ;  the  invaders,  altering  the  course  of  the  river,  entered 
secretly  along  the  river-bed.  In  the  New  Jerusalem  the  river  of  the  water  of  life 
has  its  source  in  the  midst  of  the  city,  flowing  out  from  beneath  the  throne,  which 
occupies  its  midmost  summit.  In  either  case  the  river  is  a  type  of  health  and 
happiness.  The  pleasures  of  the  world,  however,  are  never  safe  from  pollution  at 
the  source.  Disease  and  death  may  taint  them  at  any  time,  or  draw  the  stream 
into  other  channels.  But  "  there  is  a  river,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the 
city  of  God,"  and  that  river  has  its  source  protected ;  it  confers  pleasure  "  for 
evermore,"  because  it  is  sheltered  by  His  right  hand.  III.  The  comparative  sizh 
OP  THE  two  cities.  Babylon  was  a  "  great  city  " — about  three  times  the  size  of 
London.    Yet,  comparing  the  measurements  which  Herodotus  gives  of  Babylon 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  673 

which  St.  John  gives  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  we  find  that  the  latter  would  contain 
just  10,000  of  the  former.  The  world  has  great  influence,  and  the  cause  is 
adequate  to  the  effect ;  yet  how  comparatively  insignificant  it  is  when  we  contrast 
its  pretensions  with  the  greatness  of  God's  Church  !  IV.  The  gates  and  streets 
OF  THE  TWO  CITIES.  Babylon  here  seems  to  have  the  advantage — one  hundred  gates 
instead  of  twelve.  The  advantage,  however,  is  only  apparent,  and  serves  to  illus- 
trate its  real  deficiencies.  For  observe — Babylon  is  built  on  a  plain,  with  twenty- 
five  gates  on  each  side,  and  streets  running  from  gate  to  gate ;  its  ground-plan 
forms  a  series  of  squares  held  together  by  the  limiting  square  of  the  walls.  The 
New  Jerusalem  is  built  on  a  hill.  The  city  is  pyramidal  in  form  ;  all  the  streets 
run  up  towards  the  summit,  and  meet  in  the  vicinity  of  the  throne.  The  world  is 
held  together  by  restraint ;  its  elements  have  all  a  pseudo  independence ;  its  motto 
is,  "  Each  for  himself."  It  has  no  true  principle  of  unity.  In  the  Church,  on  the 
other  hand,  there  is  a  centre  of  attraction.  *'  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  " 
gives  to  the  whole  an  organic  unity.  Its  members  may  approach  from  different 
sides,  but  all  of  necessity  approach  the  centre.  Their  motto  is,  "  Thy  will  be 
done";  in  dependence  on  that  will  they  are  united.  (C  A.  Goodhart,  M.A.) 
Tlie  leng^th  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are  equal — The  symmetry  of  life : — 
So  much  of  the  noblest  life  which  the  world  has  seen  dissatisfies  us  with  its 
partialness ;  so  many  of  the  greatest  men  we  see  are  great  only  on  certain  sides, 
and  have  their  other  sides  all  shrunken,  flat,  and  small,  that  it  may  be  well  for  us 
to  dwell  upon  the  picture  which  these  words  suggest,  of  a  humanity  rich,  and 
full,  and  strong  all  round,  complete  on  every  side,  the  perfect  cube  of  human 
life  which  comes  down  out  of  heaven  from  God.  I.  The  length  of  life.  All 
men  have  their  special  powers  and  dispositions.  Each  man  finds  that  he  has  his. 
That  nature  which  he  has  discovered  in  himself  decides  for  him  his  career.  What 
he  is,  even  before  he  knows  it,  has  decided  what  he  does.  His  life  has  run  out  in 
a  line  which  had  the  promise  and  potency  of  its  direction  in  the  nature  which  his 
birth  and  education  gave  him.  All  his  self -culture  strove  that  way.  Through  the 
confusion  and  whirl  of  human  lives,  his  life  ran  in  one  sharp,  narrow  line,  from 
what  he  knew  he  was,  to  what  he  meant  to  be  and  do.  That  clear,  straight  line  of 
unswerving  intention,  that  struggle  and  push  right  onward  to  the  end — that  is  the 
end  of  his  life.  To  have  an  end  and  seek  it  eagerly — no  man  does  anything  in  the 
world  without  that.  Therefore,  we  may  freely  say  to  any  young  man.  Find  your 
purpose  and  fling  your  life  out  to  it ;  and  the  loftier  your  purpose  is,  the  more  sure 
you  will  be  to  make  the  world  richer  with  every  enrichment  of  yourself.  This,  you 
see,  comes  to  the  same  thing  as  saying  that  this  first  dimension  of  life,  which  we 
call  "  length,"  the  more  loftUy  it  is  sought,  has  always  a  tendency  to  promote  self- 
development.  II.  The  second  dimension  of  life  is  breadth.  Breadth  in  a  man's 
life  is  its  outreach  laterally.  It  is  the  tendency  of  a  man's  career  to  bring  him 
into  sympathy  and  relationship  with  other  men.  First,  the  man's  own  career 
becomes  to  him  the  interpretation  of  the  careers  of  other  men ;  and  secondly,  by 
his  sympathy  with  other  men,  his  own  life  displays  to  him  its  best  capacity.  His 
task  is  always  glorified  and  kept  from  narrowness  by  his  perpetual  demand  upon  it, 
that  it  should  give  him  such  a  broad  understanding  of  human  life  in  general  as 
should  make  him  fit  to  read,  and  touch,  and  help  all  other  kinds  of  life.  in.  Thb 
height  of  life  is  its  reach  upward  toward  something  distinctly  greater  than 
HUMANITY.  The  reaching  of  mankind  towards  God  I  Evidently,  in  order  that  that 
may  become  a  true  dimension  of  a  man's  life,  it  must  not  be  a  special  action.  It 
must  be  something  which  pervades  all  that  he  is  and  does.  It  must  not  be  a 
solitary  column  set  on  one  holy  spot  of  the  nature.  It  must  be  a  movement  of  the 
whole  nature  upward.  To  any  man  in  whom  that  uplifting  of  life  has  genuinely 
begun,  all  life  without  it  must  seem  very  flat  and  poor.  {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.) 
The  proportionateness  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  God : — The  proportionateness  of 
the  Holy  City  as  an  illustration  of  what  ought  to  be  the  proportionateness  of 
another  structure.  I.  Some  are  disproportionate  through  isolated  height.  Such 
a  one  was,  at  first,  the  Apostle  John.  He  saw  a  city  in  the  air,  and  gazed  into 
heaven.  There  are  many  such  who  dreamily  meditate  upon  the  glories  of  heaven. 
Such  are  often  the  very  ones  who  would  pass  the  beggar-child  on  the  street.  They 
do  not  notice  the  tear-dimmed  eyes  and  the  anguish  of  the  suffering  face  ;  for  they 
are  hurrying  home  to  read,  perchance  to  weep  over  thoughts  that  are  beautiful. 
The  height  and  the  length  and  the  breadth  are  not  equal.  II.  Others  are  dispro- 
portionate through  isolated  length.  These  are  the  exclusively  practical  people. 
They  see  the  plain  matter-of-fact  way  of  duty  before  them,  and  they  walk  bravely 

43 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

along  it,  yet  they  have  never  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  lights  in  the  streets  of  the 
city  of  God.  The  length  and  the  height  and  the  breadth  are  not  equal.   III.  Others 
still  are  disproportionate  through  isolated  breadth.     Some  are  broad  for  the  sake  of 
being  broad,  and  there  is  no  beauty  in  such.    They  delight  in  making  a  parade  of 
their  breadth  ;  they  enjoy  the  look  of  surprise  and  pain  on  the  face  of  some  saint 
of  God.    They  imagine  themselves  to  be  liberal,  but  their  knowledge  is  scant.    In 
them  is  no  height  of  contemplation;  they  have  never  dreamed  a  dream  of  the 
Holy  City,  nor  have  seen  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.    In  them  is  no 
length  of  practical  usefulness ;  they  have  not  visited  the  widow  and  fatherless  in 
their  aflSiction.    Even  the  breadth  which  they  have  is  the  laxity  of  ignorance  and 
waywardness,  and  that  is  all  they  have.    The  breadth  and  the  height  and  the 
length  are  not  equal.     Some  naturally  incline  towards  the  heights  of  spiritual 
meditation,  to  gaze  on  the  glories  of  the  Holy  City ;  others  towards  the  plain 
pathway  of  the  practical ;  others  still  towards  the  breadth  by  which  they  hear 
other  voices  expressing  other  thoughts  of  God's  universe.     Others,  again,  pass 
through  the  various  stages  in  succession ;  while  still  others  possess  these  three 
qualities  in  different  degrees.     It  is  the  purpose  of  (Jod,  by  His  grace,  to  make 
these  qualities  in  the  youthful  soul  proportionate  and  harmonious — to  make  the 
height,  the  length,  and  the  breadth  equaL     Some  day  a  scholar  will  write  a  book 
in  which  he  will  tell  how  God  sought  to  accomplish  this  in  one  and  another  of  the 
disciples.    The  book  will  be  one  of  rare  suggestiveness.    John,  the  beloved,  had 
the  height  and  the  breadth — to  him  came  the  command  to  cast  out  devils.    Paul 
scaled  the  heights  of  contemplation  when  he  meditated  upon  "the  exceeding  riches 
of  His  grace,"  and  he  passed  far  along  the  way  of  duty  when  he  answered  the  call, 
♦'  Come  over  and  help  us."    But  he  needed  the  breadth,  and  this  he  must  gain  by 
the  sympathy  of  a  common  suffering.     Therefore  came  the  thorn  in  the  flesh ;  and 
thus  he  saw  in  the  breadth  of  sympathy  at  once  the  sorrows  of  others  and  the 
sorrow  of  the  Son  of  Man.    In  the  souls  of  young  Christians,  the  height  and 
length  and'  breadth  will  meet  together  in  the  clear  and  harmonious  colours  of  a 
rainbow  of  our  God.     The  Christian  religion,  and  it  only,  extirpates  or  represses 
no  noble  instinct;  it  welcomes  height  and  length  and  breadth,  and  all  that  is 
included  in  them,  and  gives  to  each  its  proper  place.    But  we  need  an  ideal  to  be 
before  us.     We  look  on  the  noblest  sons  of  men  one  by  one,  and  find  them  marred  * 
by  reason  of  irregularity.    Where  shall  we  find  this  ideal?    Within  the  magic 
circle  of  the  Person  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  all  these  three  are  presented  in 
absolute  fulness  and  exquisite  harmony  I    We  stand  in  awe  of  the  heights  of 
heavenly  contemplation  of  which  glimpses  are  given  to  us.     When  He  departed 
into  a  solitary  place,  when  He  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven  in  communion  with  His 
Father,  He  drew  aside  the  veil  and  showed  to  us  the  glories  of  heavenly  contem- 
plation.   Then,  to  think  of  the  practical  aspect  of  His  active  life.    How  He  toiled 
to  realise  the  Messianic  plan  by  training  the  twelve,  by  announcing  the  laws  of  the 
kingdom,  by  healing  every  sickness  and  every  disease  among  the  people  1    Then  in 
Him  was  breadth  bounded  only  by  the  universe,  broad  as  the  love  of  Gk)d.    It  was 
a  breadth  which  led  Him  to  hear  voices  of  sheep  not  of  this  fold  who  would  yet 
enter  to  find  pasture,  that  there  might  be  one  fold  and  one  Shepherd.    It  is  the 
priceless  privilege  of  every  young  Christian  who  has  yielded  himself  to  God  through 
Christ,  to  seek  to  attain  by  His  grace  towards  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ ;  for  in  Him  and  in  Him  alone  the  height  and  the  length  and  the 
breadth  are  equal.     {O.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  And  the  buUding  of  the  wall  of  it  was  of  Jasper.— rfc«  jasper  $uper- 
structure : — That  is,  the  superstructure,  all  that  part  of  the  wall  which  rises  above 
the  foundation  rows,  was  one  great  mass  of  brilliant  jasper.  There  was  jasper 
at  the  foundation  and  jasper  at  the  summit ;  this  stone  is  **  the  beginning  and  the 
end,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  of  the  heavenly  building,  clasping  the  intervening 
rows  together  by  two  perfect  bands  of  light."  Now  what  this  jasper  was  cannot  be 
exactly  ascertained ;  but  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  it  was  not  the  stone  which  bears 
that  name  now.  The  common  jasper  is  of  many  kinds.  Sometimes  purple,  sonae- 
times  cerulean,  sometimes  green,  and  more  frequently  a  green  stone  streaked  with 
veins  of  red.  Moreover,  it  is  not  very  precious,  not  distinguished  by  its  brilliancy, 
and  it  is  far  surpassed  both  in  beauty  and  worth  by  many  others.  These  marks 
prove  beyond  question  that  our  jasper  is  not  the  stone  which  was  in  the  apostle's 
mind.  The  descriptions  which  are  given  of  it  in  the  Apocalypse  correspond  exactly 
with  the  characters  of  the  diamond,  and  unless  the  diamond  was  unknown  to  the 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  675 

ancients,  which  is  hardly  possible,  the  jasper  must  have  been  this  stone.  But 
whether  the  diamond  or  not,  the  jasper  of  John's  vision  had  all  the  characteristic 
features  of  the  diamond.  It  was  the  most  precious  of  stones,  it  shone  like  the  sun, 
and,  while  showing  no  particular  colour,  contained  all  the  colours  in  its  pure,  white 
light.  Bear  in  mind,  further,  that  the  jasper  throughout  the  Apocalypse  is  the 
type  of  Christ.  "  He  that  sat  upon  the  throne  was  to  look  upon  like  a  jasper," 
says  the  inspired  writer ;  and,  further,  "  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the 
light  of  the  city,"  and  "this  light  is  like  unto  a  jasper."  The  thought  of  our 
text,  then,  is  this — that  above  the  foundation  rows,  with  their  stones  of  various 
colours  and  of  various  price,  is  the  stone  most  precious,  most  brilliant,  shining 
with  the  pure,  white  glorious  light  of  Christ.  Christ  is  the  top-stone  as  He  is  the 
chief  corner-stone,  the  superstructure  as  He  is  the  foundation.      I.  The  supeb- 

STRUCTUKB  OF  THIS  BUILDING  CONTAINS  IN  PERFECTION  AND  COMPLETENESS  ALL  THAT 
THE   FOUNDATIONS   HAVE   IN    IMPERFECTION   AND   INCOMPLETENESS.       The   Sapphire,  the 

chalcedony,  the  sardius,  and  the  rest,  are  very  beautiful ;  but  they  are  stones  of 
one  or,  at  most,  two  colours,  and  these  colours  not  clear,  but  flecked  and  stained 
with  spots  and  dark  lines  ;  while  the  white  light  of  the  jasper,  like  the  white  light 
of  the  sun,  contains  all  the  colours,  and  contains  them  in  unmixed  purity.  As  all 
the  hues  of  the  rainbow  are  in  the  sun's  rays,  so  all  the  hues  of  the  twelve  founda- 
tion stones  are  combined  in  the  splendid  jasper  band  which  crowns  the  summit. 
Or,  putting  it  in  other  words,  while  the  foundations  have  each  their  separate  grace, 
and  shine  each  with  their  distinct  glory,  the  jasper  superstructure  holds  all  the 
graces,  there  all  the  glories  unite.  All  the  special  qualities  found  separately  in  the 
stones  below  are  found  in  splendid  combination  in  the  building  above.  And  this 
means — 1.  That  Christ  combines  in  Himself  all  actual  and  possible  graces.  The 
prophets  and  apostles  and  holy  men  of  old  were  like  the  rows  of  foundation  stones, 
men  of  one  colour,  of  some  one  or  two  distinguishing  graces.  At  their  best  they 
were  still  one-sided  men  ;  giants  in  one  Christ-like  virtue.  God's  glory  shone 
through  them  all,  but  they  were  imperfect  mediums.  They  intercepted  more  than 
they  transmitted  of  it :  they  showed  only  one  or  two  hues  of  the  jasper  light  in 
perfection.  But  Christ  unites  them  all,  and  shows  them  all  in  their  most  complete 
and  glorious  form.*  It  is  this  all-comprehending  beauty  and  perfection  of  Christ 
that  charms  us,  touches  every  fibre  of  our  moral  nature,  and  chains  our  wandering 
fancies  to  His  feet.  Everything  that  we  have  ever  admired,  or  ever  longed  for  in 
our  best  moods,  meets  us  here.  Here  is  perfect  love  and  sinless  anger ;  mighty 
self-assertion,  and  still  mightier  self-abnegation ;  a  child's  humility,  and  a  king's 
dignity  ;  a  peasant's  simplicity,  and  a  philosopher's  profundity ;  David's  fearless- 
ness, Elijah's  zeal,  Isaiah's  raptures,  Jeremiah's  tears,  a  woman's  tenderness,  and 
God's  almighty  strength.  Yes :  in  Him  is  all  that  the  most  aspiring  souls  ever 
longed  for,  and  the  most  heroic  hearts  ever  throbbed  for.  "  He  is  the  chief  among 
ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely."  2.  The  ideal  Church,  the  Church  that 
is  to  be,  combines  in  itself,  like  Christ,  all  the  graces.  It  is  growing  up  out  of  the 
parti-coloured  stones  into  the  white,  all-embracing  jasper.  The  Church,  as  we 
have  known  it  in  history  and  experience,  has  always  been  one-sided ;  the  successive 
ages  of  the  Church  have  been  almost  exactly  like  the  foundation  stones,  showing 
each  of  them  one  prominent  colour.  Each  period  in  the  Church's  history  has  been 
distinguished  by  one  strongly  marked  Christian  virtue.  The  first  age  was  bold  in 
confessing  Christ,  strong  in  its  contempt  for  the  world,  full  of  the  martyr's  zeal ; 
yet  strangely  impatient,  almost  inviting  martyrdom.  That  early  Church  was 
sublime  in  some  of  its  moods,  but  altogether  childish  in  others.  Look  at  the  early 
monastic  age  again.  There  also  the  Church  is  strong  in  its  contempt  for  the 
world's  pleasures,  in  its  power  to  trample  on  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  the  pride  of 
life ;  but  there  is  no  Christ-like  sympathy,  no  concern  for  a  guilty,  sorrowing 
world.  See  again  the  Church  of  the  Reformation.  It  has  a  giant's  strength  and 
courage ;  faith  mighty  enough  to  remove  mountains.  It  walks  with  God,  but  its 
sternness  is  not  tempered  by  the  gentleness  of  Christ.  It  has  the  Master's  hatred 
of  sin  without  the  Master's  mercy  for  the  sinner.  And  the  Church  of  to-day, 
while  great  in  charity  and  humanitarianism,  is  in  danger  of  becoming,  if  it  has  not 
already  become,  just  as  one-sided  in  another  way.  It  is  tempted  to  look  only  on 
the  gentle  side  of  Christian  doctrine,  to  let  charity  enfeeble  its  robustness,  and  pity 
for  the  sinner  engender  shallow  views  of  sin.  But  the  Church  is  striving  up, 
patiently,  through  the  coloured  rows,  to  the  superstructure.  When  it  has  attained 
that  it  will  no  longer  be  a  partial,  one-sided  Church,  but  beautiful,  with  all  the 
graces  of  the  Master.    More  faithful  than  the  early  Church,  purer  from  the  world's 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

stains  than  the  Monastic  Church,  stronger  in  its  zeal  against  sin  than  the  Reforma- 
tion Church,  and  more  tender  and  charitable  than  the  Church  of  to-day.  Nothing 
will  be  lacking  to  its  completeness.  3.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  individual 
believer.  Our  growth  in  Christ  is  like  that  of  the  Church — each  stage  characterised 
by  some  prominent  grace,  but  not  one  of  them  uniting  all  the  graces.  In  the  early 
stages  of  the  Christian  life  there  is  much  faith  and  courage,  but  little  patience  ;  in 
the  later  stages,  great  patience,  but  often  diminished  zeal.  The  average  Christian 
is  never  eminently  Christ-like  at  more  than  one  or  two  points.  It  is  as  if  he  had 
to  starve  one  grace  to  feed  another.  When  our  lives  are  fairest  and  our  faith 
strongest  we  still  show  only  one  or  two  sides  of  the  beauty  of  our  Lord.  "We  have 
His  tenderness  without  His  strength,  or  His  gentleness  without  His  stern  hatred  of 
sin,  or  His  boldness  without  His  forbearance.  But  this  is  because  the  building  has 
not  yet  risen  above  the  foundation  rows.  The  superstructure  of  it  is  of  jasper. 
We  shall  be  "  complete  in  Christ."  When  He  has  finished  the  work  in  us  there 
will  be  nothing  wanting.  No  partial  colouring  there,  but  the  white  jasper  light 
which  combines  aU  the  hues.  For  each  believer,  then,  as  well  as  for  the  Church, 
"the  building  of   the  wall  is   of   jasper."    II.    The  beauty  and  glory  of  the 

SUPERSTRUCTURE    ARE    MADE    UP   IN    GREAT  PART   OF    THE    ELEMENTS    WHICH   COMPOSE 

THE  FOUNDATION.  If  you  could  take  the  twelve  rows  of  stones,  bring  all  their 
varied  colours  into  combination,  concentrate  their  diffused  radiance,  and  remove  all 
impurity,  the  result  would  be  just  such  a  brilliant  diamond  belt  as  the  wall  of 
jasper.  As  you  trace  the  foundation  stones  from  the  base  to  the  summit,  you  see 
them  becoming  continually  more  glorious  and  ethereal,  nearer  to  the  perfect  white, 
the  higher  bands  taking  in  all  the  colours  of  the  underlying  ones  until  the  jasper 
completes  and  embraces  all.  And  the  thought  is  this,  that  the  glory  of  the  perfected 
Church  will  be  made  up,  as  it  were,  of  all  that  it  has  been  and  done  and  suffered 
through  all  the  ages  of  its  history.  In  spite  of  all  evidences  to  the  contrary,  the 
Church  of  to-day  is  stronger  and  more  faithful  and  more  able  to  wrestle  and 
endure,  more  like  her  Master  than  she  has  ever  been  before.  For  she  has  learnt 
something,  and  won  something,  from  every  one  of  her  past  experiences.  The 
fervour  of  the  first  centuries,  the  purity  and  contempt  for  the  world  of  the  monastic 
age,  the  strong  warrior-Hke  faith  and  courage  of  the  Reformation  period,  have 
influenced  her,  moulded  her,  bequeathed  their  best  features  to  her.  And  all  her 
waiting,  all  her  labours,  all  her  conflicts,  are  still  helping  to  supply  the  colours 
which  are  wanted  for  her  perfect  beauty,  so  that  the  jasper  wall  may  be  at  last 
complete.  And  this  truth  holds  of  individual  believers  just  as  fully  as  of  the 
Church.  The  superstructure  of  our  lives,  the  glory  to  which  we  are  growing  in 
Christ,  is  made  up  in  large  measure  of  the  trials  and  struggles  and  patience,  the 
faith  and  hope  and  love,  of  our  present  changeful  experience.  If  you  look  at 
the  solar  spectrum — that  is,  sunlight  divided  into  its  component  rays  by  passage 
through  a  prism — you  will  see  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  there  ;  and  not  only 
these  colours,  but  dark  lines,  thousands  and  thousands  of  them — dark  lines,  and 
quite  mysterious,  for  scientists  cannot  explain  them,  or  say  what  purpose  they 
serve.  Yet  they  are  necessary  parts  of  the  ray,  they  join  with  the  colours  to 
make  the  light  complete.  And  so  it  is  with  our  lives  when  they  are  fashioned 
into  Christ's  perfect  beauty,  made  up  of  many  colours  bright  and  sombre,  from 
sorrowful  blood-red  to  triumphant  purple,  and  crossed  with  dark  lines  innumerable, 
incomprehensible.  We  would  leave  some  of  these  colours  out  if  we  could,  we 
should  like  to  erase  all  the  dark  lines.  We  would  have  no  red,  especially — no 
passion,  no  tears,  no  sorrow.  But  the  result  would  be  miserably  disappointing. 
For  the  royal  purple  is  made  up  of  blue  and  red,  and  the  golden  has  red  for  its 
base,  and  the  perfect  white  light  needs  all  the  colours  and  all  the  dark  lines 
to  make  it  complete.  We  cannot  reach  the  jasper  superstructure  without 
passing  through  the  trial  and  patience  which  are  symbolised  by  the  stones 
below.  But  all  these  things  are  helping  to  form  the  perfect  Christ  in  us. 
The  foundation-stones  are  beautiful  because  Christ  is  in  them,  but  they  are 
not  like  the  top-stone  which  knows  no  darkness,  no  lines  of  sin,  no  incomplete 
ness,  and  where  joy  and  peace  are  stamped  in  perfect  and  eternal  characters. 
We  are  reaching  up  to  that,  Christ's  strong  hand  holding  ours  to  make  the 
ascent  secure.  And  the  superstructure  is  of  jasper.  {J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.) 
The  jasper  wall : — The  picture  of  the  measurement  of  the  city  has  a  colour  and 
tone  of  triumph  in  it.  Heaven  rejoices  in  its  divinely  perfect  proportions.  God 
marks  with  the  exactness  of  love  the  holy  city  that  mirrors  heaven's  own  beauty, 
and  wovild  proclaim  its  lineaments  and  proportions  of  glory  to  all  the  world.    There 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  67^ 

are  some  things  that  are  not  worth  measuring.  Heaven  will  take  no  copy  of  some 
lives,  that  they  may  die  the  sooner.  The  measurement  also  symbolises  heaven's 
inexorable  demand  for  ideal  perfection  in  human  life.  In  the  city  of  God  there 
must  be  no  defect  or  redundancy.  The  vessels  of  God's  glory  must  be  without 
flaw  and  without  alloy.  No  column  in  His  temple  shall  be  broken  or  deficient. 
God  will  not  stop  half-way,  or  be  content  with  rough  approximations  to  His  ideal. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  best  human  structures  must  fail  and  be  condemned.  This 
measuring  is,  therefore,  further,  a  symbol  of  eternal  preservation.  To  "  measure 
off "  implies  a  selection  for  some  purpose  or  other,  and  here  it  is  clearly  for  the 
purpose  of  honour  and  preservation.  In  the  first  verse  of  the  eleventh  chapter  we 
find  "  the  temple  of  God  and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship  therein,"  measured 
in  the  same  way,  while  **  the  court  without  the  temple  "  is  left  unmeasured.  In 
that  passage  the  symbol  is  explained  by  the  assertion  that  the  "  outer  court "  is  so 
far  left  unprotected  that  it  has  been  given  unto  the  nations  for  forty  and  two 
months.  I.  The  first  question  that  presses  for  an  answer  in  any  attempt  to 
interpret  this  symbol  is,  What  relation  does  the  jasper  wall  hold  to  the  general 
structure  and  constitution  of  that  city?  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  "jasper  wall" 
gives  unity  to  the  varied  expanse  of  the  city.  In  the  ancient  conception,  a  city 
without  a  surrounding  wall  scarcely  found  a  place  in  the  mind  at  all,  except  as  a 
picture  of  desolation  and  ruin.  The  myriad-sided  life  of  the  city  and  State  can 
never  be  gathered  into  perfect  harmony  except  within  the  wall  of  jasper,  except  by 
being  pervaded  by  the  Divine  life  in  its  profoundest  manifestation  of  love.  Men 
will  of  a  certainty  remain  scattered,  in  spite  of  all  human  devices,  until  they  are 
united  by  that  transcendent  love  which  comes  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Through  this,  and  through  this  alone,  are  those  strong  conflicting  interests  over- 
come that  separate  men  from  one  another.  2.  Further,  this  wall  of  jasper  marks 
the  extent  of  the  city.  With  the  encompassing  wall  the  city  ends.  The  descrip- 
tion which  John  gives,  therefore,  represents  the  ideal  city  as  being  of  vast  and 
magnificent  extent.  It  is  bounded  by  the  "  jasper  wall " — that  is,  by  nothing  of 
narrower  dimensions  than  the  vast  thought,  purpose,  and  power  of  redeeming  love. 
At  this  point  John  adds  symbol  to  symbol,  in  order  that  there  may  be  no  mistake 
as  to  his  meaning,  and  that  the  meaning  may  be  emphasised  in  the  strongest  way. 
The  length  and  breadth  and  height  of  the  city  are  given  in  symbolic  numbers. 
The  three  are  equal,  and  their  measurement  is  twelve  thousand  furlongs.  That  is, 
we  are  informed  by  a  new  symbol  that  this  city  is  as  vast  as  the  energies  of  the 
Divine  kingdom  of  redeeming  love.  Of  course,  it  is  now  clear  that  the  length  and 
the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  cannot  be  other  than  equal.  In  every  direction  of 
its  life  it  must  reach  the  full  measurement  of  redeeming  power.  As  far  as  the  love 
of  Calvary  can  transform  the  lives  of  men,  as  far  as  it  can  lift  the  thoughts  and 
purposes  and  attainments  of  men  towards  the  lofty  heavens,  so  great  is  the  length, 
the  breadth,  and  the  height  of  the  holy  city.  3.  It  is  instructive  to  note,  further, 
that  the  wall  of  a  city  was  its  great  watch-tower.  Upon  its  summit  the  watchman 
stood  to  take  observation  of  the  country  around,  to  warn  the  city  of  danger,  and  to 
instruct  it  concerning  the  outer  world.  The  walls  of  the  ideal  city  are  not  only 
ramparts,  but  also  watch-towers,  the  place  of  furthest  vision.  The  blind  children 
of  this  world  make  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  the  city  of  redemption  is  a 
narrow  enclosure,  which  hides  from  us  the  wide  and  varied  prospect  which  they 
imagine  lies  before  themselves.  They  pity  us,  and  invite  us  to  leave  the  narrowness 
of  the  Cross,  and  the  fetters  of  redeeming  love,  that  our  vision  may  become  as  free 
as  theirs.  It  is  they  that  are  enclosed  around,  and  cannot  see  afar  off.  The  Cross 
is  the  true  watch-tower  of  the  mind,  as  well  as  of  the  spirit.  It  is  not  only  the 
centre  of  power,  but  also  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  It  is  the  light  of  God  in 
which  "  we  also  shall  see  light."  In  proportion  as  we  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
revelation  of  God  in  Christ,  all  the  vast  realm  of  thought  will  appear  in  its  true 
character  and  proportions  before  us ;  for  the  God-man  is,  in  every  sense,  the  light 
of  the  world.  4.  The  jasper  wall  is,  further,  representative  of  the  defence  of  the 
city.  The  need  of  defence  against  attack  was  probably  the  earliest  reason  for  the 
construction  of  the  ancient  city  walls,  the  other  ideas  of  which  we  have  spoken 
having  afterwards  grown  upon  this  underlying  one.  So  the  ideal  city  is  safe  for 
ever,  guarded  by  this  wall  of  jasper,  which  is  great  and  high.  No  battering  ram 
can  beat  down  these  walls,  for  they  are  constructed  out  of  the  mightiest  forces  of 
omnipotence,  the  forces  of  eternal  grace  and  infinite  love.  II.  A  few  words  will 
sufl&ce  to  show  the  relation  of  the  jasper  wall  to  the  foundations  of  the  city.  The 
first  thing  that  strikes  us  as  impressively  suggestive  is  the  fact  that  the  deepest  base 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

of  the  city  and  its  towering  walls  are  composed  of  the  same  material.  When  we 
begin  to  search  for  the  strength  of  the  twelve  foundations,  John  meets  us  with  the 
assertion :  "  The  foundation  is  jasper."  When  we  raise  our  eyes  to  behold  its 
lofty  ramparts,  and  would  fain  know  what  its  topmost  glory  is  that  mingles  with 
the  skies,  John  again  says :  "  The  building  of  the  wall  thereof  was  jasper."  It  is 
the  symbolic  representation  of  the  utterance  of  the  Divine  Saviour,  who  says :  "  I 
am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last,  the  beginning  and  the  end." 
In  Christ,  the  effulgence  of  the  Father's  glory,  the  first  foundations  are  laid  of  the 
city  of  a  glorified  human  life,  and  in  Him  its  final  splendour  will  be  realised.  The 
name  of  Jesus  is  the  all-potent  source  of  new  life  for  the  fallen  sons  of  earth,  and 
it  shall  be  the  eternal  boast  and  wonder  of  the  glorified.  As  is  the  lowest  founda- 
tion of  the  holy  city,  so  shall  be  its  supremest  splendour.  The  Cross  can  never  be 
superseded.  The  wall  of  jasper  is  a  living  growth  out  of  the  foundations  of 
precious  stones.  This  living  relation  in  the  growth  of  the  ideal  city  is  determined 
by  eternal  and  inexorable  law.  The  city's  jasper  wall  cannot  be  built  unless  the 
foundations  are  set  in  precious  stones,  and  the  deepest  of  these  is  jasper.  Passing 
from  symbolic  language  to  plainer  speech,  the  quality  of  a  city's  life  cannot  rise 
higher  than  its  deepest  foundations.  The  nature  of  the  principles  and  ideals  upon 
which  men  proceed  will  determine  the  value  and  permanence  of  such  a  social  life 
as  they  are  likely  to  create.  Upon  foundations  of  iron  and  brass  nothing  better 
than  iron  and  brass  can  ever  be  built.  If  our  ideals  fall  short  of  the  divinest  that 
are  possible  to  men,  if  our  deepest  principles  fall  short  of  the  glory  of  the  eternal 
skies,  then  the  building  of  the  ideal  city  becomes  for  ever  impossible  for  us.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  foundations  of  precious  stones  cannot  fail  to  issue  in  the  wall 
of  jasper.  When  Divine  forces  form  the  base,  the  city  is  certain  to  rise  in  the  like- 
ness of  God.  Out  of  the  love  of  the  Cross  a  kingdom  of  love  shall  of  necessity 
grow.  All  ye  that  desire  to  build  the  jasper  wall,  remember  that  it  cannot  be  built 
except  on  the  jasper  foundation.  III.  There  are  one  or  two  points  remaining  in 
the  characterisation  of  the  jasper  wall  which  must  receive  brief  notice.  One 
consists  in  the  measurement  of  the  thickness  of  the  wall,  which  is  declared  to  be  a 
hundred  and  forty  and  four  cubits — that  is,  twelve  cubits  by  twelve.  This  is  clearly, 
once  more,  the  number  that  symbolises  redemption,  and  so  brings  the  thickness  of 
the  city- wall  into  line  with  the  twelve  thousand  furlongs  that  measure  the  length 
and  breadth  and  height  of  it.  In  the  last  place,  it  is  instructive  to  note  that  the 
city  when  measured  proves  to  be  an  exact  cube.  ♦*  The  length  and  the  breadth  and 
the  height  thereof  are  equal."  The  cube  has  from  ancient  times  been  regarded  as 
a  symbol  of  ideal  perfection.  Here  human  life  is  at  last  full  and  complete,  having 
found  the  complete  cycle  of  its  power.  Probably,  however,  John's  picture  is  more 
immediately  connected  with  the  form  of  the  "  holy  of  holies  "  in  the  tabernacle, 
which  was  also  a  perfect  cube,  no  doubt  based  upon  the  ancient  idea  of  that  form 
as  being  specially  perfect  and  sacred.    {John  Thomas,  M.A.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  And  fhe  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished  with 
all  manner  of  precious  stones. — The  foundation  stones : — Our  text  is  part  of 
John's  description  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  It  is  the  living  city  of  the  living  God. 
I  say,  emphatically,  the  "living"  city,  for  the  apostle  is  thinking  not  so  much  of 
a  place  as  of  a  people.  The  imagery,  regarded  superficially,  would  suggest  to  ua 
a  literal  city,  with  actual  walls  and  houses  and  streets  ;  but  a  closer  examination 
shows  us  that  this  was  hardly  the  writer's  intention.  He  tells  us,  for  instance,  that 
the  twelve  foundations  bear  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb,  that  God 
Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it,  and  that  it  is  not  lighted  by  sun  or 
moon,  but  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.  From  all  which  we  conclude  that  it  is 
not  a  material  but  a  spiritual  city — a  city  whose  stones  are  living  souls,  whose 
pearly  gates  and  streets  are  resplendent,  not  with  material  radiance,  but  with  the 
more  ethereal  light  of  moral  and  spiritual  beauty.  It  is  a  city  built  and  com- 
pacted together  by  Christ — Christ  Himself  being  both  the  foundation  and  the 
superstructure  of  it.  In  a  word,  it  is  the  redeemed  Church  of  God.  Not  the 
Church  as  it  actually  exists.  It  is  the  bride  adorned  for  her  marriage  without  spot 
or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing.  Let  us  keep  this  in  mind  as  we  seek  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  imagery.  I.  There  is  nothing  base  or  common  in  this  citt.  Every 
part  is  most  beautiful  and  every  part  most  precious.  It  is  this  feature  of  the 
description  which  fills  us  with  a  sense  of  rapture.  Now,  remember  we  are  speak- 
ing of  a  living  city,  not  of  mere  dead  walls  and  buildings.  The  meaning,  then,  is 
that  every  member  of  the  glorified  Church,  every  living  stone  on  those  living  walls, 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION,  679 

is  of  perfect  beauty,  and  of  priceless  worth,  most  precious  in  the  sight  of  God, 
most  precious  in  each  other's  sight.  Once  common  dust,  stained  with  sin,  fit  only 
to  be  trampled  on  by  God  and  all  pure  angels,  now  wrought  by  a  Divine  alchemy 
into  radiant  pearls  and  precious  stones,  so  that  even  the  place  where  God  puts  His 
feet  is  glorious.  Now  every  streak  of  imperfection  has  been  removed,  every  fault 
repaired.  In  the  olden  time  alchemists  spent  weary  days  and  nights,  and  wore  their 
flesh  to  bone  and  their  brains  to  madness,  in  striving  to  change  the  common  metals 
into  precious  gold.  Of  course  their  labour  was  in  vain  ;  and  yet  the  dream  had  a 
foundation  of  reality.  Christ,  the  Divine  transformer,  has  succeeded  in  a  far 
grander  sense  than  they  thought  and  intended.  There,  on  the  radiant  walls  and 
streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  are  the  proofs  of  His  success.  The  common  char- 
coal and  the  brilliant  diamond  are,  as  you  know,  of  the  same  material.  Each  of 
them  is  simply  a  lump  of  carbon,  and  the  chemist  can  actually  change  the  splendid 
gem  into  dull  black  charcoal.  But  there  his  power  ends ;  he  cannot  change  it  back 
again.  And  the  world  and  the  devil  can  put  noble  souls  into  their  crucibles  and 
turn  them  out  black  and  lustreless.  Their  genius  suffices  for  that  transformation, 
and  then  fails.  But  Christ  takes  these  marred  elements  and  touches  them  back 
into  such  vivid  splendour  that  they  shine  like  jasper  on  the  heavenly  walls.  And 
the  Church  of  the  Apocalypse  is  a  treasure-house  filled  with  these  Christ-wrought 
jewels.  It  is  the  communion  of  beautiful  souls,  where  "  the  feeblest  is  as  David 
and  David  as  an  angel  of  God,"  where  "  a  man  is  more  precious  than  the  gold  of 
Ophir,"  where  "  each  esteems  other  better  than  himself,"  and  where  the  spiritual 
beauty  of  each  one  is  the  wealth  of  all.  This  is  not,  as  some  suppose,  the  setting 
forth  of  a  heaven  of  material  splendour — a  magnified  jeweller's  shop,  as  it  has 
been  irreverently  called.  It  is  rather  the  exaltation  of  the  moral  over  the  material. 
It  means  that  the  true  gold  and  pearls  of  the  universe  are  the  graces  of  God's 
elect  souls.  '*  The  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  were  garnished  with  all 
manner  of  precious  stones."  II.  The  imagery  of  our  text  suggests  infinite 
VAKiETY.  "  All  manner  of  precious  stones."  The  apostle  enumerates  twelve  of 
them,  but  these  twelve  are  only  representative  of  the  greater  number.  Similarly 
the  twelve  gates  of  the  city  are  pearls,  but  no  two  alike,  for  each  several  gate  is  of 
one  distinct  pearl.  Further  on,  the  tree  of  life,  growing  in  the  midst  of  the  city, 
yields  twelve  manner  of  fruit :  and  so  it  is  everywhere.  There  is  only  one  feature 
of  general  likeness.  Every  part  shines  with  the  radiance  of  the  jasper.  The 
apostles  of  Christ  were  just  as  diverse  in  mind,  manner,  and  disposition  as  any 
twelve  men  could  be.  James  was  a  thorough  conservative,  Paul  as  thorough  a 
radical.  Peter  was  bold  and  enterprising,  Andrew  timid  and  retiring.  John  was 
imaginative  and  sanguine,  Thomas  prosaic  and  despondent.  Yet  they  were  all 
vessels  made  meet  for  the  Master's  service  ;  all  alike  sanctified ;  all  alike  filled  with 
the  Divine  Spirit ;  and  now  they  are  built  up  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  each  one  with 
his  individuality  preserved,  each  one  a  precious  stone  beautiful  and  glorious  after 
its  own  kind.  This  living  city  has  room  for  all  manner  of  souls.  See  how  Christ 
gathered  them  in.  Fishermen  and  sailors,  rude  in  speech  and  uncultured  in  mind ; 
publicans,  inclined  to  cautiousness  and  calculation  ;  scribes,  full  of  book-learning, 
exact  and  formal ;  Pharisees,  in  whom  ritualism  was  ingrained  ;  Koman  centurions, 
soldierly  and  imperious ;  physicians,  like  Luke.  An  endless  variety,  indeed,  whose 
peculiarities  Christ's  service  would  not  remove,  but  only  purify  and  deepen.  Now 
they  shine  all  manner  of  precious  stones  in  the  Holy  City,  making  heaven's  inter- 
course delightful.  How  significant  are  the  words  which  follow  our  text !  "  The 
kings  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory  and  honour  unto  it " ;  and  further  on, 
"  They  shall  bring  the  glory  and  honour  of  the  nations  into  it."  "  The  kings  of 
the  earth  " ;  that  is,  not  the  Csesars,  and  Constantines,  and  Charlemagnes,  but  the 
more  royal  souls  who  are  kings  by  the  imposition  of  a  Divine  hand.  And  "  the 
glory  and  honour  of  the  nations,"  the  most  faithful  of  the  Israelites,  the  noblest  of 
the  Greeks,  the  purest  Eomans,  the  most  brilliant  of  Frenchmen,  the  most  artistic 
of  Italians,  the  strongest  among  German  and  Anglo-Saxon  thinkers — all  of  them, 
with  the  fine  qualities  which  distinguished  them  as  nations,  preserved  and  sancti- 
fied La  Christ.  The  most  gifted  minds,  the  sweetest  singers,  the  sublimest  poets, 
the  rarest  geniuses,  the  bravest  soldiers,  the  noblest  patriots  and  statesmen — all  the 
glory  and  honour  of  the  nations.  Christ  claims  the  best  of  every  kind  to  garnish 
the  living  walls.  Chrysostom  and  Augustine  its  orators,  Pascal  and  Malebranche 
its  philosophers,  Newton  and  Kepler  its  scientists,  Dante  and  Milton  its  poets, 
Michael  Angelo  and  Titian  its  artists.  Men  who  were  as  devout  in  faith  as  they 
were  gigantic  in  intellect,  and  these,  and  thousands  of  others  as  noble  as  they,  have 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

brought  their  honour  and  glory  into  the  city.  Oh,  what  a  building  that  will  be 
when  it  is  completed !  What  a  society  of  elect  and  choice  souls  when  every 
variety  of  human  disposition,  every  manner  of  gift  purified  and  immortalised,  are 
gathered  together  in  one  redeemed  company !  "  The  foundation  of  the  wall  of  the 
city  was  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones."  III.  The  imagery  of  our 
text  suggests  the  mode  of  Chbistian  growth.  The  apostle  enumerates  singly  and 
in  their  proper  order  the  twelve  foundation  stones.  He  must  have  had  some  distinct 
meaning  in  this.  The  precious  stones  rising  one  above  the  other  would  represent, 
if  we  could  only  interpret  them  correctly,  the  growth,  the  upbuilding  of  the  Holy 
City — the  Church.  And  as  the  Church  is  built  up  exactly  after  the  manner  of  the 
individual  believer,  we  have  also  Christian  growth  represented  in  the  picture.  Now 
look  for  a  moment  at  the  twelve  rows.  There  is  first,  as  we  might  expect,  the 
jasper,  which  represents  Christ.  All  living,  growing  faith  starts  from  that  as 
foundation.  There  can  be  no  enduring  building  on  any  other  base.  Next  comes 
the  sapphire,  a  rich  blue  stone,  like  the  azure  of  the  sky — that  blue  sky  which  is 
the  everlasting  type  of  calmness  and  peace.  So  this  sapphire  represents  the  second 
stage  of  Christian  growth,  the  indescribable  peace  and  calm  which  come  from  rest- 
ing on  Christ,  and  from  the  sense  of  forgiveness.  The  third  is  the  chalcedony, 
white,  and  yet  not  unmixed  white.  It  is  the  first  purity  of  the  Christian  life,  the 
purity  of  the  young  fervent  disciple,  not  perfect,  not  altogether  unselfish — for  the 
beginnings  of  religious  life  are  always  too  self -regarding — and  yet  very  fair  to  look 
upon.  The  fourth  is  the  emerald,  a  flashing  green  pearl,  the  colour  which  all  poets 
of  all  nations  have  chosen  as  the  symbol  of  hope,  and  so  indicative  of  the  hope 
which  glows  in  the  disciple's  breast,  enduing  him  for  trial,  and  spurring  him  on  to 
all  his  endeavours.  Then  comes  the  sardonyx,  a  stone  with  a  white  surface  on  a 
dark  ground.  See  what  that  means — the  fervour  of  the  first  love  is  gone,  and  the 
time  of  temptation  and  partial  backsliding  has  come.  The  dark  ground,  the  old 
nature,  which  was  deemed  dead,  reappears,  thrusting  itself  up  under  the  Christian 
purity.  Then  follows  the  deep  blood-red  sardius,  the  type  of  suffering  and  patience 
and  death — the  type  pre-eminently  of  Christ;  for  you  remember,  "He  that  sat 
upon  the  throne  was  to  look  upon  like  a  jasper  and  a  sardine  stone."  The  sardius 
after  the  sardonyx — suffering  to  correct  impurity.  For  when  the  Church  has  lost 
the  fervour  of  its  faith  and  the  glow  of  its  love,  and  the  dark  world  spirit  is 
reappearing  under  its  white  professions,  then  nothing  can  avail  but  a  new  baptism  in 
Christ,  a  fresh  draught  of  His  cup  of  martyrdom,  fellowship  in  His  sufferings,  and 
conformity  to  His  death.  Trial,  affliction,  tears,  are  denoted  by  the  blood-red 
sardius.  Next  is  the  chrysolyte,  washed  with  gold,  radiant  with  the  colour  of  gold, 
showing  how  the  Church  and  the  single  believer  come  forth  from  their  baptism  of 
suffering  refined  and  glorious,  like  gold.  Then  the  beryl,  blue  again,  to  represent 
God's  heavenly  calm,  but  a  richer,  deeper  and  clearer  blue  than  the  sapphire, 
because  that  second  peace  which  results  from  renewed  baptism  with  Christ  and  a 
share  in  His  sufferings  is  deeper  and  more  enduring.  The  ninth  is  the  topaz,  where 
the  green  tints  mingle  with  the  gold.  It  is  the  exquisite  commingling  of  joys  realised 
and  joys  yet  expected — a  large  measure  of  heaven  now  and  a  confident  waiting  for 
more.  The  tenth  is  the  chyrsoprasus,  gold  and  blue.  The  riches  of  God's  love,  the 
wealth  of  increasing  graces,  and  the  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding.  All 
through  the  colours  are  becoming  purer  and  deeper  and  more  refined.  Last  are 
the  jacinth  and  the  amethyst,  the  darker  and  the  lighter  purple,  the  colour  which 
in  all  ages  has  done  service  as  the  emblem  of  victory  and  triumph,  the  colour  into 
which  the  rainbow  refines  itself  at  last — for  violet  is  the  topmost  of  the  rainbow's 
bands,  and  points  upward  to  the  deep  heavens'  hinting  at  far-off  glories.  So  the 
Church  has  grown,  through  its  long,  wayward,  distracted,  man-vexed,  God-guided 
history.  Now  pure  and  fervent  and  full  of  unspeakable  calm ;  and  now  falling 
from  its  first  faith  and  love,  and  needing  to  be  crucified  with  Christ  again  and 
purified  afresh  by  baptisms  of  martyrdom  and  pain;  but  ever  rising  to  clearer 
knowledge,  to  larger  charity,  to  purer  faith,  and  to  the  still  far-off  hills  of  triumph. 
And  thus  do  we  rise  from  glory  to  glory.  And  yet  that  is  not  the  last.  For  above  the 
amethyst  is  the  jasper  again—"  the  superstructure  of  the  wall  is  of  jasper."  That 
means  like  Christ  at  last.  (J.  G.  Greenhovgh,  M.A.)  The  street  of  the  city  was 
pure  gold. — The  golden  street : — The  "  street  of  the  city  "  stands  for  the  lowest 
range  of  its  life.  In  its  foundations  there  must  exist  vast  and  eternal  principles  to 
make  its  many-sided  life  possible.  Its  "  wall  "  of  unity  and  defence  must  be  equally 
resplendent.  In  its  "  gates  "  the  vastest  thoughts  and  forces  and  aims  of  the  city 
find  expression.    But  in  the  "  street "  that  which  is  low  and  obscure  finds  its  place. 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  681 

There  the  narrower  and  lower  interests  of  life  are  centred,  the  little  wrangling  in 
the  bazaar  or  market-place,  the  little  cares  for  daily  bread.  Such  a  symbol  would 
not  deny  that  there  may  be  greatness  and  nobility  in  the  street.  1.  The  ideal  city 
is  here  presented  as  possessing  lower  and  higher  ranges  of  life.  Looking  at  the 
"city  of  human  life"  as  it  is  in  actual  existence  at  present,  the  "street  "must 
correspond  with  what  we  call  in  an  emphatic  way  the  earthly  relations  of  life,  of 
which  the  human  body  is  the  typical  medium  and  symbol.  The  lowest  rung  of 
life  is  that  which  has  to  do  with  the  necessities  and  cravings  of  our  physical 
existence.  These  constitute  an  influence  that  ever  tends  to  drag  us  downward,  to 
lower  our  ideals,  to  narrow  our  vision,  and  to  dwarf  our  action.  This  antagonism 
between  the  higher  and  the  lower,  between  the  "  foundations  "  and  the  "  street,"  is 
forcibly  brought  out  in  our  Saviour's  injunction:  "Do  not  worry,  saying.  What 
shall  we  eat  ?  or.  What  shall  we  drink  ?  or.  Wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  ? 
Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall 
be  added  unto  you."  Yet  these  earthly  needs  are  ever  with  us,  and  the  battle  and 
struggle  for  earthly  things  fills  a  large  place  in  human  life.  Though  we  cannot 
live  by  bread  alone,  we  cannot  yet  live  without  bread.  The  "  street  "  problem  in 
our  cities  is  one  of  vast  proportions.  The  earthly  side  of  hfe  looms  large,  and 
threatens  to  overwhelm  the  others.  It  is  in  the  corresponding  relation  in  the  ideal 
city  that  we  must  look  for  the  street  of  gold.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  then,  that 
these  earthly  relations  are  in  themselves  an  evil.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  a 
valuable  addition  to  the  sum  of  human  life,  just  as  the  street  is  to  the  city.  The 
evil  consists  in  the  abuse  of  them,  in  their  degradation  through  sin  and  selfishness, 
or  in  giving  thein  a  position  of  false  pre-eminence.  The  "  walls  "  must  not  be 
flung  down  in  order  that  the  "  street  "  may  be  seen.  Yet  without  its  street  the  city 
would  be  mutilated.  Leaving  the  metaphors  into  which  John's  picture  so  strongly 
tempts  us,  let  us  remember  that  the  total  of  human  life  is  greatly  enriched  by  its 
earthly  side.  The  wider  the  range  of  desire,  sensibility,  and  consciousness,  the 
nobler  are  the  possibilities  of  power.  A  life  without  higher  and  lower  elements  in 
it  would  be  a  duU  monotony,  a  stagnant  simplicity,  like  the  same  note  struck  for 
ever  on  the  same  string.  To  make  the  rich  music  of  harmony  you  must  have 
higher  and  lower  notes.  The  secret  cf  the  wonder  of  our  human  Uves  is  found  in 
the  great  ranges  of  higher  and  lower,  of  which  they  are  composed.  St.  John's 
symbols  tell  us  that  the  life  of  the  ideal  city  will  be  analogous  to  the  present  in 
this,  that  it  will  range  all  the  way  from  the  heavenly  to  the  earthly,  from  the 
spiritual  to  the  corporeal.  There  will  still  be  earthly  interests  to  attract,  earthly 
tasks  to  perform,  earthly  pleasures  to  enjoy,  and  earthly  ends  to  gain.  The  life  of 
earth,  in  as  far  as  it  is  innocent  and  pure,  will  be  there  in  all  its  completeness.  If 
the  ideal  city  can  in  any  sense  be  realised  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  it  can  only 
be  as  a  smaller  society  within  the  larger  whole  of  human  life.  For  nothing  appears 
to  be  clearer  in  the  New  Testament  than  that  there  will  be  ungodliness  in  the  world 
at  the  time  of  His  coming,  and  even  ungodliness  of  a  gross,  arrogant,  and  powerful 
kind.  2.  So  we  are  led  to  another  thought — namely,  that  in  the  ideal  city  there 
shall  be  nothing  commonplace  even  in  hfe's  lowest  range.  I  think  most  will 
instinctively  feel  at  this  point  in  our  exposition  that  there  is  beautiful  appropriate- 
ness in  the  selection  of  gold  to  describe  the  lowest  element  in  the  life  of  the  holy 
city.  So  in  this  city  there  is  nothing  common  or  unclean.  The  street  of  the  city 
of  our  life  is  at  present  full  of  commonplace.  "Very  frequently  it  is  but  wood,  hay, 
and  stubble.  And  there  are  unfortunate  moments  when  we  even  trample  it  into 
mire  and  clay.  The  dead  level  of  earthly  cares  and  interests  seems  often  to  mock 
the  dignity  of  the  spirit  within  us,  and  many  of  life's  tasks  and  experiences  seem 
trivial  and  mean.  But  in  the  holy  city  the  lowest  interests  and  powers  shall  be 
exalted  into  dignity.  All  the  stubble  of  our  daily  life  shall  disappear.  The  street 
of  the  city  shall  be  of  pure  gold.  There  are  two  or  three  ways  in  which  this  may 
be  achieved.  In  the  full  glory  of  the  ideal  city  there  will,  without  doubt,  be  a  con- 
siderable elevation  in  our  earthly  faculties  and  earthly  relations.  The  children  of 
the  resurrection  shall  stand  together  upon  a  higher  plane  of  life.  Those  things  in 
our  present  earthly  existence  that  are  most  gross  and  incidental  shaU  disappear 
entirely,  while  all  that  is  essential  in  the  earthly  and  corporeal  part  of  our  nature 
shall  be  preserved  and  greatly  exalted.  A  great  elevation  of  earthly  relations  will 
also  be  secured  by  their  due  subordination.  It  is  almost  a  truism,  although  a 
paradox,  that  the  undue  exaltation  of  earthly  things  effects  their  degradation. 
What  is  beautilul  and  appropriate  in  its  due  place  becomes  hideous  and  repulsive 
when  it  is  exalted  beyond  its  measure.    By  this  means  many  earthly  relations  that 


682  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

in  their  due  place  add  to  the  symmetry  and  beauty  of  human  life  are  so  used  as  to 
make  life  a  hollow  and  distorted  thing.  Thus  the  gold  is  perverted  into  dross,  and 
the  precious  becomes  injurious.  So,  when  all  things  shall  be  subordinated  accord- 
ing to  their  measure,  the  whole  of  life  will  rise  in  value,  and  that  which  is  lowHest 
shall  become  exceeding  precious.  "  The  street  shall  be  of  pure  gold."  Further, 
the  lowest  relations  of  life  will  be  raised  by  the  Diviner  spirit  that  shall  be  infused 
into  them.  Much  of  our  life  is  common  and  trivial,  because  we  exercise  it  in  a 
common  and  trivial  spirit.  If  we  partake  of  the  common  meal  in  the  spirit  of 
holiness  and  love,  it  is  no  more  common.  It  also  becomes  a  sacrament,  a  holy 
thing,  and  a  means  of  grace  to  the  soul.  In  this  way  shall  the  lower  ranges  of  life 
in  the  ideal  city  become  greatly  exalted.  3.  Further,  in  this  description  of  the 
street  of  the  city  there  is  a  distinct  indication  of  a  special  process  of  purification 
having  been  performed.  In  the  eighteenth  verse  the  word  "  pure  "  is  used  twice,  so 
as  to  give  it  special  emphasis.  "  Pure  gold  "  is  constantly  used  in  the  Scriptures  to 
symbolise  that  which  has  been  purified,  and  especially  by  fire.  The  application  of 
this  part  of  the  symbol  is  obvious  and  striking.  The  lower  ranges  of  life  are  pre- 
eminently those  in  which  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  appear.  But,  as  a  kind  of  com- 
pensation for  this,  it  is  in  this  lower  region  of  life  that  the  fires  of  purification  burn 
most  frequently  and  effectively.  The  great  discipline  of  men  is  carried  on  amid 
the  sorrows,  the  disappointments,  and  the  crosses  of  daily  life.  The  great  fires  of 
a  purifying  Providence  sweep  through  the  streets  of  the  city,  burn  up  the  dross,  and 
purify  the  gold.  4.  In  the  last  place,  John's  symbol  teaches  us  that  in  the  ideal 
city  the  lowest  range  of  life  will  be  a  mirror  of  the  highest.  The  "  street  of  the 
city  "  was  pure  gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass.  Leaving  the  language  of  symbol, 
all  the  lowest  interests  of  the  holy  city  wiU  reveal  the  presence  and  the  power  of  the 
higher.  In  every  corporeal  activity,  in  every  earthly  function,  even  in  the  lowliest 
tastes,  the  spiritual  grandeur  of  the  soul  will  be  seen,  and  the  spiritual  ends  of  the 
life  will  be  revealed.  To  raise  the  earthly  that  it  may  become  the  mirror  of  the 
heavenly  should  be  our  constant  aim.     {John  Thomas,  M.A.) 

Ver.  21.  And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls. — The  gates  of  pearl : — It  was 
no  fantastic  vision  separated  from  all  earthly  associations  that  the  seer  of  Patmos 
beheld.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  linked  to  all  that  was  dear  and  sacred  to  himself 
and  to  his  race.  The  forms  were  the  same,  but  the  materials  were  changed.  The 
materials  of  the  earthly  city  were  substances  that  faded  and  decayed,  for  they  had 
only  a  temporary  purpose  to  serve ;  those  of  the  heavenly  were  unchangeable  and 
indestructible,  matter  in  its  most  sublime  and  enduring  form  connected  with  the 
unceasing  service  of  bodies  and  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect.  Not  from  his 
recollections  of  his  own  old  home  could  the  unique  feature  of  the  gates  of  pearl 
have  been  derived.  It  must  have  been  suggested  by  the  circumstances  of  his  island 
home,  as  Peter's  vision  on  the  housetop  at  Joppa  took  shape  from  the  hunger  of  his 
body  and  the  occupation  of  the  tanner  with  whom  he  lodged.  There  was  nothing 
to  remind  him  of  the  gates  of  pearl  in  the  earthly  Jerusalem.  I.  The  numbeb  of 
THE  GATES.  There  were  twelve  of  these  gates;  three  on  the  east,  three  on  the  north, 
three  on  the  south,  and  three  on  the  west.  What  a  contrast  does  this  feature  of 
the  heavenly  city  present  to  the  narrowness  and  exclusiveness  of  the  old  Jewish 
pohty  !  The  Jews  were  the  hermits  of  the  human  race.  They  were  kept  apart 
from  all  other  nations  on  the  high  plateau  which  had  walls  of  mountain,  desert, 
river-trench,  and  stormy  sea  hemming  them  in  on  every  side.  It  was  considered 
unlawful  for  a  Jew  to  keep  company  with  or  come  in  to  one  of  another  nation.  The 
people  prided  themselves  on  their  exclusive  privileges  as  the  favourites  of  heaven, 
and  pushed  to  an  extreme  the  restrictions  of  their  religion.  Even  St.  John  himself 
could  not  altogether  divest  his  mind  of  his  Jewish  prejudices.  He  could  hardly  yet 
realise  the  idea  that  the  world  was  greater  in  God's  eyes  than  Judsea.  Unlike  the 
little  Jewish  capital,  type  of  its  narrow  creed,  the  heavenly  city  was  vast  as  the 
largest  thought  or  hope  could  compass,  a  perfect  cube  of  twelve  thousand  furlongs, 
capable  of  containing  all  the  cities  of  the  world  within  its  circuit.  Through  the 
earthly  Jerusalem  no  river  ran,  no  highway  passed.  Its  gates  were  shut  for  safety 
and  security  in  its  mountain  fastness.  But  through  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  the 
broad  full  river  of  life  flowed ;  and  through  its  gates  or  up  the  river  the  nations 
brought  their  wealth  into  it.  Through  its  gates,  open  to  the  four  quarters  of  the 
globe,  a  multitude  which  no  man  could  number  of  all  nations  and  kindreds  and 
people  and  tongues  had  entered  in.  If  there  was  one  thing  especially  opposed  to 
the  whole  tenor  of  Jewish  thought,  it  was  Christ's  command  to  go  into  all  the  world 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  683 

and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  And  to  us  in  the  Christian  Church,  who 
have  been  placed  on  a  more  elevated  standing-point,  and  have  been  educated  by 
eighteen  centuries  of  Christian  experience,  the  range  of  the  Divine  regard  seems  as 
limited  as  ever.  We  are  accustomed  to  hear  about  the  strait  gate  and  the  narrow 
way  and  the  few  who  find  it ;  and  we  make  out  of  the  saying  a  straitened  faith  and 
a  narrow  gospel.  We  need,  indeed,  the  vision  of  the  vast  heavenly  city — with  its 
twelve  gates  pointing  to  every  part  of  the  compass,  and  its  multitude,  which  no 
man  can  number,  out  of  every  nation — to  correct  our  narrow,  selfish  judgments  of 
men,  and  to  enlarge  our  hopes  of  the  destiny  of  the  race.  That  vision  is  the  highest 
illustration  of  the  teaching  of  Scripture  by  precept  and  example,  that  God  is  no 
respecter  of  persons.  But  while  there  are  many  modes  of  entrance  into  the 
heavenly  city  corresponding  to  the  varying  conditions  and  circumstances  of  men, 
there  is  only  one  way  of  salvation.  The  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  although 
twelve  in  number  and  placed  on  different  sides,  are  nevertheless  composed  of  the 
same  material.  Every  several  gate  is  of  one  pearl.  It  is  the  one  Cross  that  draws  all 
men  to  the  Saviour.  It  is  by  the  rugged,  tear-stained  path  to  Calvary  that  the  Good 
Shepherd  finds  every  lost  sheep  straying  in  the  wilderness  and  brings  it  back  to  the 
fold.  We  are  told  that  the  gates  are  not  shut  day  or  night.  They  are  not  needed 
for  defence  or  security  like  those  of  the  earthly  city,  for  the  inhabitants  dwell  in  a 
peaceful  habitation,  and  in  a  sure  dwelling  and  in  a  quiet  resting-place.  Like  the 
broken  sword  laid  in  the  grave  are  the  gates  of  the  celestial  city.  Their  existence 
reminds  the  inhabitants  of  a  former  condition  of  warfare  and  insecurity,  while 
their  open  state  shows  the  contrast  between  the  old  guarded  fortress,  exposed  to 
continual  alarms,  and  the  present  freedom  and  enlargement  of  the  quiet  habitation, 
defended  only  by  the  glory  of  God,  as  the  wide  border  of  Canaan  was  guarded  by 
angel  sentinels  during  the  keeping  of  the  solemn  feasts.  For  beauty  therefore,  not 
for  use,  the  heavenly  city  has  its  twelve  gates.  All  that  might  cause  fear  or  a 
feeling  of  insecurity  will  be  gone  for  ever  ;  but  all  that  will  remind  the  redeemed  of 
the  way  by  which  they  had  been  led  in  the  past,  all  that  will  enhance  the  value  of 
the  Saviour's  love  and  serve  to  deepen  their  own  peace,  will  be  kept  before  their 
minds  by  everlasting  memorials.  II.  The  material  of  which  the  gates  were 
COMPOSED.  Every  several  gate  was  of  one  pearl.  What  a  beautiful  symbol  this  is  ! 
Death  is  the  gate  by  which  every  one  must  enter  the  heavenly  city.  And  what  a  dark 
and  gloomy  appearance  does  it  present  to  us  on  this  earthly  side  !  Sin  has  done 
everything  possible  to  make  the  gate  unsightly  to  poor  creatures  of  sense.  But  how 
different  is  the  entrance  into  the  heavenly  life !  We  pass  through  the  iron  gate  of 
death,  and  looking  back  from  the  other  side,  from  the  golden  street  of  the  celestial 
city,  we  see  it  transformed  into  a  gate  of  pearl.  All  its  gloom  has  disappeared ;  all 
its  rehcs  of  mortality  have  vanished.  It  is  a  triumphal  arch  for  the  passage  of 
those  who  have  been  made  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  them. 
How  strange  will  be  the  transition  to  many  of  God's  timid  saints  who  are  in  bondage 
all  their  Ufetime  to  the  fear  of  death,  who  dread  every  allusion  to  it,  and  keep  every 
object  and  association  connected  with  it  away  from  their  eye  and  their  mind ! 
Through  darkness  into  light,  through  pain  and  weeping  into  everlasting  joy,  through 
fear  and  dread  into  a  bright  and  blessed  assurance  for  evermore ;  the  gate  of  iron 
changed  into  a  gate  of  pearl ;  that  which  was  an  object  of  the  utmost  abhorrence 
into  an  object  of  admiration  unbounded  I  How  much  do  these  gates  of  pearl  say 
to  the  redeemed  souls  that  have  passed  through  them !  To  the  inner  ear  these 
gates  of  pearl,  set  up  where  there  is  no  more  sea,  speak  of  the  far-off  vanished  seas 
of  earth,  through  whose  dangers  the  redeemed  escaped  safe  to  land.  None,  too, 
can  gaze  upon  the  gates  of  pearl  without  being  reminded  of  their  wonderful 
deliverances,  when  the  Lord  "  drew  them  out  of  great  waters  "  and  cheered  them 
with  a  precious  promise  like  a  pearl  found  in  the  depth — "When  thou  passest 
through  the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  through  the  rivers  they  shall  not  over- 
flow thee."  They  cannot  think  of  the  storm  without  thinking  of  Him  who  cara*» 
through  the  storm  to  their  help,  and  said  to  the  waves  within  and  without,  •'  Peacp, 
be  still."  How  were  these  gates  of  pearl  formed  ?  The  walls  of  the  heavenly  cii^ 
are  formed  of  jewels,  each  of  which  was  crystallised  in  the  dark  depths  of  the  mine, 
under  the  pressure  of  rocks,  by  igneous  or  aqueous  agency.  From  sand  and  clay 
and  coal,  and  other  worthless  or  repulsive  substances,  they  were  sublimed  into 
their  present  beautiful  forms  and  hues,  as  the  blossoms  of  the  mineral  kingdom.  But 
the  truth  that  what  is  fairest  and  most  precious  is  obtained  only  through  sore  and 
long-continued  struggle,  which  the  jewelled  walls  witness  to,  is  attested  in  a  more 
tender  and  touching  way  by  the  gates  of  pearl.    This  substance  is  not  of  mineral 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

but  of  animal  formation.  A  pearl  is  caused  by  tbe  irritation  of  a  minute  parasite, 
or  by  the  presence  of  a  particle  of  sand  or  other  extraneous  matter  accidentally 
introduced  between  the  mantle  and  the  shell  of  a  species  of  mussel.  The  creature 
cannot  get  rid  of  it,  and  therefore  to  allay  the  irritation,  covers  it  over  with  a  series 
of  layers  of  nacre  or  pearly  matter.  This  smooth,  round  shining  object,  which  feels 
BO  soft  and  pleasant  to  the  touch,  which  reflects  the  light  in  a  tender  way  like  snow 
or  moonlight,  which  is  so  precious  that  it  is  deemed  worthy  of  a  place  in  the  crown 
of  a  monarch,  is  caused  by  a  struggle  with  difficulties,  an  effort  to  overcome  a 
trial;  subliming  by  a  wonderful  alchemy,  by  the  victorious  power  of  life,  into 
enduring  patience  a  source  of  irritation,  turning  a  worthless  grain  of  sand  into  a 
pearl.  The  fact  therefore  that  the  heavenly  gates  are  made  of  a  substance  with 
such  a  remarkable  history  as  this,  irresistibly  suggests  the  trials  by  which  those  who 
pass  through  them  are  made  meet  for  their  abundant  entrance  into  the  city.  That 
gate  speaks  of  temptations  vanquished,  of  degree  of  excellence  reached  through 
Buffering,  of  a  Divine  beauty  destined  to  supersede  every  mark  of  sorrow  and  be 
eternal.  Who  would  have  thought  that  out  of  the  rough,  broken,  coarse-looking 
shell,  as  it  appears  on  the  outside,  and  by  the  labours  and  sufferings  of  a  creature 
almost  at  the  lowest  point  in  the  scale  of  life,  whose  structure  is  as  simple  as  it  can 
well  be,  without  beauty  of  form  or  hue  to  attract,  the  glistening  loveliness  and 
preciousness  of  the  oriental  pearl  could  be  produced  I  And  who  could  have  thought 
that  out  of  the  dark  and  sorrowful  experiences  of  earth,  purified  by  suffering,  could 
have  come  the  great  white-robed  multitude  within  the  gates  of  pearl !  (JET.  Macmillan^ 
D.D.)  Gates  of  pearl : — Thoreau  thinks  that  he  can  trace  the  leaf  pattern 
throughout  all  the  kingdoms  of  nature,  and  he  declares  that  the  Creator,  in  making 
this  earth,  but  patented  a  leaf.  One  who  follows  the  building  art  through  the 
centuries,  from  its  first  rudimentary  principles  to  its  consummate  blossom  in  the 
medisBval  cathedral,  is  impressed  with  the  idea  that  the  architect  has  but  patented 
a  door.  A  habitation  without  some  way  of  getting  into  it  was  of  course  useless. 
The  way  of  ingress  and  egress  being  the  most  important  feature  of  the  domicile,  it 
naturally  called  forth  the  first  exercise  of  that  architectural  skiU  which  distinguishes 
man  from  the  beaver  or  bird.  This  skill  was  shown  by  placing  a  horizontal  stick 
or  stope  upon  two  perpendicular  posts,  and  forming  what  is  called  a  door  lintel. 
This  simple  principle,  multiplied  and  extended,  gives  us  the  conmion  frame  building 
or  stone  building,  with  windows  and  a  flat  roof.  It  is  the  principle  which,  under 
the  touch  of  Grecian  genius,  resulted  in  that  matchless  gem  of  architecture,  the 
Athenian  Parthenon.  It  has  been  suggested  that  this  simple  door  lintel,  at  some 
time  or  other,  broke  under  the  heavy  weight  which  was  placed  upon  it,  and  that  the 
broken  halves  were  set  up  against  each  other  upon  the  doorposts  in  an  inclined 
position.  The  transition  from  this  arrangement  to  three  or  more  wedge-shaped 
stones  fitted  together,  was  easy,  and  thus,  in  time,  the  arch  sprang  into  being,  out 
of  which  have  grown  the  wonders  of  mediaeval  and  modern  architecture.  The 
entrance  way  being  thus,  in  a  sense,  the  germ  of  the  building,  it  is  not  strange  that 
it  should,  in  time,  become  the  gem  of  the  building.  Being  a  conspicuous  feature, 
and  the  first  to  attract  critical  inspection,  it  was  natural  that  the  architect  should 
employ  his  subtlest  skill  in  adorning  it.  Carrying  our  thought  over  into  another 
realm,  we  are  reminded  that  it  is  a  rule  of  literature  to  be  mindful  of  beginnings — to 
beautify  the  gateway.  A  preface  is  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  book  to  write.  If 
well  written,  it  is  the  most  important  part,  for  it  predisposes  the  reader  to  a  favour- 
able acceptance  of  what  is  to  follow.  The  same  is  true  of  introductions  to  speeches 
and  lectures.  "  The  success  of  a  discourse,"  says  Gaichies,  "  often  depends  upon 
the  beginning.  From  first  impressions,  whether  good  or  bad,  we  do  not  easily 
recover."  And  I  am  tempted  to  add  that  the  same  is  true  of  people.  From  our  first 
impressions  of  them  we  do  not  easily  recover.  Everything  depends  upon  the  gate- 
ways of  life,  and  the  reeCBon,  I  think,  has  been  made  obvious,  because  at  the  portals 
we  get  our  first  impressions  of  the  structure.  Now  I  might  turn  this  truth  before 
you  in  a  great  many  lights,  and  apply  it  in  many  ways,  but  I  must  confine  myself 
to  two  of  them.  And,  first,  I  think  of  the  youth-time  as  the  portal  which  opens  into 
the  realities  of  life,  and  I  think  how  important  it  is  to  make  of  it  a  gate  of  pearl, 
that  the  young  spirit  which  passes  through  may  receive  only  wholesome  impressions. 
"What  book  lies  upon  the  table  ?  What  words  fall  from  the  lips  of  parents  and 
friends?  Do  they  possess  the  pearl  quality?  Do  they  foreshadow  to  the  chUd  the 
grand,  true  man  which  he  may  be  ?  Do  they  inspire  him  to  be  that  man  ?  I  am 
just  here  reminded  of  three  gateways  and  the  impressions  which  they  give  of  what 
lies  beyond  them.     Should  you  take  a  drive  or  a  walk  upon  a  certain  suburban  road, 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION. 


you  would  pass  all  three  of  them.  At  the  first  you  would  find  a  rickety  gate  swing- 
ing askew  upon  a  single  hinge,  as  though  making  a  vain  attempt  to  obtain  a  bill  of 
divorcement  from  the  tottering  post  to  which  it  is  attached.  Beyond  the  dilapidated 
gateway  you  picture  to  yourself  a  dilapidated  farm,  a  dilapidated  house,  and  a 
dilapidated  family.  The  country  proverb,  "  A  farmer  is  known  by  his  fences,"  comes 
to  you,  and  you  pass  on,  saying,  "  The  owner  of  that  place  is  a  thriftless  man." 
You  may  be  mistaken,  of  course,  but  that  is  your  first  impression.  A  weary, 
heart-broken  wife  and  mother,  hinged  to  a  thriftless,  unfeeling,  and  perhaps 
drunken  husband,  surrounded  with  the  weeds,  the  nettles,  and  the  briars  of  domestic 
infelicities.  Scowls  and  oaths,  blows  and  recriminations,  envy,  impatience, 
irreligion — these  are  the  influences  through  which  thousands  of  the  children  of  the 
land  are  looking  into  the  untried  future.  It  is  the  only  gateway  to  life  which  they 
know.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  they  make  life  a  cruel,  thriftless  thing  ?  But  this 
suburban  road  will  bring  you  to  another  gateway,  an  imposing  structure,  with 
massive  stone  posts,  and  two  strong  iron  gates,  which  are  closed  Over  them  is 
written,  "  These  are  private  grounds ;  visitors  not  allowed.  All  trespassers  will  be 
promptly  prosecuted."  A  magnificent  estate  evidently — broad,  winding  avenues, 
luxuriant  shrubbery,  and  beyond,  probably,  acres  of  velvet  lawn,  with  flowers  from 
every  clime,  and  a  mansion  wherein  wealth  and  taste  find  rendezvous.  But  that 
frowning  wall  and  that  inhospitable  gate  I  Strange,  you  say,  that  the  owner  should 
create  so  much  beauty,  and  then  wall  it  in  to  his  family  and  a  few  friends.  How 
many  homes  we  find  like  this  gateway,  beautiful,  thrifty  homes,  but  seclusive  and 
exclusive,  in  the  sense  of  being  closed  to  the  outgoing  and  incoming  sympathies 
and  charities  of  life ;  homes  in  which  children  receive  the  impression  that  the  great 
world  which  lies  before  them  is  a  selfish  world,  and  that  their  own  lives,  to  be 
successful,  must  be  devoted  to  selfish  getting  and  selfish  enjoying !  But  if  you  go 
far  enough  on  that  suburban  road,  you  will  find  a  third  gateway,  as  imposing  as  the 
second,  but  it  stands  open,  and  from  either  side  of  it,  around  the  broad  acres, 
extends  a  low,  rustic  fence.  Near  the  entrance  is  a  sign  bearing  the  words, 
"  Visitors  will  kindly  refrain  from  injuring  the  shrubbery."  You  notice  the  Inviting 
seats  and  vine-covered  arbours.  As  you  look  upon  this  vision  of  beauty,  you  feel 
very  much  as  the  good  woman  did,  who,  viewing  her  wealthy  neighbour's  well-kept 
grounds  from  her  humble  chamber,  exclaimed,  "  How  good  the  Lord  is  to  give  me 
the  enjoyment  of  this  paradise  without  the  trouble  of  taking  care  of  it  1  "  You  may 
be  wrong  in  your  estimate  of  the  man  who  owns  this  estate,  but  you  cannot  avoid 
the  impression  that  he  is  an  open-hearted,  public-spirited  citizen,  one  who,  in 
seeking  enjoyment  himself,  is  willing  that  the  others  should  share  it.  And  so  yoa 
point  another  moral :  Homes  there  are,  yes,  thousands  of  them,  which  to  the  young 
are  like  this  last  open  gateway,  suggesting  and  opening  into  a  large,  unselfish, 
beneficent  life ;  homes  where  the  young  are  inspired  by  Christian  example  to  live 
Christian  lives.  But,  taking  this  last  thought  with  us,  I  am  prompted  to  lead  you 
still  farther  along  the  line  of  our  text.  There  is  a  material  life  and  there  is  a  moral 
and  spiritual  life ;  two  realms  adjoining ;  and  there  are  ways  which  take  us  from 
the  one  to  the  other.  I  suppose  there  is  no  experience  more  familiar  to  many  of  us 
than  that  of  finding  in  some  strong,  true  character  the  example  and  the  instruction 
which  leads  us  to  noble  striving.  Hood,  in  speaking  of  Cromwell,  says,  "  An  age 
cannot  move  without  its  great  men.  They  inspire  it,  they  urge  it  forward.  They 
are  its  priests  and  its  prophets  and  its  monarchs."  All  of  which  is  but  saying  that 
the  great  man  is  the  portal  of  promise  and  opportunity  to  the  age  in  which  he  lives. 
His  superior  character  furnishes  the  model,  his  superior  genius  provides  the  oppor- 
tunity, for  the  development  and  advancement  of  the  race.  The  progress  of  humanity 
has  been  continuously  through  these  gates  of  pearl — these  massive,  resplendent 
lives  which  have  sprung,  clean-cut  and  beautiful,  out  of  the  conditions  of  their 
times.  Even  the  unbeliever  is  one  with  us  here.  He  admits  the  power  of  example, 
and  the  influence  of  the  stronger  soul.  He  says,  "  Yes,  these  are  the  gateways  of 
character,  these  strong  men  and  women  standing  all  around  us,  and  they  help  us  to 
live  better  lives."  Is  it  not  strange  that  one  who  can  believe  all  this  does  not  go  a 
step  farther,  does  not  stand  in  loving  faith  before  Him  who  alone  can  give  us 
entrance  into  the  highest  possible  life,  who  hath  said,  "  I  am  the  door ;  by  Me,  if 
any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved."  Here  is  the  gate  of  pearl  which,  swinging 
back  upon  its  hinges  reveals  to  us,  and  admits  us  to  a  life  which  the  world  knew 
nothing  of  before  the  Advent.  The  direct  agency  of  God  in  bringing  a  soul  through 
the  portal  of  the  new  life  we  cannot  explain.  Regeneration  is  a  Divine  mystery, 
but  it  is  none  the  less  a  Divine  fact.    But  the  going  through  the  door,  the  passing 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

into  a  higher  manhood  and  womanhood  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  Elder  Brother  and 
Saviour,  is  something  which  we  can  understand.  It  is  through  Him  that  we  axe 
made  meet  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     (C.  A.  Dickinson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  I  saw  no  temple  therein. — Heaven,  without  a  temple ;  why  f — 1.  A 
temple  is  a  place  set  apart  for  the  residence  of  a  Deity.  In  heaven  there  is  no 
temple,  no  particular  place  of  worship.  In  Eev.  vii.  it  is  said,  '*  they  serve  Him  in 
His  temple."  There  heaven  itself  is  the  temple  mentioned ;  here  it  is  meant  that 
no  portion  in  particular  could  be  styled  the  temj^le.  2.  A  temple  is  a  place  where 
particular  rites  are  observed.  In  Deut.  xii.  13,  it  was  expressly  commanded  that  no 
sacrifices  should  be  offered  but  in  the  temple;  elsewhere  they  would  be  a  pro- 
fanation. But  in  heaven  no  place  was  set  apart  for  religious  services  ;  they  might 
be  offered  in  all  parts  alike.  3.  A  temple  is  a  place  where  the  worshippers  resort 
at  seasons  for  worship  :  three  times  a  year  the  Israelites  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to 
appear  before  the  Lord  from  all  parts  of  the  holy  land.  In  heaven  there  are  no 
stated  seasons  of  worship  ;  no  need  to  say  there,  "  Come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  house 
of  the  Lord  " :  the  inhabitants  are  everywhere  and  always  engaged  in  the  service 
and  worship  of  God.  4.  A  temple  is  set  apart  from  common  uses  for  sacred 
exercises.  In  heaven  there  is  no  distinction  between  ordinary  and  religious 
employments.  Lessons  :  1.  Those  must  be  essentially  disqualified  for  heaven  who 
find  no  pleasure  in  devotion.  2.  What  a  reason  is  here  why  we  should  improve 
the  seasons  of  devotion,  and  especially  these  Sabbath  opportunities  of  religious 
improvement !  3.  Finally,  how  happy  are  those  that  love  God  and  His  service  I 
{R.  Hall,  M.A.)  No  temple  in  heaven: — The  explanation  given  of  how  this 
comes  to  be  does  not  at  the  first  satisfy  us.  We  all  Imow  that  in  this  world,  to  say 
that  every  day  should  be  kept  as  a  sabbath,  comes  to  exactly  the  same  thing  as 
having  no  sabbath  at  all.  Some  of  you  will  think  how  a  certain  eminent  man,  set 
free  from  work  after  many  years  of  weary  and  uncongenial  drudgery,  said  that  he 
found  that  where  all  your  time  is  holiday,  there  are  no  holidays.  And  yet  this  is 
all  the  comfort  given  us  in  the  presence  of  the  statement  that  in  heaven  there  is  no 
temple.  We  are  told  that  there  will  be  no  temple  in  particular,  because  the  place 
will  be  all  temple.  Now,  the  somewhat  disappointed  feeling  that  rises  at  the  first 
glance  at  our  text  comes  of  our  applying  our  common  worldly  ways  of  thinking  to 
the  better  world — to  a  state  of  being  that  transcends  our  present  thoughts.  As  we 
are  now,  it  is  only  for  short  isolated  times  that  we  can  be  at  our  best  in  the  matter 
of  spiritual  mood  and  holy  feeling.  But  in  heaven  all  this  is  changed.  And  it 
seems  to  me  as  if  there  were  a  sudden  light  cast  upon  the  state  of  the  redeemed, 
by  the  brief  statement  that  as  for  heaven,  the  happiest  and  holiest  place  in  all  the 
universe,  there  is  no  temple  there.  You  know,  that  statement  might,  standing  by 
itself,  read  in  either  of  two  quite  opposite  ways.  It  might  be  the  very  worst,  or  the 
very  best,  account  of  the  place  of  which  it  is  written.  *•  No  temple  there,"  might 
mean  no  care  about  religion  at  all.  "  No  temple  there,"  may  mean  that  the  whole 
place  is  one  great  temple ;  and  that  the  whole  life  there  is  worship  ;  and  that  the 
inhabitants  are  raised  quite  above  all  earthly  imperfections,  and  above  the  need  of 
those  means  which  in  this  world  are  so  necessary  to  keep  grace  in  the  soul  alive. 
All  temple  would,  with  creatures  like  us,  be  equivalent  to  no  temple  at  all.  But 
with  glorified  souls,  it  means  that  they  are  always  at  their  best :  always  holy  and 
happy  :  always  up  to  the  mark  of  the  noblest  communion  with  their  Saviour  and 
their  God !  All  this,  however,  is  but  one  truth  set  out  by  this  text.  Let  us  now 
proceed  to  an  entirely  different  view  of  it.  It  is  something  to  remind  us  of  the 
great  fact  that  blest  souls  in  heaven  are  lifted  above  the  need  of  the  means  of  grace. 
They  have  reached  the  end  of  all  these ;  and  accordingly  the  means  are  needed  no 
more.  You  have  got  the  good  of  them,  indeed,  but  you  do  not  need  to  use  them 
now.  They  were  very  well  in  their  time,  but  their  time  is  gone  by.  Now,  all  the 
means  of  grace — and  God's  house,  with  its  praises,  prayers,  and  exhortations, 
among  the  rest — are  just  as  steps  towards  heaven.  And  when  the  soul  has  reached 
heaven  their  need  is  over.  The  church  and  its  services  are  no  more  than  the 
means,  and  when  we  can  have  the  end  without  the  means  we  may  well  be  content. 
You  know  the  scaffolding  which  the  workmen  use  in  building  up  some  tall  church 
spire  may  be  very  ingenious,  may  serve  its  purpose  admirably  well ;  but  when  the 
spire  is  finished  you  do  not  propose  to  keep  the  scaffolding  up  permanently.  And 
the  means  of  grace,  all  of  them,  and  God's  house  with  the  others,  are  no  more 
than  as  the  scaffolding  by  whose  means  the  soul  is  edified.  And  when  the  glorified 
soul  has  reached  the  highest  attainments  of  Christian  character,  and  has  always 


CHAP.  XXI.]  .  REVELATION.  fi.S7 

within  reach  the  sublimest  depths  of  Christian  feeling  and  solid  enjoyment — as  it 
has  in  heaven — then  the  scaffolding  by  which  it  was  built  up  to  this  may  be  taken 
down ;  the  means  of  grace,  so  needful  in  their  time,  may  be  done  without,  may  go. 
(A.  K.  H.  Boydj,  D.D.)  No  temple  in  heaven  : — Our  apostle's  mind,  then,  had 
been  Divinely  enlarged  until  the  old  doctrinal  methods  of  worship  had  begun  to  tell 
upon  him  with  the  power  of  a  hindrance  and  limitation.  This  prophecy  of  a  city 
without  a  temple,  like  all  true  prophecy,  is  the  daughter  of  unrest.  It  is  the 
attempted  escape  out  of  form  of  a  mind  or  heart  that  feels  strained  by  present 
limitations.  Pressure,  such  as  it  discovers  itself  to  be  in  our  unrest,  is  the  impulse 
outward  of  a  mind  that  finds  its  immediate  quarters  too  small  for  it,  and  so  moves, 
or  undertakes  to  move,  into  a  house  that  is  larger.  As  we  grow  we  outgrow  every- 
thing in  the  way  of  a  mode  and  form  of  worship.  Worship  up  to  the  time  of 
Christ  had  centred  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  a  custom  of  Divine  origin.  Now, 
St.  John  had  had  that  experience  of  the  spiritual  character  of  God  that  disclosed 
to  him  the  utter  incompatibility  existing  between  true  worship  and  any  admixture 
of  the  building  or  house  element ;  and  because  he  realised  that  the  temple  and 
perfect  worship  are  incompatible,  he  saw  that  there  was  sure  to  be  a  time  when  the 
temple  would  be  everywhere,  and  it  is  thus  explained  to  him.  And  this  prophecy 
of  his,  like  all  true  prophecy,  is  but  the  name  we  give  to  that  power  by  which  a 
Divinely  quickened  mind  rises  against  those  restraints  by  which  its  own  thoughts 
and  experiences  have  hitherto  been  bound.  There  is  a  very  important  purpose 
subserved  in  having  the  ideal  disclosed  to  us,  although  not  able  to  live  by  it.  It 
gives  us  a  direction  like  the  polar  star  to  the  fugitive  escaping  towards  freedom,  and 
lays  down  a  pathway  along  which  we,  too,  may  move  in  the  direction  of  freer  life. 
And  the  ideal  is  not  only  a  distant  line  of  guidance,  but  instructs  by  the  power  of 
contrast,  for  the  brighter  and  purer  it  is  the  more  startling  the  contrast  in  which 
the  non-ideal  is  seen  to  stand  to  it.  I  would  not  try  to  trust  myself,  nor  would  I 
recommend  it  to  the  most  spiritual-minded  man  or  woman  among  you  to  trust 
yourself  to  any  system  of  worship  or  method  of  religion  that  is  not,  in  part,  formal 
or  methodical.  The  fact  that  some  time  we  are  going,  we  hope,  to  live  in  a  city 
that  has  no  temple,  or  will  need  none,  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  The  fact  that  we 
already  appreciate  the  incompatibility  between  stereotyped  methods  and  places  and 
religion  has  likewise  nothing  immediately  to  do  with  it.  The  great  matter  of 
spirituaUty  is  what  must  determine  the  moral  and  spiritual  law  ^at  is  to  govern 
us.  People  in  absenting  themselves  from  the  sanctuary  are  saying  that,  according 
to  the  words  of  the  apostle,  and  even  of  the  Lord  Himself,  sanctuary  worship 
makes  up  no  true  part  of  religion.  Well,  neither  is  the  shell  the  true  part  of  the 
nut,  and  the  nut  will  not  always  need  the  shell.  The  sanctuary  and  all  its  form 
and  local  appurtenances  are  not  religion,  but  simply  its  encasement,  its  integument, 
and  is  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  religion.  When  religion  has  become 
perfectly  natural  to  us — that  is  to  say,  when  it  is  just  as  natural  for  us  to  be 
religious  as  it  is  to  be  irreligious,  when  irreUgion  has  become  perfectly  unnatural 
to  us,  and  spiritual-mindedness  a  second  instinct,  and  obedience  to  God  has 
become  spontaneous,  and  adoration  before  Him  and  the  spirit  of  communion  with 
Him  works  within  us  with  the  enforced  facility  of  new  genius — then,  having 
become  ideal  men  and  able  to  live  an  ideal  life,  we  need  be  amenable  only  to  an 
ideal  law.  Just  to  the  degree  that  we  are  dominated  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  we  are 
free  from  the  obhgations  of  the  studied  and  the  narrowed.  But  because  religion 
is  going  to  be  a  purely  spiritual  thing  some  time,  or  because  there  are  those  to 
whom  it  is  mostly  such  now,  that  is  not  what  it  is  to  us,  except  as  we  are  ourselves 
spiritualised.  Counting  the  time,  I  believe,  is  no  true  ingredient  of  musical  skill, 
but  the  fact  that  an  accomplished  musician  can  keep  time  without  counting  is  no 
reason  why  the  novice  should  omit  doing  so  until  he  has  so  progressed  that  he  can 
keep  time  without  counting.  As  has  been  said  before,  the  ideal  has  no  relevancy 
to  us  any  farther  than  we  ourselves  get  in  the  range  with  the  ideal,  and  become 
ourselves  idealised.  If  we  are  ever  competent  to  live  in  an  untempled  city,  it  will 
be  because  of  our  faithful  use  of  the  formal  we  have  graduated  out  of  the  necessity 
of  the  formal,  just  as  the  grown  man's  ability  to  get  along  without  parents  to 
control  him  proceeds  from  the  fidelity  with  which  he  conformed  himself  to  parental 
instruction  before  he  became  a  man.  FideUty  to  His  sanctuary  is  God's  appointed 
means  of  making  us  free  from  the  necessity  of  the  sanctuary,  and  forms  faithfully 
observed,  and  methods  loyally  and  devoutly  adhered  to,  are  so  many  appliances 
Divinely  contrived  for  reinforcing  human  infirmity,  and  for  the  protection  of  the 
renewed  spirit,  till  that  spirit  shall  have  reached  such  proportions  of  sanctity  and 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

power  and  have  become  so  instilled  with  the  life  of  God — that  is,  shall  be  com- 
petent safely  to  determine  for  itself  its  own  methods,  and  its  expanded  heavenly 
genius  have  become  within  it  the  secure  law  of  its  own  individual  spiritual  life. 
{C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  No  temple  in  heaven  : — He  who  witnessed  the  glorious 
vision  recorded  in  this  book  had  doubtless  oft  travelled  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem 
to  present  himself  before  the  Lord  in  the  temple.  He  who  had  seen  and  rejoiced 
in  the  sight  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem  had  now  a  different  scene  opened  before  him. 
What  would  the  earthly  Jerusalem  have  been  without  its  temple  ?  A  body  without 
a  soul,  a  world  without  a  sun.  In  the  world  we  have  many  institutions  which  are 
intended  for  good,  but  their  very  presence  is  an  indication  of  evil.  In  going 
through  the  streets  of  a  large  city,  you  often  find  buildings,  some  of  them  like 
palaces,  not  intended  for  the  rich  and  gay ;  but,  it  may  be,  for  orphans,  or  destitute 
old  men  and  women.  What  a  blessed  city  that  would  be  where  there  was  no  need 
of  such  institutions.  And  so  is  the  absence  of  the  temple  the  crowning  glory  of 
the  Holy  Jerusalem.  That  we  may  enter  more  into  the  meaning  of  the  text,  let  us 
glance  at  the  uses  of  the  temple.  1.  It  was  a  meeting-place  between  God  and  His 
people.  How  grateful  ought  we  to  be  that  God  has  appointed  to  man  meeting- 
places.  Are  we  strengthened,  enlivened,  comforted,  by  meeting  with  fellow- 
Christians  ?  If  the  temple  and  the  church  now  be  a  place  for  such  purposes,  how 
is  it  that  the  absence  of  a  temple  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  is  a  mark  of  its  per- 
fection ?  The  history  of  our  earth  tells,  when  there  was  no  imperfection,  no  sin  in 
the  world,  there  was  no  temple ;  there  was  no  need  for  it.  A  temple  conveys  the 
idea  of  limiting  the  worship  of  God  to  a  set  time  and  place  ;  and  not  only  that,  but 
it  reminds  us  of  how  many  places  there  are  where  we  seldom  think  of  meeting  with 
God.  In  heaven  there  is  no  temple,  because  it  is  not  needed.  There  is  no  need  of 
a  meeting-place  when  God  dwells  among  the  inhabitants  ;  no  need  of  a  temple,  for 
we  shall  never  be  forgetful  of  Him  ;  no  need  of  getting  our  hearts  anew  enkindled 
with  a  devout  and  heavenly  flame  when  every  heart  is  full  of  love.  2.  The  temple 
a  place  of  reconciliation.  If  two  friends  have  quarrelled,  how  delightful  to  see 
them  reconciled  and  walking  together !  But  the  very  fact  of  your  saying  that  they 
are  reconciled  shows  that  they  have  quarrelled.  So  it  is  in  the  church  and  in  the 
temple.  You  cannot  listen,  you  cannot  look  upon  the  ceremonies,  without  at  once 
learning  that  man  has  quarrelled  with  God;  that  he  has  sinned  against  Him, 
and  is  now  reconciled.  But  in  the  New  Jerusalem  there  is  no  need  of  the 
symbol,  or  the  words  that  tell  man  has  been  reconciled  to  God — brought  back 
to  God — for  he  is  with  God ;  what  need  of  a  place  where  friends  should 
come  to  be  reconciled,  when  they  are  reconciled  already.  {Jas.  Aitken.) 
And  I  saw  no  temple  therein : — I.  The  symbol  of  the  Divine  olory,  which  was 

SEEN    in    the    temple    AT    JERUSALEM,   WILL    BE    EXCHANGED     IN    HEAVEN    FOR    THE 

IMMEDIATE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD  AND  OF  Christ.  There  shall  be  no  display  of  super- 
natural light  there,  such  as  dwelt  in  fearful  majesty  of  old  within  the  holy  place  of 
the  temple ;  there  shall  be  no  symbol  of  mysterious  glory,  as  in  the  ancient 
sanctuary,  fitted  and  designed  rather  to  veil  the  face  of  God  than  to  reveal  His 
character ;  the  Almighty  will  not  clothe  and  hide  Himself,  as  in  former  days,  with 
the  impenetrable  cloud,  or  the  equally  impenetrable  brightness.  But,  without  the 
intervention  of  any  sign  or  symbol,  or  even  outward  representation,  the  living  God 
shall  be  there  seen  as  He  is ;  the  excellent  glory  that  blazed  between  the  cherubim 
as  the  representative  of  the  Divine  presence  in  ancient  times  will  give  place  to  the 
revealed  form  and  the  open  face  of  Jehovah.    II.  The  sacrifices  and  offerings 

FOR   SIN,    which   formed   A   PRINCIPAL   PART    OF     THE    SERVICES    OF    THE     TEMPLE    AT 

Jerusalem,  will  be  exchanged  in  heaven  for  the  favour  of  a  reconciled  God 
AND  AN  EXALTED  REDEEMER.  The  Sacrifice  once  presented  on  the  Cross  by  the 
Son  of  God  Himself  has  completely  taken  away  the  guilt  of  sin  and  the  Divine 
wrath  that  was  due  to  it.  The  one  shedding  of  blood  upon  Calvary  has  perfectly 
done  what  the  blood  streaming  upon  a  thousand  altars,  and  shed  by  ten  thousand 
victims,  in  former  ages,  could  never  accomplish.  There  shall  be  no  temple  in 
heaven,  in  respect  that  there  shall  be  no  need  of  sacrifice  or  shedding  of  blood 
there.  But  more  than  this.  We  are  assured  by  the  inspired  apostle  that,  in  the 
absence  of  any  other  temple,  '♦  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  shall  be  the 
temple  there  "  ;  and  no  small  share  of  the  happiness  of  the  redeemed,  as  we  learn 
from  the  passage  before  us,  wiU  be  that,  in  exchange  for  the  sacrifices  and  offerings 
presented  for  sin  in  the  ancient  temple,  the  saints  of  the  Lord  in  heaven  shall  enjoy 
the  favour  of  a  reconciled  God,  and  dwell  in  the  presence  of  an  exalted  Saviour, 
And  shall  nof  the  presence  of  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  the  appearance  of 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION. 


the  crucified  Saviour  in  human  form  among  the  multitudes  whom  His  blood  has 
saved,  lend  to  them  an  assurance  of  peace  and  safety,  and  complete  acquittal  from 
the  guilt  of  sin,  which  cannot  fail  to  swell  their  hearts  with  more  than  mortal 
gladness  ?  III.  The  imperfect  revelations  peculiar  to  the  ancient  temple  at 
Jerusalem  will  be  superseded  in  the  celestial  world  by  the  full  knowledge 
OF  God  and  the  Eedeemer.  In  this  world  of  sin  and  imperfection  the  Christian 
sees  only  through  a  glass  darkly.  He  sees,  therefore,  but  in  part,  and  he  knows 
but  in  part.  Mortal  ears  are  not  capable  of  hearing  the  accents  of  eternity  ;  and 
there  are  sights  there  which  could  not  be  unveiled  to  mortal  eyes.  The  &,ngels  of 
heaven  "  desire  to  look  into  them,"  and  even  they  look  in  vain.  And  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord,  when  they  break  away  from  the  confinement  of  their  present  condition 
and  awaken  to  the  vastness  of  their  future  lot,  shall  enter  upon  a  state  of  existence 
in  which  new  thoughts,  new  feelings,  and  new  truths  concerning  God  and  concern- 
ing the  Saviour,  shall  occupy  and  enlarge  their  souls  throughout  eternity.  IV.  The 
particular  places  and  seasons,  which  \\tere  peculiar  to  the  devotions  of  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem,  will  be  done  away  with  in  the  worship  of  heaven. 
The  many  mansions  of  that  celestial  city  will  be  alike  pervaded  by  the  glory  of  the 
Almighty,  and  alike  sanctified  and  gladdened  by  it.  The  inhabitants  of  that 
kingdom,  which  is  eternal  in  the  heavens,  will  not  have  to  wait  the  slow  return  of 
those  annual  seasons  when  His  ancient  people  were  invited  to  appear  before  God 
in  Zion,  and  to  hold  fellowship  with  the  Most  High  in  His  sanctuary  ;  for  their  life 
will  be  a  season  of  continual  and  endless  fellowship  with  their  Maker  ;  and  the  day 
of  glory  which  they  shall  spend  in  His  presence — a  day  which  has  no  morning  and 
no  night — will  be  one  everlasting  and  uninterrupted  Sabbath.  {J.  Bannervian,  D.D.) 
The  perfection  of  the  heavenly  state  : — I.  There  is  no  temple  in  hell.  There  is 
none  for  the  devil.  Here  he  has  innumerable  followers ;  and  the  Scriptures  call 
him  not  only  the  prince  of  this  world,  to  show  that  they  are  his  subjects,  but  the 
god  of  this  world,  to  show  that  they  are  his  worshippers.  There  are  days  set  apart 
for  his  honour,  and  places  of  worship  open  for  his  name.  They  will  soon  see  him 
as  he  is — they  will  see  what  a  wretch  they  have  been  serving  here  ;  how  he  has 
deceived  them — how  he  has  destroyed  them  ;  and,  after  having  been  their  tempter, 
proving  only  their  tormentor;  and  therefore  Scripture  says,  "  They  shall  look 
upward,  and  curse  their  king  and  their  god."  II.  There  is  no  temple  in  heaven. 
1.  There  is  no  idol  temple  there.  2.  There  is  no  temple  there  for  heresies  and 
error.  3.  There  is  no  party  temple  there.  4.  There  will  be  no  material  temple 
there.  The  reason  is,  because  they  will  be  unnecessary.  They  are  now  in  the 
order  of  means,  but  then  the  end  will  be  accompUshed.     HI.  Now  there  abb 

TEMPLES   ON   EARTH   WHICH   DESERVE    OUR   ATTACHMENT   AND     OUR     RESPECT.        1.    It     is 

even  possible  for  us  to  err  now  on  the  side  of  excess.  We  do  this  whenever  we 
forget  that  their  institutions  and  ceremonies  are  not  to  be  regarded  for  their  owq 
sake.  They  are  not  ends,  but  means ;  they  are  not  religion,  but  the  instrumentalities 
of  religion ;  and  these  temples,  therefore,  are  not  in  all  respects  essential  to  religion 
even  here.  2.  We  are  more  liable  to  err  on  the  side  of  deficiency  than  of  excess ; 
and,  therefore,  having  opposed  formality  which  rests  in  temples,  we  must  assail 
enthusiasm  that  would  rise  above  them,  and  despise  the  things  that  are  not  neces- 
sary in  eternity,  though  important  and  necessary  here.  Hereafter  we  shall  live 
without  food  and  without  sleep ;  but  what  should  we  think  of  a  man  who  affected  to 
be  spiritual  enough  to  despise  these  vulgarities  now,  and  to  think  that  he  could  live 
without  them?  Let  us  take  six  views  of  man,  each  of  which  will  show  that, 
though  our  temples  are  to  be  dispensed  with  hereafter,  yet  that  they  are  important 
8md  necessary  now.  (1)  Let  us  view  man  physically.  Let  us  look  at  his  very 
constitution ;  at  his  nature.  It  was  reserved  for  a  philosopher  of  our  own  times  to 
prove  that  the  possessions  of  the  most  enlarged  mind  are  from  ideas  originally 
admitted  through  the  medium  of  the  senses,  or  from  contemplating  the  operation 
of  our  own  minds  acted  upon  by  the  medium  of  sensation.  And  what  reason  in 
the  world  have  we  to  suppose  that  religion  will  not  operate  in  the  same  way,  and 
derive  benefit  from  external  things  ?  Now  God  has  acted  all  along  upon  the  truth 
of  Locke's  principle,  and  He  addresses  us  chiefly,  in  His  word,  by  facts.  The  apostle 
spoke  of  those  things  which  he  had  seen,  and  heard,  and  handled,  of  the  good  word 
of  life.  All  the  observances  of  Christianity  are  founded  upon  facts  which  interest 
and  impress  us  entirely  through  the  medium  of  sensation  and  reflection.  (2)  Let 
us  view  man  as  an  immortal  being,  who  has  deep  wants,  and  mysterious  cravings, 
which  distinguish  from  all  the  orders  of  inferior  creatures,  but  rendering  him  the 
■abject  of  hopes  and  fears  which  nothing  f^arthly  can  remoye  or  satisfy.    It  is  only 

44 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxi. 

the  institutions  of  religion  that  can  meet  this  hunger.  (3)  As  a  depraved  being. 
Who  can  deny  this  ?  For  what  is  the  inference  ?  If  he  be  ignorant,  he  needs  to 
be  instructed  ;  if  he  be  wandering,  he  needs  to  be  reclaimed ;  if  he  be  careless,  he 
requires  to  be  aroused  ;  if  he  be  averse  to  duty,  he  stands  in  need  of  every  address 
and  motive  that  can  excite  him  and  influence  him.  Can  religion  be  safely  left  to 
the  choice  and  the  disposition  of  such  a  being  as  this  ?  (4)  View  man  as  a  renewed 
being.  Thus  he  is  made  to  differ  from  others,  and  from  himself.  But  though  he 
be  a  changed  creature  now,  he  is  not  yet  a  glorified  one.  He  is  surrounded  with 
numerous  diversions  and  temptations ;  he  abounds  with  much  evil.  Religion  is 
indeed  planted  in  him,  but  then  it  is  an  exotic,  and  a  very  tender  one.  Can 
religion  be  kept  alive  and  flourishing  in  the  soul  without  aid — constant  aid  ?  (5) 
View  man  in  his  civil  being.  Here  you  will  meet  with  him  among  ranks  and 
degrees  of  life,  and  these  ranks  and  degrees  of  life  are  proper.  The  Scripture 
enforces  an  attention  to  them  ;  no  advantage  is  ever  derived  from  the  violation  of 
them.  But  then  it  will  be  acknowledged  that  they  may  become  excessive  and 
injurious,  and  I  ask  what  there  is  that  can  charm  them,  and  sanctify  them,  like 
public  worship,  where  the  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together,  &c.  (6)  Let  us  view 
man  publicly,  in  his  connection  with  the  State,  for  whose  safety  and  for  whose 
welfare  he  ought  to  be  concerned.  Now,  if  religion  be  essential  to  the  safety  and 
the  welfare  of  a  country,  we  contend  that  these  institutions,  and  these  observances, 
are  essential  to  religion.  And  we  would  ask.  What  would  any  nation,  what  would 
any  neighbourhood  be,  if  the  Sabbath,  and  if  our  temples  were  given  up  ?  How 
rude,  how  savage,  how  insubordinate,  how  insulting,  are  found  those  in  the  different 
parts  of  the  country  that  are  brought  up  away  from  the  influence  of  the  means  of 
grace.     {W.  Jay.)        The  heavenly  temple  : — I.   The  use   of  temples  in  man's 

PRESENT   STATE.        U.    ThE   ABSENCE   OF   TEMPLES   FKOM    MAN'S   FUTUBE   STATE.      What 

changes  then  must  have  passed  upon  our  condition  ere  temples  may  be  swept  away 
without  injury,  nay,  rather,  with  great  benefit,  to  vital  religion.  It  tells  me  there 
is  no  keeping  of  the  earthly  Sabbaths,  for  all  its  days  alike  are  holiness  to  the 
Lord :  and  telling  me  this  it  also  tells  me  that  if  once  admitted  within  the  gates  of 
pearl,  and  privileged  to  tread  the  streets  of  gold,  I  shall  be  free  from  every 
remainder  of  corruption ;  I  shall  no  longer  need  external  ordinances  to  remind  me 
of  my  allegiance,  and  strengthen  me  for  conflict ;  but  that,  made  equal  to  the 
angels,  I  shall  love  God  without  wavering,  and  serve  God  without  weariness.  It  is, 
however,  when  we  consider  churches  as  the  places  in  which  we  are  to  gain  acquaint- 
ance with  God,  that  we  find  most  of  interesting  truth  in  the  fact  that  there  is  no 
temple  in  heaven.  Allowed  not  direct  and  immediate  intercourse  with  God,  we  can 
now  only  avail  ourselves  of  instituted  means,  and  hope  to  obtain  in  the  use  of 
ordinances  faint  glimpses  of  that  Being  who  withdraws  Himself  majestically  from 
the  searchings  of  His  creatures.  And  we  may  not  doubt  that  God  shall  ever- 
lastingly continue  a  mystery  to  all  finite  intelligences ;  so  that  we  look  not  in  the 
favoured  expatiations  of  the  future  for  perfect  acquaintance  with  Deity.  We 
rather  take  it  as  a  self-evident  truth,  that  God  can  be  comprehensible  by  none  other 
but  God ;  and  that  consequently  there  will  always  be  between  the  Creator  and  the 
created  that  immeasurable  separation  which  forbids  all  approach  to  familiar 
inspection.  But  nevertheless  we  may  not  doubt  that  although  God  must  be 
inscrutable  even  to  the  angel  and  the  archangel,  there  are  disclosures  of  Deity 
made  to  these  illustrious  orders  of  being  such  as  we  ourselves  are  neither  permitted 
nor  qualified  to  enjoy.  The  manifestation  of  Godhead  in  that  to  us  unknown  region 
which  we  designate  heaven,  and  to  those  ranks  of  subsistences  which  we  believe 
associated  highest  in  the  scale  of  creation,  must  be,  we  are  sure,  of  that  intenseness 
and  that  vividness  which  give  to  intercourse  the  character  of  direct  and  personal 
communion.  To  such  manifestations  we  ourselves  are  privileged  to  expect 
admission.  It  shall  not  be  needful  in  order  to  advance  in  acquaintance  with  the 
Deity,  that  the  saints  gather  themselves  into  a  material  sanctuary,  and  hearken  to 
the  teaching  of  one  of  their  brethren,  and  partake  of  sacramental  elements.  They 
can  go  to  the  fountain  head,  and  therefore  require  not  those  channels  through 
which  living  streams  were  before  time  transmitted.  Present  with  the  Lord,  they 
need  no  emblem  of  his  presence :  faith  having  given  place  to  sight,  the  apparatus 
of  outward  ordinances  vanishes,  like  the  shadows  of  the  law  when  the  substance 
had  appeared.     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)         The  negative  glory  of  heaven : — I.  In  that 

WORLD    THERE    IS     NO     SPECIALITY    IN     THE     FORMS    OF    RELIGIOUS    WORSHIP.      A   City 

without  a  temple  would  strike  the  common  notions  of  men  as  atheistic.  To  the 
Jewish  mind  especially  it  would  give  the  idea  of  a  city  to  be  avoided  and  deoounced. 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  691 

Still,  whatever  might  be  the  popular  notions  of  men  about  temples,  with  their 
methods  of  worship:  1,  Their  existence  implies  spiritual  blindness  and  imper- 
fection, they  are  remedies  for  evils.  2.  Their  history  shows  that  men,  in  many 
instances,  have  turned  them  to  a  most  injurious  account.  They  have  nourished 
superstition ;  men  have  confined  the  idea  of  sacredness  and  worship  and  God  to 
these  buildings.  They  have  nourished  sectarianism.  When  it  is  said,  therefore, 
that  there  is  no  temple  in  heaven,  it  does  not  mean  that  there  will  be  no  worship  in 
heaven,  but  that  there  will  be  no  temple  like  that  on  earth ;  always  implying 
imperfections.  The  reason  assigned  for  the  non-existence  of  a  temple  in  heaven 
is  a  very  wonderful  one,  "  The  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple 
of  it."  God  and  His  Holy  Son  are  not  only  the  objects  of  heavenly  worship,  but 
the  very  temple  of  devotion.  All  there  feel,  not  only  that  they  have  to  render  to 
God  and  His  Son  worship,  but  they  are  in  them  in  the  worship.     II.  In  that 

WORLD    THERE    IS    NO   NECESSITY   FOR   SECOND-HAND   KNOWLEDGE.       The  foUUtain   of    all 

light  is  God  Himself.     He  is  the  Father  of  lights.     Here,  like  Job,  we  hear  of  God 
by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  there  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  be  like  Him.     He 
will  be  the  light,  the  clear,  direct,  unbounded  medium,  through  which  we  shall  see 
ourselves,  our  fellow  worshippers,  and  the  universe.     HI.  In  that  world  there 
WILL  BE  NO  apprehension  OP  DANGER  FROM  ANY  PART.     "  And  the  gatcs  of  it  shall 
not  be  shut  at  all  by  day  :  for  there  shall  be  no  night  there."     No  fear  of  tempta- 
tion ;  here  we  are  bound  to  watch  and  pray  lest  we  fall  into  temptation.     Why  ? 
Because  of  the  greater  amount  of  motive  that  now  exists  in  heaven  to  bind  the 
virtuous  to  virtue,  the  Christian  to  Christ,  the  godly  to  God.     1.  There  is  a  motive 
from  the  contrast  between  the  present  and  the  past.     2.  There  is  the  motive  from 
the  appearance  of  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.    There   is  no  fear  of 
affliction  ;  we  are  told  there  •*  shall  be  no  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be 
any  more  pain."    IV.  That  in  that  world  there  will  be  none  of  the  incon- 
veniences ot  darkness.     ♦•  There  shall  be  no  night  there."    1.  Night  interrupts 
our  vision.     It  hides  the  world  from  our  view,  and  is  the  symbol  of  ignorance. 
The  world  is  full  of  existence  and  beauty,  but  night  hides  all.     2.  Night  interrupts 
our  labour.     We  go  forth  unto  our  labour  until  the  evening.     V.  That  in  that 
world  there  will  be  no  admission  of  impurity  of  any  kind.     "  And  there  shall  in 
no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination, 
or  maketh  a  lie ;  but  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."    (Homilist.) 
The  mission  of  the  temple  accomplished  : — The  first  of  these  ideas  is  that  of  special 
local  manifestations  of    God's  presence   and    power.      This    idea  was  strongly 
suggested  by  the  ancient  Jewish   temple,   and  particularly  by   the    Shechinah 
which  always  blazed  above  the  mercy-seat.     It  was  the  earthly  palace  of  the 
heavenly  King,  where  He  held   His  earthly  court.      This  temporary  idea   was 
necessary  for  the  development  of  the  human  sense  of  the  Divine  presence  on  the 
earth,  as  the  scaffolding  is  required  for  the  construction  of  a  building,  or  a  ladder 
may  be  needed  to  reach  the  summit  of  a  cliff.     The  spiritual  sense  of  humanity 
was  not  sufficiently  developed  to  see  the  glory  of  God  everywhere  and  in  everything, 
to  behold  every  common  bush  afire  with  God.     Only  a  great  spiritual  eye  can  re^ 
the  name  of  God  in  the  common  everyday  writing  of  human  history.     In  order 
that  men  should  see  it  at  all  it  was  necessary  to  write  it  here  and  there  in  great 
capitals.     Just  as  a  man  pursuing  his  way  in  the  midst  of  gathering  electric  forces 
may  know  nothing  of  them  until  the  lightning  flashes  bright  from  the  thick  cloud, 
BO  men,   as  yet  untrained  to  feel  the  invisible,  would  have  become  regardless, 
and  perchance  ignorant,  of  the  Divine  presence  were  it  not  for  its  special  and 
pronounced  manifestation  in  the  "  temple  "  and  other  holy  places.     The  attempt 
to    force    men    at    once    to    recognise    an    equal    Divine    presence    everywhere 
would  have  resulted  in  their  not  recognising  it  anywhere.     In  the  interminable 
and    pathless   jungle  of   human  life  they  would   forget  a   God  that   might  be 
present  everywhere  but  was  conspicuous  nowhere.     {John  Thomas,  M.A.)        The 
glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  la  the  light  thereof.— The  Qod- 
enlightened  city : — I.    The   principal    purpose    here    mentioned,   for  which    the 
heavenly  bodies  were  created,  and  for  which  we  need  them  in  this  lower  world 
is,  TO  GIVE  LIGHT  iTPON  THE  EARTH.     But  agreeable  and  necessary  as  they  are  to 
ns,  the  New  Jerusalem  needs  them  not  for  this  purpose ;  for  the  glory  of  Qod 
doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.     The  unfathomable  flood  of  light 
and  glory  which  unceasingly  flows  from  the  Father,  is  collected  and  concentrated 
in  the  person  of  His  Son  ;  for  He  is  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  and  the 
express  image  of   His  person.    Heaven  is,  therefore,  illuminated  not  only  with 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

God's  glory,  but  with  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  with  the  most  dazzling  effulgence 
of  Divine,  uncreated  light,  a  light  which  enlightens  and  cheers  the  soul  as  well  as 
the  body.  Of  the  nature  and  degree  of  this  light,  who  but  the  happy  beings  that 
enjoy  it  can  form  any  conception  ?  As  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  will  not  need  the 
light  of  created  luminaries,  so,  we  may  add,  they  will  no  more  need  the  assistance 
of  human  teachers,  or  of  the  means  of  grace.  Little  do  they  need  human  teachers, 
who  know  incomparably  more  of  Divine  things  than  all  the  prophets  and  apostles 
united  knew,  while  here  below.  Little  do  they  need  the  Bible,  who  have  forever 
escaped  all  its  threatenings,  who  are  enjoying  all  its  promises,  who  intuitively 
understand  all  its  doctrines,  and  who  have  arrived  at  that  heaven  to  which  it 
points  out  the  way.  II.  Another  purpose  for  which  God  formed  the  sun  was,  we 
are  told,  to  divide  the  day  from  the  night.  To  creatures  constituted  as  we  are, 
the  vicissitude  of  day  and  night,  which  is  thus  produced  by  the  sun,  is  equally 
necessary  and  agreeable  ;  and  we  ought  ever  to  acknowledge  the  wisdom  and  good- 
ness to  which  it  is  owing.  Our  bodies  and  our  minds  are  soon  fatigued,  and 
indispensably  require  the  refreshment  of  sleep.  But  we  may  easily  perceive  that  it 
would  be  a  great  privilege  to  be  freed  from  the  necessity  of  sleeping,  and  especially 
from  that  subjection  to  weariness  and  fatigue  which  occasion  the  necessity.  Do 
the  rays  of  light  grow  weary  in  their  flight  from  the  sun  ?  or  does  the  thunder-bolt 
need  to  pause  and  seek  refreshment  in  the  midst  of  its  career  ?  As  little  do  the 
inhabitants  of  heaven  become  weary  in  praising  and  enjoying  God.  As  httle  do 
they  need  refreshment  or  repose  ;  for  their  spiritual  bodies  will  be  far  more  active 
and  refined  than  the  purest  light ;  and  their  labour  itself  will  be  the  sweetest  rest. 
III.  Another  purpose  for  which  the  heavenly  bodies  were  created  was  to  serve  for 

SIGNS,    AND  FOR   THE   REGULATION   OF    THE   SEASONS.      In    this,    aS    in    Othci    tespects, 

they  are  eminently  useful  to  a  world  like  ours.  The  heat  of  the  sun  is  no  less 
necessary  than  its  light ;  but  the  convenience  and  happiness  of  man  require  that 
this  heat  should  be  communicated  to  us  in  different  degrees  at  different  periods. 
But  however  necessary  the  celestial  luminaries  may  be  for  signs  and  seasons  on 
earth,  they  are  needed  for  neither  of  these  purposes  by  the  inhabitants  of  heaven. 
They  need  no  pole  star  to  guide  their  rapid  flight  through  the  immeasurable  ocean 
of  ethereal  space  ;  for  God,  their  sun,  is  everywhere,  and  where  He  is,  there  is 
heaven ;  there  they  are  at  home.  They  need  no  signs  to  warn  them  of  approaching 
storms,  or  impending  dangers;  for  they  enjoy  uninterrupted  sunshine  and  perpetual 
peace.    IV.  Another  purpose  for  which  the  heavenly  bodies  were  created  was  to 

SHOW  THE  FLIGHT,  AND  MARK  THE  DIVISIONS  OF  TIME.     But    thoUgh    SUCh    divisionS   of 

time,  as  days  and  years,  are  thus  necessary  on  earth,  they  will  be  perfectly  needless 
to  the  inhabitants  of  heaven.  With  them,  time  has  ended  and  eternity  begun  ;  and 
eternity  neither  needs,  nor  is  capable  of  division.  They  know  with  the  utmost  cer- 
tainty that  their  happiness  will  never,  never  end.  Why  then  should  they  wish  to  know, 
what  possible  advantage  could  it  be  to  them  to  know,  at  any  given  period,  how  many 
days  or  years  had  passed  away  since  they  arrived  in  heaven?  {E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
The  light  of  the  New  Jerusalem : — I.  It  is  peculiar  light.  There  is  none  like  it. 
Its  blaze  is  not  earthly.  Yet  it  is  truly  light  for  men.  It  is  Divine,  but  it  is  also 
human.  All  created  and  all  uncreated  brilliance  is  concentrated  in  it.  The  Man 
Christ  Jesus  is  there.  God  over  all  is  there.  II.  It  is  unchanging  light.  He 
from  whom  it  emanates  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Here  there  is 
no  rising  nor  setting ;  no  clouding  nor  eclipsing.  IH.  It  is  festal  light.  The 
feast  is  spread ;  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  His  wife  hath  made  herself 
ready.  IV.  It  is  all-pervading  light.  It  is  not  confined  to  a  few  favoured 
dwelUngs ;  to  one  region  of  the  city.  The  whole  city  shall  be  full  of  light.  V.  It 
IS  the  light  of  life.  It  is  living  light,  life-giving  light ;  not  dead  and  inert  like 
that  of  our  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars,  but  Uving ;  instinct  with  life,  and  health,  and 
immortality.  It  fills  the  whole  man  with  life — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  VI.  It  is 
the  light  of  love.  For  that  name,  *♦  the  Lamb,"  contains  within  it  the  revelation 
of  the  love  of  God.  That  lamp,  which  is  the  Lamb,  then  must  be  love  ;  its  light 
must  be  the  light  of  redeeming  love.  (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Christ  the  light  of 
heaven : — I.  What  Christ  is  in  heaven.  He  is  the  Son  of  Man,  it  says ;  for  it 
calls  Him  "  the  Lamb,"  the  same  name  that  was  applied  to  Him  in  His  human 
nature  on  earth,  and  a  name  which  will  not  admit  of  being  applied  to  Him  as  the 
everlasting  God.  It  involves  in  it  an  idea,  not  at  variance  with  divinity,  but  yet 
quite  foreign  to  it.  Further,  this  name  sets  Him  forth  as  retaining  in  heaven  the 
marks  of  His  sufferings  on  earth.  This  teaches  us  not  only  the  blessed  truth  that 
we  shall  see  in  heaven  the  Saviour  who  bled  for  us,  but  that  we  shall  see  Him  as 


CHAP.  XXI.  ]  RE  VELA  TION. 


the  Saviour  who  bled  for  us  ;  we  shall  never  look  on  Him  without  beholding  in  Him 
that  which  will  remind  us  of  His  dying  love.  But  again — our  Lord  is  styled  also  in 
this  text  "  the  glory  of  God."  I  say,  our  Lord  is  so  styled,  because  it  seems  quite 
evident  that  the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb  mean  here  one  and  the  same  object. 
The  apostle  evidently  speaks  as  though  by  God  and  the  Lamb  he  meant  the  same 
Person ;  as  though  he  could  not  separate  them  in  his  mind ;  as  though,  in  fact, 
they  had  been  presented  to  him  in  this  vision  but  as  one  object,  and  were  but  one 
object.  And  we  are  to  infer  more  from  this,  than  that  the  ascended  Jesus  is  acknow- 
ledged in  heaven  to  be  God  and  Lord ;  we  are  warranted  to  infer  that  no  other  God 
or  Lord  is  seen  or  thought  of  in  heaven ;  and  more  also — that  Christ's  human 
nature  is  as  complete  a  manifestation  of  the  Divine  glory  as  even  heaven  itself  can 
understand  or  bear.  11.  What  Christ  is  to  heaven.  He  is  in  it  as  the  Son  of 
Man,  the  once  crucified  Son  of  Man,  the  glory  of  God ;  He  is  to  it  a  light,  and  all 
the  light  it  has.  There  are  two  ideas  generally  connected  with  the  word  "light "  in 
Scripture,  when  used  in  a  spiritual  sense — one  primary  idea,  knowledge,  because 
light  shows  us  things  as  they  are ;  and  then  a  secondary  idea,  joy,  because  a  right 
knowledge  of  spiritual  things  imparts  joy.  When  therefore  we  are  told  that  there  is 
light  in  heaven,  that  God  dwells  in  light  there,  that  the  inheritance  of  the  saints 
there  is  an  inheritance  in  light,  we  are  to  understand  that  heaven  is  a  world  of 
knowledge,  and  such  knowledge  as  gives  rise  to  pleasure  and  joy  ;  that  we  shall  not 
lose  our  character  as  intellectual  beings  there  ;  that  our  minds  and  understandings 
will  go  with  us  to  heaven,  and  be  called  into  exercise  in  heaven,  and  have  every- 
thing  brought  before  them  that  can  expand,  and  elevate,  and  delight  them.  But 
whence  is  this  knowledge  to  come  ?  The  text  tells  us.  It  traces  it,  observe,  to  the 
glorified  Jesus  as  its  source.  God  in  Christ,  it  says,  and  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
Man,  is  the  author  of  it.  '*  The  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon, 
to  shine  in  it."  La  this  imperfect  state  of  the  Church,  we  need  the  sun  and  the 
moon,  all  the  help  we  can  obtain.  We  want  the  assistance  of  created  things  to 
impart  knowledge  and  joy  to  us — Scriptures,  and  ministers,  and  sacraments,  and 
ordinances.  But  not  so  in  heaven.  HI.  The  greatness  of  this  heavenly  happi- 
ness. This  is  evidently  the  point  to  which  the  text  is  intended  to  bring  us.  Its 
design  is  to  show  us  how  much  happier  a  world  heaven  is  than  earth,  and  how  much 
happier  the  Church  in  heaven  is  than  the  Church  on  earth.  It  supposes,  you 
observe,  the  Church  to  have  some  blessedness  here.  It  has  its  sun  and  it  has  its 
moon,  some  sources  of  knowledge  and  joy,  and  these  quite  sufl&cient,  not  to  meet  its 
desires,  but  to  answer  the  purposes  of  its  present  condition.  But  then  it  implies 
that  these  sink  into  nothing,  when  compared  with  the  light  which  will  shine  on  it, 
the  knowledge  and  joy  which  will  be  imparted  to  it  in  the  heavenly  city.  1.  The 
light  that  flows  immediately  from  Christ  in  glory,  is  clearer  and  brighter  than  any 
other  light  can  be.  There  is  more  of  it,  and  what  there  is  of  it  is  of  a  purer  nature. 
2.  The  knowledge  we  shall  have  in  heaven  is  not  only  more  accurate  than  any  we 
can  attain  here,  it  is  a  knowledge  more  easily  acquired.  How  difficult  do  we  some- 
times find  it  now  to  lay  hold  of  Divine  truth  1  What  a  process  we  are  obliged  to 
pass  through  in  order  to  arrive  at  a  clear  comprehension  of  the  simplest  truths  ot 
the  gospel !  Now  in  heaven  a  glance  will  teach  you.  Knowledge  will  flow  like  a 
stream  into  our  minds,  and  bring  happiness  with  it,  and  this  every  moment,  and 
this  for  ever,  without  mixture,  without  interruption,  without  end.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 
The  Lamb — tJie  light : — In  that  millennial  state  of  which  the  text  speaks,  Jesus  Christ 
is  to  be  the  light  thereof,  and  all  its  glory  is  to  proceed  from  Him ;  and  if  the  text 
speaketh  concerning  heaven  and  the  blessedness  hereafter,  all  its  light,  and  bless- 
ings, and  glory,  stream  from  Him :  "  The  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof."  I.  The 
MiLiiENNiAL  PERIOD.  Jesus,  in  a  millennial  age,  shall  be  the  light  and  the  glory  of  the 
city  of  the  new  Jerusalem.  1.  Observe,  then,  that  Jesus  makes  the  Ught  of  the 
millennium,  because  His  presence  will  be  that  which  distinguishes  that  age  from 
the  present.  That  age  is  to  be  akin  to  paradise.  It  is  true  we  have  the  presence  of 
Christ  in  the  Church  now — "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."  We  have  the  promise  of  His  constant  indwelling :  "  Where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  But  still  that 
is  vicariously  by  His  Spirit,  but  soon  He  is  to  be  personally  with  us.  2.  The 
presence  of  Christ  it  is  which  will  be  the  means  of  the  peace  of  the  age.  In  that 
sense  Christ  will  be  the  Ught  of  it,  for  He  is  our  peace.  It  will  be  through  His 
presence  that  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  an  ox,  that  the  leopard  shall  Ue  down 
with  the  kid.  3.  Again,  Christ's  presence  is  to  that  period  its  special  instruction. 
When  He  comes,  superstition  will  not  need  an  earnest  testimony  to  confute  it — iy 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

will  hide  its  head.  Idolatry  will  not  need  the  missionary  to  preach  against  it — the 
idols  He  shall  utterly  abolish,  and  cast  them  to  the  moles  and  bats.  4.  Once  again, 
Christ  will  be  the  light  of  that  period  in  the  sense  of  being  its  glory.  Think  of  the 
splendour  of  that  time !  Oh  !  to  be  present  and  to  see  Him  in  His  own  light,  the 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords !  II.  The  state  of  the  olokified  in  heaven 
ITSELF.  "  The  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it." 
1.  The  inhabitants  of  the  better  world  are  independent  of  creature  comforts.  We 
have  no  reason  to  believe  that  they  daily  pray,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread." 
Their  bodies  shall  dwell  in  perpetual  youth.  They  shall  have  no  need  of  raiment ; 
their  white  robes  shall  never  wear  out,  neither  shall  they  ever  be  defiled.  2.  While 
in  heaven,  it  is  clear  that  the  glorified  are  quite  independent  of  creature  aid,  do  not 
forget  that  they  are  entirely  dependent  for  their  joy  upon  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  their 
sole  spiritual  light.  They  have  nothing  else  in  heaven  to  give  them  perfect  satis- 
faction but  Himself.  The  language  here  used,  "  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof,"  may 
be  read  in  two  or  three  ways.  By  your  patience,  let  us  so  read  it.  La  heaven  Jesus 
is  the  light  in  the  sense  of  joy,  for  light  is  ever  in  Scripture  the  emblem  of  joy. 
Darkness  betokens  sorrow,  but  the  rising  of  the  sun  indicates  the  return  of  holy 
joy.  Christ  is  the  joy  of  heaven.  Another  meaning  of  light  in  Scripture  is  know- 
ledge. Ignorance  is  darkness.  Oh !  what  manifestations  of  God  there  will  be ! 
Dark  dealings  of  providence  which  you  never  understood  before  will  then  be  seen 
without  the  light  of  a  candle  or  of  the  sun.  Many  doctrines  puzzled  you ;  but 
there  all  will  be  simple.  IH.  The  heavenly  man's  state  may  be  set  forth  in 
these  words.  First,  then,  even  on  earth  the  heavenly  man's  joy  does  not  depend 
upon  the  creature.  In  a  certain  sense  we  can  say  to-day  that "  the  city  hath  no  need 
of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it."  As  we  can  do  without  these  two 
most  eminent  creatures,  so  we  can  be  happy  without  other  earthly  blessings.  Our 
dear  friends  are  very  precious  to  us — we  love  our  wife  and  children,  our  parents  and 
our  friends,  but  we  do  not  need  them.  May  God  spare  them  to  us  I  but  if  they  were 
taken,  it  does  not  come  to  a  matter  of  absolute  need,  for  you  know  there  is  many 
a  Christian  who  has  been  bereft  of  all,  and  he  thought,  as  the  props  were 
taken  away  one  after  another,  that  he  should  die  of  very  grief ;  but  he  did 
not  die,  his  faith  surmounted  every  wave,  and  he  still  rejoices  in  his  God. 
We  finish  by  observing  that  such  a  man,  however,  has  great  need  of  Christ — he 
cannot  get  on  without  Christ.  We  can  do  without  light,  without  friendship, 
without  life,  but  we  cannot  live  without  our  Saviour.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
light  of  the  city : — "And  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon, 
to  shine  upon  it."  The  sun  and  the  moon  are  obviously  the  symbols  of  earthly 
resources.  It  is  not  through  the  city's  sun  and  moon  that  God  will  flood  her 
streets  with  the  light  of  the  jasper  stone.  It  is  not  through  the  development  of 
knowledge,  the  progress  of  thought,  and  the  growth  of  the  Arts,  that  God  will 
raise  city  and  State  to  an  ideal  condition.  The  impartation  of  God's  glory  to  the 
earth  is  not  dependent  upon  sun  and  moon.  "  The  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun." 
The  "  jasper  "  glory  is  obtained  by  direct  communication  with  God.  It  is  imparted 
immediately  by  the  Divine  Spirit  to  the  spirit  of  man,  and  can  only  be  received  by 
spiritual  trust  and  personal  devotion.  The  "jasper"  brightness  will  give  new 
splendour  to  sun  and  moon,  but  the  latter  can  never  create  the  former.  {John 
Thomas y  M.A.) 

Ver.  25.  No  night  there.— The  everlasting  day  : — I.  No  natural  night  there. 
The  large  portion  of  our  existence  that  sleep  now  consumes  will  be  added  to  our 
peaceful,  our  blissful  occupations.     II.  No  night  of  sin  there.     HI.  No  night 

of  suffering  there.  IV.  No  NIGHT  OF  IGNORANCE  THERE.  V.  No  NIGHT  OF 
infirmities  THERE.  VI.  No  NIGHT  OF  MYSTERIOUS  PROVIDENCES  THERE.  VII.  No 
NIGHT  OF  HINDERED  PRAYERS  THERE.  VIH.  No  NIGHT  OF  DISAPPOINTED  EXPECTA- 
TIONS THERE.  IX.  No  NIGHT  OF  SEPARATION  THERE.  X.  No  NIGHT  OF  TEMPTA- 
TION THERE.  {T.  Nunns,  M.A.)  No  night  there  .-—In  looking  at  the  emblems 
employed  in  the  Word  of  God,  you  cannot  fail  to  be  impressed  with  their  simplicity 
as  well  as  their  beauty.  Night  is  one  of  these.  1.  It  is  the  season  of  repose.  2. 
It  is  the  time  of  evil — the  season  chosen  for  the  performance  of  deeds  of  darkness 
and  of  sin.  3.  And  it  is  the  time  of  fear.  Yet  notwithstanding  all  this  I  praise 
God  for  the  night.  4.  Night  is  suggestive  of  sorrow.  This  is  the  inevitable 
lot  of  the  good  on  earth.  But  "there  shall  be  no  night"  of  sorrow  "there!  " 
No  tears  shall  be  shed,  no  hopes  shall  be  frustrated,  no  disappointments  felt,  no 
friends  removed,  no  graves  opened.     Night,  as  we  have  seen,  is  associated  with 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION.  695 

deeds  of  darkness.  And  hence,  when  it  is  affirmed  of  the  heavenly  state  that 
"there  shall  be  no  night  there,"  we  are  reminded  of  the  perfect  purity  of 
our  eternal  home.  Further,  night  is  associated  with  weariness  and  fatigue. 
To  affirm,  therefore,  of  the  heavenly  world  that  there  shall  be  no  night 
there,  is  to  declare  that  weariness  and  fatigue  shall  be  unknown.  One  of  the  most 
difficult  questions  is  that  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  glorified  body  the  redeemed 
will  possess.  And  then,  night  is  associated  with  obscurity.  Its  shades  conceal 
much  from  our  vision,  and  hence  it  has  ever  been  regarded  as  an  appropriate 
emblem  of  mental  obscurity.  Mystery  surrounds  us  on  every  hand.  Questions 
are  continually  arising  to  which  we  can  return  no  complete  answer.  Now  it  is 
night  with  us.  The  unclouded  day  is  yonder.  {S.  D.  Hillman,  B.A.)  No 
night  there  : — I.  The  absence  of  night  in  the  glorified  Church  implies    that 

THERE  WILL  BE  NO  SIN  THERE.  IE.  ThE  ABSENCE  OF  NIGHT  IMPLIES  THERE  SHALL 
BE    NO   IGNORANCE   THERE.       III.    ThE     ABSENCE    OF     NIGHT    IMPLIES     THERE   SHALL   BE 

NO  WEARINESS   THERE.     Here  God's  people  are  wearied  with  labours.    IV.  The 

ABSENCE  OF  NIGHT  IMPLIES  THAT  THERE  SHALL  BE  NO  CHANGE  THERE.  V.  ThE 
ABSENCE   OF   NIGHT   IMPLIES   THAT   THERE    SHALL   BE  NO  DEATH  THERE.       {B.   W.  Bucke, 

M.A.)  The  happiness  of  heaven: — I.  The  import  of  the  representation  by 
WHICH  THIS  STATE  IS  HERE  DISTINGUISHED.  1.  Among  the  mansions  of  the  blessed, 
there  shall  be  no  fatigue,  no  tendency  to  lassitude,  and  no  reason  for  repose.  2. 
There  shall  be  no  hostile  intrusion  there ;  there  is  no  reason  for  precaution.  3. 
There  is  no  impurity  and  no  sin.  4.  But  night  is  a  season  of  privation ;  and 
when  we  are  told  of  heaven  as  a  state  where  no  privation  shall  be,  we  are  well 
reminded  that  no  night  shall  be  there.  Do  you  speak  of  privation  of  society  ?  In 
heaven  you  will  have  delightful  and  hallowed  fellowship.  Do  you  speak  of  priva- 
tion of  knowledge  ?  In  heaven,  illumination  wQl  be  poured  upon  our  faculties  to 
the  utmost  extent  which  those  faculties  can,  by  possibility,  bear.  Do  you  speak  of 
privation  of  happiness?  In  heaven,  perturbation  and  pain,  and  fear,  and  distress, 
will  be  removed  for  ever.  5.  "  No  more  death " — "  no  more  death "  to  our 
persons:  "for  this  corruptible  shall  put  on  incorruption. "  "  No  more  death "  to 
our  happiness ;  "  no  more  death  "  to  our  attainments ;  "  no  more  death  "  to  our  joy. 
All  unchangeable,  and  all  imperishable,  and  all  for  ever !     IE.  The  conclusions 

WHICH   OUB  CONTEMPLATIONS   OF   THE   HEAVENLY   STATE    UNDER    THIS    REPRESENTATION 

OUGHT  FORCIBLY  TO  IMPRESS  UPON  OUR  MINDS.  1.  Oui  Contemplations  ought  to 
induce  preparation.  2.  Our  contemplations  of  the  heavenly  state  ought  to  induce 
gratitude.  You  were  the  slave  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will,  and  now 
have  been  brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God — a  liberty 
which  is  to  be  consummated  in  the  skies.  3.  These  contemplations  of  the 
heavenly  state  should  induce  desire.  And  truly  there  is  nothing — if  we  are 
preparing  for  such  scenes  as  those  which  have  now  been  laid  before  you — 
there  is  nothing  which  should  keep  your  desires  from  heaven.  {J.  Parsons.) 
Heaven  without  night : — 1.  We  are  wont  to  associate  with  night  the  idea  of 
weariness.  Sweet  to  the  myriad  toilers  in  the  world's  vast  workshop  is  the  coming 
of  the  still  evening  hour,  when  the  tasks  of  day  are  laid  aside,  and  tired  limbs  and 
overwrought  brains  draw  refreshment  from  slumber.  So  benign  is  this  provision 
that  Scripture  has  included  it  among  the  special  acts  of  Divine  goodness,  in  the 
beautiful  saying,  "  He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep."  Now,  as  this  arrangement  is  not 
found  in  heaven,  the  inference  is  obvious  that  the  denizens  of  that  bright  realm  do 
not  require  its  operation,  and  are  so  constituted  as  to  be  inaccessible  to  fatigue  from 
any  intensity  or  duration  of  employment.  2.  Night  is  the  symbol  of  ignorance. 
How  often  do  the  Sacred  Writers  represent  the  intellectual  and  moral  blindness  of 
men  under  the  figure  of  darkness  !  Thus  Job,  describing  the  errors  and  follies  of  the 
devotees  of  human  wisdom,  says, "  They  meet  with  darkness  in  the  day  time,  and  grope 
at  noonday  as  in  the  night."  And  the  fearful  ignorance  of  God  and  of  truth,  which 
overspread  the  world  at  the  period  of  the  Kedeemer's  advent,  is  pourtrayed  by  the 
graphic  declaration,  "Darkness  covered  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people." 
In  this  emblematic  sense,  a  deep  and  cloudy  night  stretches  over  the  sphere  which 
we  now  inhabit.  How  imperfect  are  our  faculties  I  How  narrow  the  limits  of  our 
knowledge  1  How  obscure  and  uncertain  our  researches  I  What  barriers  of  gloom 
and  mystery  meet  us  on  whatever  side  we  attempt  to  push  our  investigations ! 
But  in  heaven  there  will  be  no  intellectual  night.  All  the  errors  that  now  shade 
and  darken  our  minds — all  the  obstacles  which  here  impede  and  limit  our  acquisi- 
tions— shall  there  be  for  ever  removed.  The  faculties  of  the  soul  which,  amid  the 
fogs  and  illasions  of  sense,  are  so  restricted  in  their  range,  and  so  distorted  in  their 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

vision,  will,  in  that  radiant  world,  expand  into  seraphic  strength,  and  under  the 
beams  of  eternal  day  receive  a  new  impulse,  and  a  right  direction.  The  veil  also, 
which  now  hangs  over  so  many  departments  of  Truth,  will  then  be  lifted,  and  we 
shall  enter  her  inmost  temple,  and  worship  at  her  most  secret  shrine.  3.  Night  is 
the  symbol  of  sin.  The  time  which  God  has  ordained  for  rest,  man  has 
appropriated  to  crime.  All  classes  of  the  depraved  and  lawless  look  upon  night  as 
their  chosen  patron  and  protector.  "  The  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness." 
'•  Men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil."  When,  there- 
fore, we  read  of  heaven  as  being  without  night,  the  expression  evidently  implies 
that  into  those  holy  realms  no  impurity  can  ever  be  admitted.  •'  There  shall  in  no 
case  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth,  neither  whatsoever  worketh  abomination, 
or  maketh  a  lie,  but  they  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."  4.  Night  is 
the  symbol  of  danger.  The  hours  in  which  darkness  broods  over  the  earth  are 
peculiar  for  their  insecurity.  It  is  then  that  the  robber,  the  housebreaker,  the 
incendiary,  and  the  whole  tribe  of  depredators  on  property  and  life,  steal  from 
their  lurking  places,  and  roam  abroad  on  their  work  of  mischief.  And  then  it  is 
that  perils  easily  avoided  by  day  deepen  and  multiply  their  terrors.  The  exclusion 
of  night  from  heaven  may,  therefore,  be  interpreted  as  a  pledge  that,  in  that 
secure  asylum,  no  adversary  shall  assail  us,  and  no  possibility  of  evil  ever  menace 
our  peace.  The  seductions  of  the  world,  and  the  treachery  of  our  own  hearts,  will 
not  follow  us  there,  nor  can  Satan  cross  "  the  great  gulf  fixed  "  between  hell  and 
heaven  to  vex  us  with  his  assaults.  5.  Night  is  the  symbol  of  want.  Sleep  is  the 
sister  of  death.  During  its  reign  over  us,  we  retire  within  ourselves ;  the  senses 
close  their  portals,  and  the  soul  is  shut  in  from  all  its  wonted  delights.  Communion 
with  man  and  with  Nature  has  ceased.  Perception  is  suspended.  Reason  is  in 
abeyance.  Gone  are  consciousness,  memory,  hope.  And  even  should  slumber 
be  interrupted,  what  a  dreary  blank  does  the  eye  behold  I  Hidden  is  the  rich  land- 
scape— stream,  and  forest,  and  mountain — all  the  grand  things  and  the  lovely  on 
which  the  daylight  looks.  Above  us  may  glimmer  the  watching  stars  and  the 
silvery  moon,  but  they  only  awaken  regret  for  the  nobler  luminary  departed.  So  is  it 
that  night  typifies  want ;  and  the  fact  that  heaven  knows  no  night  is  a  most  expressive 
sign  that  it  also  knows  no  privation.  Want,  in  one  or  another  of  its  forms,  is 
inseparable  from  our  earthly  condition.  Pilgrims  in  the  desert,  we  must  expect  to 
sigh  in  vain  for  much  that  is  essential  to  perfect  felicity.  But  when  we  reach  the 
land  of  Divine  fulness  above,  every  need  will  be  supplied.  Everything  around  us,  every 
scene,  every  object,  every  employment,  will  be  adapted  to  exclude  disquietude,  and  to 
minister  delight.  Every  faculty,  every  passion,  will  be  absorbed,  in  adoration,  and 
overflowing  with  ecstasy.  And  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  will  bring  out  His 
treasures  to  augment  our  bliss,  showering  down  upon  our  spirits  all  the  raptures 
which  Almighty  Goodness  can  bestow.  6.  Night  is  the  symbol  of  death.  There 
are  few  analogies  in  the  whole  range  of  sacred  imagery  more  suited  to  represent 
death  than  the  season  of  night.  And  thus  we  find  it  very  frequently  employed  by  the 
inspired  writers.  The  Psalmist,  in  speaking  of  the  removal  of  his  friends  by  death, 
says,  "  Mine  acquaintance  hast  Thou  put  into  darkness."  Job  calls  death  "  the  day 
of  darkness,"  and  the  grave  "  the  bed  of  darkness,"  "  a  land  of  darkness,  as 
darkness  itself  ;  and  of  the  shadow  of  death,  without  any  order,  and  where  the  light 
is  as  darkness."  Our  Divine  Teacher  has  also  given  us  a  very  striking  description 
of  death  under  the  figure  of  night.  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me 
while  it  is  day  ;  the  night  cometh  in  which  no  man  can  work."  To  beings  situated 
as  we  are,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  form  an  idea  of  a  state  of  existence  in  which 
death  is  unknown.  Yet  this  is  true  of  heaven.  "  There  shall  be  no  more  death." 
Oh,  what  a  soul-ravishing  announcement  is  this !  No  more  death  1  Then  hope  has 
dawned  on  the  midnight  of  the  tomb;  the  King  of  Terrors  is  despoiled  of  his 
power,  and  the  all-conqueror  is  himself  conquered !  No  more  death  to  our  persona 
— no  more  death  to  our  attainments — no  more  death  to  our  usefulness — no  more 
death  to  our  joys!  All  are  changeless  and  perfect.  God  is  our  portion,  holiness 
our  vesture,  happiness  our  allotment,  eternity  our  home.  Oh,  what  a  boon  is 
Immortality  when  it  thus  stamps  its  own  endless  duration  on  all  that  awaits  us  in 
"  the  Better  Land  !  "  (Dr.  Ide.)  The  vision  of  the  truth : — I.  Now  here  is  seen 
THE  VALUE  OF  Chbistian  PRINCIPLE.  The  Man  of  Sorrows  is  on  His  march  for 
the  morning ;  for  the  principles  of  the  passion  place  you  on  the  track  of  the 
dawn.  n.  These  principiiES  are  powers  of  guidance  in  three  important — ^nay, 
MOMENTOUS — QUESTIONS  OF  CONDUCT.  1.  What  is  scriously  necessary  for  any  soul 
in  order,  in  its  mortal  journey,  to  be  useful  and  happy  ?     The  answer  is — Not  to 


CHAP.  XXI.]  REVELATION,  697 

live  at  random,  but  to  have  an  object  in  life.  2.  What  is  to  be  my  view  of  the 
world?  What  is  the  attitude  of  the  soul  of  the  Christian  towards  the  mass  of 
mankind?  The  optimist  views  it  all  through  the  medium  of  a  rose-coloured 
dream.  All  is  going  onward  as  merry  as  a  marriage-bell.  The  only  objection  is — 
theories  do  not  alter  human  suffering,  and  to  this  theory  facts  do  not  square.  It  is 
impossible  here  reasonably  to  deny  the  darkness.  It  is  true  it  is  blessed  to 
remember  "there  shall  be  no  night  there."  3.  There  is  here  a  revelation  of  the 
future.  The  eternal  city  is  in  fact  the  working  out  of  the  twofold  Divine  benedic- 
tion. It  is  the  completion  and  beatified  result  of  purified  characters.  "  Blessed  are 
the  undefiled  in  the  way,"  and  •'  Blessed  is  he  whose  unrighteousness  is  forgiven 
and  whose  sin  is  covered."  This  is  the  glorious  end  of  innocence  and  penitence. 
The  breaking  of  the  dawn  1  It  is  coming,  there  is  a  land  of  brightness  after 
darkness  ;  amid  all  sorrow  hope  wiU  yet  have  its  triumph  :  "  there  shall  be  no  night 
there  "  !  III.  Night  here,  however.  Why?  From  the  absence  of  the  sun  :  from 
the  accumulation  of  the  clouds.  1.  There  is  sin.  Wills  opposed  to  the  wiU  of 
changeless  goodness :  wills  almost  fixed  in  evil — eyes  from  which  all  vision  of 
brightness  seems  gone  :  hearts  which  seem  to  keep  no  trace  of  pity.  Ah  me ! — a 
ruined  soul,  or  a  soul  on  the  road  to  ruin,  how  terrible  I  To  be  growing  worse 
instead  of  better  :  to  be  losing  foothold,  not  climbing  boldly  on.  Soul  of  a  sinner ! 
Pause,  think  twice.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  deliverance :  hard  to  believe  at  times 
that  God's  grace,  that  fresh  breezes  from  the  heavenly  courts,  can  disperse  such 
clouds,  but  it  is  true.  Look  up,  march  eastward  ;  repent,  cry  for  help,  take  heart ; 
though  the  path  be  rough  it  is  the  path  of  the  Holy  Passion.  The  city  of  the 
saints  is  the  land  of  the  sunlight.  "  There  shall  be  no  night  there."  2.  There  is 
sorrow.  Ah  !  who  has  ever  read,  who  can  ever  read,  the  mystery  of  tears  ?  But 
there  it  is.  There  is  a  home  where  no  sorrow  enters — there  dwelleth  no  evil,  *•  there 
is  no  night  there."  3.  There  is  death.  However  it  be  lightened  by  the  faith  of  a 
Christian,  what  thinking  mind  can  fail  to  acknowledge  there  is  the  solemnity  of 
night  about  the  grave  ?  Well,  the  dawn  of  eternity  shall  break,  and  death  itself 
shall  die.  IV.  There  are  many  difficulties,  many  sorrows;  yet  are  there 
NOT  some  AiiLEViATiONS  ?  Life  is  never  altogether  darkness  when  it  is  illuminated 
by  hope.  Look  upward,  take  courage,  never  allow  the  cowardice  of  permanent 
despondency,  or  the  blasphemy  of  final  despair.  Trust  God.  Surely  even  here  are 
streaks  in  the  darkness.  There  are  quiet  hours  of  rest  and  blessing;  such  a 
converse  with  a  dear  friend  ;  such  a  happy  day  of  pleasure ;  such  evidence  that  the 
sun  is  there,  though  veiled  by  the  vapour ;  such  approaches  of  the  daylight ; 
such  streaks  of  the  dawn.  To  repent,  heartily,  manfully,  thoroughly,  when 
you  have  sinned ;  to  receive  trial  and  sorrow  with  loving  submission,  and 
willingly  to  taste  the  sweet  "uses  of  adversity";  to  love  goodness,  truth,  duty, 
God  in  Chjrist,  and  by  the  power,  the  moral  power  of  love,  to  help  and  make 
men  better — this,  this,  surely,  whatever  happens,  is  to  plant  your  feet  firmly 
on  the  track  of  the  dawn.  V.  What  about  the  future?  Well,  John  assures 
us  that  there  lies  before  us  something  beyond  all  words  happy,  which  he  can  only 
convey  to  us  by  speaking  of  it  as  "  a  city."  Kemember  that  in  that  city  you  will 
fjad  the  result  of  your  toil  and  the  end  of  your  journey.     {Canon  Knox  Little.) 

Ver.  27.  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  that  deftleth. — The 

barrier : — I.  The  word  of  exclusion.  This  is  no  arbitrary  decree,  it  is  a  solemn 
declaration  to  which  all  holy  spirits  give  their  willing  assent  and  consent ;  an 
ordinance  of  which  even  the  excluded  themselves  shall  admit  the  justice.  1.  For, 
first,  it  is  not  meet  that  so  royal  and  divine  a  corporation  as  the  glorified  Church  of 
God  should  be  ruined  by  defilement.  God  forbid  that  "  her  light,  which  is  like  unto 
a  stone  most  precious,  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as  crystal,"  should  ever  be 
dimmed  by  the  breath  of  sin.  2.  There  can  be  no  entrance  of  evil  into  the  kingdom 
of  God,  for  it  is  the  very  essence  of  the  bliss  of  the  glorified  Church  that  evil  should 
be  excluded.  3.  Furthermore,  consider  that  there  is  an  impossibility  of  any  sinful, 
unrenewed  person  ever  entering  into  the  body  corporate  of  the  glorified  Church  of 
God — an  impossibility  within  the  persons  themselves.  The  sea  cannot  rest  because 
it  is  the  sea,  and  the  sinner  cannot  be  quiet  because  he  is  a  sinner.  4.  Our  own 
hearts  forbid  that  evil  should  so  enter.  You  know  how  a  few  rags  from  the  East 
have  sometimes  carried  a  plague  into  a  city ;  and  if  you  were  standing  at  the  quay 
when  a  plague-laden  ship  arrived  you  would  cry,  "  Burn  those  rags  ;  do  anything 
with  them,  but  do  keep  them  away  from  the  people.  Bring  not  the  pest  into  a  vast 
city,  where  it  may  slay  its  thousands  !  "    So  do  we  cry,  "  Great  God,  forbid  it  that 


698  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

anything  that  defileth  should  enter  into  Thy  perfected  Church  I  We  cannot  endure 
the  thought  thereof."  II.  The  wobd  op  exclusion  wokkino  within  the  soul — 
within  my  soul,  within  yours.  No  person  who  defiles,  no  fallen  spirit,  or  sinful 
man  can  enter.  And  as  no  person,  so  no  tendency,  leaning,  inclination,  or  will  to 
sin  can  gain  admission.  No  wish,  no  desire,  no  hunger  towards  that  which  ia 
unclean  shall  ever  be  found  in  the  perfect  city  of  God.  Nor  even  a  thought  of  evil 
can  be  conceived  there,  much  less  a  sinful  act  performed.  Nothing  shall  ever  be 
done  within  those  gates  of  pearl  contrary  to  the  perfect  law,  nor  anything  imagined 
in  opposition  to  spotless  holiness.  Consider  such  purity,  and  wonder  at  it.  It  is 
altogether  perfect!  And,  mark  well,  that  no  untruth  can  enter — "neither  what- 
soever maketh  a  lie."  Nothing  can  enter  heaven  which  is  not  real;  nothing 
erroneous,  mistaken,  conceited,  hollow,  professional,  pretentious,  unsubstantial,  can 
be  smuggled  through  the  gates.  Only  truth  can  dwell  with  the  God  of  truth. 
Bethink  you  that  not  only  does  actual  sin  shut  men  out  of  heaven,  but  this  text 
goes  to  the  heart  by  reminding  us  that  we  have  within  us  inbred  sin,  which  would 
defile  us  speedily,  even  if  we  were  now  clean  of  positive  transgression.  How  can  you 
and  I  enter  heaven  while  there  is  unholy  anger  in  us  ?  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
into  heaven  a  hasty  temper,  or  a  quick  imperious  spirit,  or  a  malicious  mind  ;  for 
these  defile.  But  then  look  at  the  other  part  of  the  difficulty — that  is,  the  making 
of  your  own  heart  pure  and  clean.  How  shall  this  be  done  ?  Have  you  tried  to 
master  your  temper  ?  I  hope  you  have.  Have  you  managed  it  ?  Your  tendencies 
this  way  or  that,  you  have  striven  against  them,  I  hope,  but  have  you  mastered 
them  ?  I  cannot  overcome  myself,  nor  overcome  my  sin.  I  will  never  cease  from 
the  task,  God  helping  me,  but  apart  from  the  Divine  Spirit  the  task  is  as  impossible 
as  to  make  a  world.  IH.  The  word  of  salvation,  which  just  meets  the  difficulty 
raised  by  the  sentence — **  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  that 
defileth."  But,  first,  my  past  sin,  what  of  that?  "Washed  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb !  "  This  is  our  first  great  comfort,  "  He  that  believeth  in  Him  is  not 
condemned."  But  here  is  the  point,  there  is  still  no  entrance  into  the  holy  city  so 
long  as  there  are  any  evil  tendencies  within  us.  This  is  the  work,  this  is  the 
difficulty,  and  since  these  are  to  be  overcome,  how  is  the  work  to  be  done? 
Simple  believing  upon  Christ  brings  you  justification,  but  you  want  more 
than  that ;  you  need  sanctification,  the  purgation  of  your  nature.  Faith  in 
Christ  tells  us  of  something  else  beside  the  blood.  There  is  a  Divine  Person — let 
us  bow  our  heads  and  worship  Him — the  Holy  Ghost  who  proceedeth  from  the 
Father,  and  He  it  is  who  renews  us  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Heaven : — ^I.  Into  heaven  shall  enteb  nothing  that  defileth.  Every  one,  and 
everything  whatsoever  that  is  tainted  with  any  impurity  shall  be  utterly  excluded. 
Not  merely  that  eventually  heaven  will  be  cleared  of  such  blemishes,  but  such 
shall  never  enter  there.  Absolute  truthfulness  and  perfect  purity,  without  any 
admixture  of  defilement  at  all,  these  are  what  God  requires  in  all  who  cross  the 
threshold  of  His  home  above.  Better  to  be  blind  to  the  glory  altogether  than  to 
gaze  longingly  upon  it,  if  we  must  also  gaze  with  despair  on  the  forbidding 
regulation  that  those  defiled,  as  we  are,  shall  in  no  wise  enter.  H.  This  is  true ;  but, 
God  be  thanked !  it  is  not  the  whole  truth.  For,  note — The  Lamb  was  slain  to 
CLEANSE  the  DEFILED.  There  would  never  have  been  found  in  heaven  a  "Lamb 
as  it  had  been  slain,"  unless  it  had  been  God's  intention  that  some  poor  defiled 
creatures  should  get  rid  of  their  defilement  and  be  found  there  too.  We  could  not 
have  climbed  that  frowning  wall ;  we  could  not  have  burst  through  those  glorious 
gates ;  a  flaming  sword  of  cherubims  would  have  kept  us,  the  defiled,  from 
entering.  But  where  Christ  our  atonement  goes,  there,  clinging  to  His  feet,  we 
may  go  too.  If  He  mounts  to  heaven,  we  may  follow  Him.  If  He  sits  upon  the 
throne  of  God,  there,  too,  our  dwelling-place  shall  be.  The  transgressor  may  be 
sunk  in  the  guiltiest  pollution ;  but  if  in  his  distress  he  casts  his  sinful  soul  into 
the  forgiving  arms  of  the  Eedeemer,  he  shall  surely  be  forgiven.  Out  of  his  great 
tribulation  he  shall  come,  and  wash  his  robes  and  make  them  white  in  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  and  therefore  he,  too,  once  defiled,  and  banished,  and  despairing,  shall 
be  found  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple. 
ni.  Those  becorded  in  Christ's  book  of  life,  and  washed  in  His  blood,  shall 
ENTER  INTO  LIFE.  But  wc  stand  here  in  our  pollution,  full  of  abomination,  and  false- 
hood, and  defilement.  The  antagonism  is  frightful,  the  exclusion  complete.  But 
the  Lamb  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  His  blood  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  In  that 
fountain,  "  whosoever  will "  may  wash  and  be  clean.  Being  justified  by  faith  he  has 
peace  with  God.   The  Holy  One  will  regenerate  and  sanctify  his  soul.  (T.  M.  Herbert, 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION,  699 

M.A.)  The  impassable  gulf: — The  other  day  our  Australian  colonists  were  urging  ug 
on  to  what  might  have  been  a  very  formidable  struggle  with  France.  They  pleaded, 
and  that  justly,  that  it  was  almost  fatal  to  the  well-being  and  security  of  the  com- 
munities on  the  east  coast  of  Australia  that  France  should  have  its  convict  station 
in  such  close  proximity.  Men  steeped  in  triple  murders  and  every  unnatural 
abomination  made  their  way  across  from  New  Caledonia  from  time  to  time  to  a 
colony  planted  with  fair  and  virtuous  homes.  Of  course  we  all  sympathised  with 
the  colonists ;  we  should  resent  the  existence  of  a  passable  gulf  between  our  homes 
and  culprits  of  that  sort.  If  by  an  income  tax  of  sixpence  in  the  pound  we  could 
make  the  strip  of  sea  an  impassable  gulf,  we  should  all  be  ready  to  do  it.  When  a 
man  has  passed  impenitent  into  eternity,  his  sin  is  just  as  much  an  abomination  to 
the  God  of  light  and  the  children  of  light  as  the  crime  of  the  French  convict  is  to 
us.  How  is  it  that  we  sympathise  with  the  colonist,  but  question  God's  right  in 
fixing  this  impassable  gulf?  Had  He  no  right  to  protect  His  children  in  their 
new  home  ?  Heaven  would  be  no  heaven  if  the  proud  Pharisee  could  come  sweep- 
ing by,  wounding  some  poor  saint  of  God  at  every  step,  and  seeking  to  press  God's 
emancipated  sufferers  into  new  serfdoms.  (T.  G.  Selby.)  ^Future  punishment 
retributive  : — I  wonder  that  men  should  have  such  faith  in  the  reformative  effect 
of  punishment.  When  we  call  to  mind  that  forty-five  per  cent,  of  the  convictions 
in  our  police  courts  are  the  convictions  of  people  who  have  been  sentenced  before, 
and  that  ninety-five  per  cent,  of  sentences  to  penal  servitude  are  passed  upon 
people  who  have  previously  had  an  acquaintance  with  the  pains  and  rigours  of 
prison  life,  it  does  not  seem  very  reasonable  to  hope  much  from  the  reforma- 
tive tendency  of  the  punishment  that  will  overtake  the  wicked  beyond  the 
grave.  (Ibid.)  The  Lamb's  book  of  life. — The  Heavenly  Church  Book : — 
I.  The  begister.  The  Infinite  One  must  know  everything — what  it  is,  where  it 
is ;  its  nature,  character,  and  uses.  But  it  is  not  said  that  there  is  an  indis- 
criminate register  for  all,  but  simply  for  the  holy  and  true.  Not  for  the  wicked. 
Are  you  enrolled  in  that  book  among  the  saints  ?  If  in  Christ,  you  are,  you  must 
be — no  one  can  keep  you  out  of  it.  If  not  in  Christ,  you  must  be  out  of  it,  and  no 
one  can  put  you  in.  II.  The  begistrab.  "  The  Lamb's  book."  The  Book  of  Life 
must  be  the  most  difficult  to  keep.  What  wisdom — discrimination  and  justice  are 
required !  The  combined  intelligence  of  heaven  and  earth  could  not  keep  it ;  even 
archangels  would  make  mistakes,  but  the  "  Lamb  "  cannot.  Think  of  His  high 
qualifications.  His  wisdom  is  perfect,  His  omniscience  unfailing.  His  justice 
unsullied,  and  His  love  deep  and  eternal.  HI.  The  registered.  To  be  in  that 
book  is  to  be  safe.  To  be  there  is  to  have  heaven  for  an  eternal  possession.  To  be 
there,  is  to  be  among  the  highest  and  the  best.  What  honour  can  be  comparable 
with  this?  {Homilist.)  The  heavenly  register: — L  The  book  referred  to — 1. 
The  book  of  life.  2.  The  Lamb's  book.  (1)  As  the  author  of  life.  (2)  As  the 
Head  of  the  Church.  (3)  As  the  final  Judge.  H.  The  names  recorded — 1. 
Repentant  sinners.  2.  Living  beUevers.  3.  Sanctified  disciples.  Of  all  ages — 
countries — dispensations — conditions.  HI.  The  PBrvHiEOES  of  the  registered.  1. 
Divine  honour.  2.  Divine  riches.  3.  Every  good.  4.  Heavenly  glory.  Con- 
clusion :  The  subject  should  produce — 1.  Unspeakable  joy.  2.  Entire  confidence. 
3.  Holy  circumspection.    4.  Fidelity  and  obedient  perseverance.     {Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


Veb.  1.  A  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystaL — The  life  river : — ^I.  It  is 
A  BivEB  OF  heaven.  They  that  drink  of  it  must  drink  immortality  and  love.  "  It 
is  the  river  of  God."  II.  It  is  a  river  of  grace.  It  flows  from  the  throne 
of  the  Lamb ;  and  everything  that  has  connection  with  the  Lamb  is  necessarily  of 
grace.  III.  It  is  a  river  of  power.  It  comes  from  the  throne — the  throne  of 
God;  and  therefore  possessing  the  properties  of  that  throne.  It  communicates 
power  into  the  soul  of  every  one  that  drinks,  or  even  that  walks  along  its  banks. 
The  power  and  authority  of  God  are  in  it ;  for  it  issues  from  the  fountainhead  of 
universal  power,  IV.  A  river  of  purity.  "  A  pure  river  of  water  of  life  1  " 
Like  the  Lamb  from  whose  throne  it  comes,  who  is  without  blemish,  and  without 
spot  1    Like  the  city  through  which  it  flows,  into  which  nothing  that  defileth  shall 


700  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxn. 

enter  1  As  it  pours  its  heavenly  waters  on  us  now,  it  purifies.  V.  A  riveb  of  life. 
Wheresoever  the  .river  cometh  it  quickeneth  (Ezek.  xlvii.  9).  Each  drop  is 
life-giving  ;  it  contains  everlasting  life,  for  the  Spirit  of  life  is  in  that  river.  VI. 
A  BivEB  OF  BRIGHTNESS.  The  words  "  clear  as  crystal "  should  be  "  bright  as 
crystal  " — the  same  word  as  in  ver.  16,  "the  bright  and  morning  star."  It  is  a 
river  of  splendour.  Divine  and  heavenly  splendour.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The 
river  of  life :  or  the  spiritual  enjoyments  of  the  heavenly  life : — I.  The  spiBiTUAii 

ENJOYMENTS   OF   THE    HEAVENLY  LIFE   ABE   ABUNDANT    IN   THEIB    MEASUBE.       "And    He 

showed  me  a  pure  river."  Great  cities  are  generally  built  on  the  banks  of  rivers  to 
ensure  health,  commerce,  and  pleasure.  The  spread  of  the  Gospel  is  sometimes 
set  forth  under  the  emblem  of  a  river  (Ezek.  xvii.  1 ;  Hab.  ii.  14 ;  Psa.  xvi. 
4).  Here,  however,  we  have  the  spiritual  enjoyment  of  redeemed  and  glorified 
humanity  imaged  forth.  St.  John  did  not  see  a  brook,  or  a  well,  but  a  river 
flowing  from  the  great  Throne.  The  spiritual  enjoyments  of  heaven  are  not 
scanty.     On  this  river  the  richest  products  wiU  be  borne  to  glorified  humanity. 

II.    The     SPIRITUAL     enjoyments     of     the      heavenly     life      ABE     PURE     IN     THEIR 

NATURE.  "  Pure" — "  Clear  as  crystal."  Are  we  to  judge  of  the  purity  of  water  by 
its  cleansing  properties  ?  Then  none  so  pure  as  this  which  flows  from  the  Throne 
of  God,  as  it  can  purify  the  unclean  soul.  It  can  wash  out  sins  of  the  deepest 
dye  from  the  garments  of  the  moral  nature,  and  make  them  white  as  no  fuller 
on  earth  can  whiten  them;    hence,  the   faultless  multitude  before  the   throne. 

m.    The    SPIRITUAL   enjoyments   of   the   heavenly  life  ABE  INVIGOBATINO  IN    THEIB 

ENEBGY.  "  Water  of  life."  This  great  river  of  heaven  is  not  sluggish  in  its  flow, 
but  quick  and  rapid.  It  gives  life  and  verdure  wherever  it  comes.  The  things  of 
earth  are  dead  and  barren,  but  when  touched  by  the  influence  and  grace  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  they  teem  with  vitaUty.  But  the  life  of  the  soul  now  is  nothing  in 
intensity  as  compared  with  what  it  will  be  when  it  attains  the  enjoyment  of 
heaven.  Then  it  will  become  possessed  of  an  immortal  vitality  which  shall  know 
no  decay  or  decline.  IV.  The  spiritual  enjoyments  of  the  heavenly  life  wilii 
ETERNALLY  MEET  THE  NEEDS  OF  THE  HUMAN  SOUL.  The  thirsty  there  havB  a  river  at 
which  they  can  drink,  and  which  will  never  be  exhausted.  The  Divine  gifts 
in  heaven  wiU  be  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  our  renewed  and  glorified 
natures.     Thus  the  soul  will  be  made  glad.    V.  The  spiritual  enjoyments  of  the 

HEAVENLY  LIFE   ARE   THE    OUTCOME    OF    THE    SOVEREIGN    MERCY   OF  GOD.      "  Out  of  the 

Throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb."  And  so  all  the  spiritual  enjoyments  of  heaven, 
in  abundance,  in  purity,  in  life,  in  satisfaction,  and  in  perpetuity  will  be  the 
outcome  of  the  Sovereign  Grace  of  God  as  exercised  through  and  manifested  in 
the  mediatorial  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  Lessons :  1.  That  we  should  prize  the 
ordinances  through  which  the  water  of  life  is  conveyed  to  men.  2.  Contemplate 
the  active  spiritual  enjoyment  of  the  good.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Divine  love  a 
river: — I.  Exhaustless.  It  rises  from  the  infinitude  of  the  Divine  nature — a 
source  unfathomable.  II.  Universal.  This  river  rolls  everywhere.  It  rolls  under 
the  universe :  and  all  things  float  on  its  waves.  It  refreshes  and  beautifies  all. 
m.  Ever  flowing.  The  inexhaustible  fountain  is  always  active,  outpouring 
itself.  Creation  is  a  work  never  finished,  for  the  river  of  Divine  love  is  overflowing. 
IV.  Kestorative.  It  at  once  resuscitates  and  cleanses :  it  quenches  thirst  and 
removes  defilement.  Christ  is  the  channel  through  which  flows  this  soul- 
restorative  love.  {Homilist.)  Christianity  a  transcendental  system  : — I.  It  is 
transcendental  in  its  value.  What  on  earth  is  of  such  worth  as  water?  But 
what  is  the  character  of  this  water  ?  1.  It  is  a  "  river  " — not  a  stagnant  pool,  a 
Bleeping  lake,  or  a  purling  brook;  but  a  river,  profound  in  depth,  majestic  in 
volume,  resistless  in  movement.  2.  It  is  a  "pure"  river.  How  pure  is  Chris- 
tianity 1  How  holy  its  morals,  how  morally  perfect  its  leading  character — Christ  1 
3.  It  is  a  pure  river  of  life.  4.  It  is  a  pure  river  of  life  that  is  transparent. 
"  Clear  as  crystal."  II.  It  is  transcendental  in  its  origin.  1.  It  proceeds  from 
"  the  throne  " — the  centre  of  universal  authority.  Christianity  is  a  code  rather 
than  a  creed,  more  regulative  than  speculative.  2.  It  proceeds  from  the  "  throne 
of  God."  Christianity  is  a  Divine  system;  its  congruity  with  aU  collateral 
history,  with  our  moral  intuitions,  with  all  our  a  priori  notions  of  a  God, 
proves  its  Divinity.  3.  It  proceeds  from  the  "throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb."  Christ  has  to  do  with  it.  Conclusion:  Such  is  the  gospel.  Value  this 
river.  Kind  Heaven,  speed  the  course  of  this  river  I  May  it  penetrate  every 
region  of  the  world,  and  roU  its  waves  of  life  through  every  heart !  {Homilist.) 
Heaven : — I.  Wherein  the  glorified  life  in  heaven  will  be  similar  to,  and 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  701 

WHEREIN   IT   WILL   DIFFER   FROM,    SPIRITUAL   LIFE    ON   EARTH.       1.    The   first  truth  that 

meets  us  in  this  passage  is,  that  the  influences  which  will  sustain  the  future  life  in 
heaven  are  described  in  precisely  the  same  figurative  language  as  that  used  by  our 
Lord  and  the  inspired  writers  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  life  on  earth.  That 
which  John  saw  flowing  in  the  midst  of  the  street  from  its  perennial  source 
in  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  was  a  river  of  "  water  "  of  life.  This  is 
exactly  the  language  used  in  Scripture  to  indicate  the  powers  and  influences 
which  sustain  the  spiritual  man  in  this  world.  Isaiah  invites  men  to  partake 
of  spiritual  blessings  in  the  words:  "Ho!  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye 
to  the  waters."  Jeremiah  thus  laments  over  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  Jews : 
*'  For  my  people  have  forsaken  me,  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  have 
hewn  out  to  themselves  cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water."  "  If 
thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith  unto  thee,  Give  Me  to 
drink,  thou  wouldst  have  asked  of  Him,  and  He  would  have  given  thee  living 
water."  We  are  clearly  taught,  therefore,  by  this  vision  of  the  apostle,  that  while 
the  outward  condition  of  the  life  in  heaven  will  be  vastly  changed,  the  weak  and 
sinful  body  giving  place  to  one  like  the  glorified  body  of  Christ — yet  the  life  itself 
will  be  the  same.  We  shall  then  continue  to  be  what  we  begin  to  be  now. 
Heavenly  life,  in  its  deepest  and  inmost  reality,  is  begun  on  earth.  As,  in  the 
unopened  bud,  there  are  in  microscopic  form  all  that  will  afterwards  expand  into 
the  flower ;  as,  in  the  child,  there  are  all  the  incipient  faculties  that  will  afterwards 
develop  into  the  full  power  and  maturity  of  manhood  ;  so  with  man  as  a  spiritual 
being.  Grace  is  the  infancy  of  glory,  and  glory  is  the  manhood  of  grace.  Natural 
death,  which,  when  seen  from  the  human  side,  appears  an  overwhelming  catas- 
trophe, can  have  no  power  over  that  life — it  only  separates  the  germ  from  the 
material  husk  in  which  it  has  been  enclosed.  2.  As  then  the  future  life  will 
be  a  continuation  under  changed  conditions  of  the  life  we  possess  now,  it  follows 
not  only  that  present  experience  must  in  its  measure  be  the  only  true  inter- 
pretation of  the  future,  but,  further,  the  glory  of  that  future  life  reflects  light  back 
upon  the  present.  It  becomes  us  not  only  to  fix  our  hopes  upon  the  blessings  yet 
in  reserve,  but  to  prize  highly  those  we  have  already  received.  While  we  think  of 
heaven  as  the  one  hope  of  the  present  life,  let  us  learn  to  set  more  value  on  and 
use  more  diligently  the  grace  which  sovereign  mercy  has  already  bestowed.  II. 
Wherein  the  glorified  life  in  heaven  will  differ  from  spiritual  life  on  earth. 
1.  Observe,  as  the  first  special  characteristic  of  this  water  of  life,  that  it  flows  in  a 
river,  at  once  suggesting  the  idea  of  unfailing  abundance.  Our  great  rivers  never 
become  dry.  Generations  of  men  are  born  and  perform  their  part  in  life  and  then 
die,  while  the  rivers  of  which  they  drank,  and  beside  which  they  built  their  cities, 
remain  the  same.  Some,  like  the  Nile,  have  been  flowing  from  long  before  historic 
times.  "  Men  may  come,  and  men  may  go,  but  they  flow  on  for  ever."  And  the 
blessings  that  will  be  given  in  the  future  to  sustain  the  spiritual  life  of  the  behever 
are  here  symbolised  by  a  river  of  water  of  life,  denoting  certainly,  among  other 
things,  that  in  heaven  there  will  be  an  unfailing  abundance  of  whatever  is  necessary 
to  sustain  the  life  and  growth  of  the  spiritual  nature.  No  pressing  need  will  ever 
darken  the  brightness  of  that  Divine  home,  or  promote  the  decay  of  spiritual  vigour. 
The  river  flows  from  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  Its  source  is  perennial. 
Sooner  shall  all  the  powers  of  the  universe  fail ;  sooner  shall  God  Himself  cease  to 
be  God,  than  the  fountains  from  which  spiritual  blessings  flow  become  dry  or 
empty.  2.  Observe,  as  a  second  point,  that  John  saw  the  river  of  water  of  life 
flowing  in  the  midst  of  the  street.  To  understand  the  symbolism  here,  we  must 
remember  that  the  street  is  the  place  where  men  meet  together,  where  they  pursue 
their  varied  occupations.  And  the  golden  undefiled  street  of  the  New  Jerusalem 
represents  the  scene  of  the  common  activities  of  the  life  there.  And  the  position  of 
the  river  flowing  in  the  midst  of  the  street  teaches  the  truth  that  whatever  the 
occupations  may  be,  there  will  be  nothing  in  them  antagonistic  to  the  highest 
interests  of  the  spiritual  life.  Now  the  street  is  the  scene  of  care  and  toil.  Here 
on  earth  it  is  the  place  where  temptations  have  to  be  met,  where  sin  assaults  and 
wickedness  displays  itself.  No  river  of  water  of  life  flows  in  the  midst  of  our 
streets,  but  rather  the  waters  of  ungodliness  and  iniquity.  The  man  who  longs  for 
communion  with  God  does  not  go  into  the  open  highways  of  human  trafl&c  to  find 
strength  and  peace :  he  goes,  rather,  into  his  closet.  He  must  put  the  world  outside 
in  order  to  pray  for  the  lessening  of  the  power  of  the  world  within.  But  in  heaven 
fellowship  with  God  will  need  neither  abstraction  nor  privacy.  Every  occupation 
wiU  harmonise  with  the  highest  aspirations  of  man's  renewed  nature.    Ail  outward 


702  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

things  will  perfectly  accord  with  and  promote  the  well-being  of  his  spirit.  3. 
Observe,  further,  John  speaks  in  the  most  emphatic  manner  of  the  purity  of  that 
1-iver.  "  A  pure  river  of  water  of  life  clear  as  crystal."  Spiritual  influences,  the 
truth  that  enlightens,  the  Divine  grace  that  quickens  and  sustains  the  spirit,  are  in 
themselves  always  pure.  But  how  continually  on  earth  they  become  dimmed  and 
weakened  by  mixing  with  what  is  human  and  worldly !  How  strangely  truth 
becomes  mixed  with  error,  and  Divine  influences  marred  and  weakened  by  human 
(passions  and  prejudices !  What  man  can  maintain  that  he  has  received  and  holds 
only  the  truth  ?  that  he  has  made  no  mistakes  ?  that  in  him  the  grace  of  God  is 
unmarred  by  any  human  weaknesses  or  by  any  contrary  affections  ?  But  in  heaven 
the  river  of  water  of  life  is  "  pure,  clear  as  crystal "  ;  it  has  no  admixture  of  error 
or  imperfection ;  it  has  never  become  adulterated  by  inferior  elements.  4.  Then 
observe,  as  a  last  point,  this  vision  of  John  teaches  that  in  heaven  faith  will  give 
place  to  sight.  John  "  saw  the  river  of  water  of  life  proceeding  from  the  throne  of 
God  and  the  Lamb."  How  much  of  unbelief  and  misbelief  mingles  with  the 
strongest  faith  on  earth !  How  insidiously  doubts  creep  into  our  minds  and  rob 
them  of  their  joyful  confidence !  There  are  times  when  our  fear  suggests  that  the 
ground  of  our  faith  is  slipping  away  from  beneath  our  feet.  But  those  who  will 
drink  of  that  pure  stream  will  behold  the  source  whence  it  comes ;  they  will  have 
no  need  of  faith,  and  they  will  have  no  temptation  to  doubt.  Every  joy  will  be 
permeated  and  intensified  by  a  sense  of  blessed  certainty  that  it  is  the  true  gift  of 
the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb.  {W.  H.  King.)  The  river  of  life : — 
I.  Its  source.  H.  Its  progress.  HI.  Its  properties.  1.  Living.  "  Water  of 
life"  (John  iv.  10).  2.  Pure  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25;  Eph.  iv.  30).  3.  Bright.  "  Clear 
as  crystal."  Eadiant  with  light.  Illuminating.  IV.  Its  effects.  1.  Quickening 
(Ezek.  xlvii.  9 ;  John  iv.  14;  John  vii.  37-39).  2.  Beautifying  (Isa.  xxxv.  1,  6,  7; 
Isa.  Iviii.  11).  3.  Fructifying  (Rev.  xxii.  12 ;  Jer.  xvii.  8 ;  Psa.  i.  3  ;  Isa.  Iv.  1 ; 
Rev.  xxii.  17).  {E.  H.  Hopkins.)  Gleaming  as  crystal : — If  we  are  to  understand 
the  New  Jerusalem  properly,  we  almost  need  to  have  been  citizens  of  the  old. 
Observe,  then,  that  the  ancient  Jerusalem  was  not  situated,  as  most  cities,  on  the 
banks  of  some  river,  or  the  shore  of  some  sea.  It  stood  in  a  peculiar  position,  at 
some  distance  from  either :  it  was  badly  watered  ;  we  read  of  a  pool  or  two,  of  a 
little  brook,  of  an  aqueduct  and  some  other  artificial  water-structures.  Bearing 
this  fact  in  mind,  you  will  understand  how  forcible  an  appeal  to  the  imagination 
would  be  contained  in  the  verse  of  the  46th  Psalm,  which  tells  of  a  river  that 
should  "make  glad  the  city  of  God."  In  evidence  of  the  foregoing  you  may 
notice  the  following  remark  of  Philo  on  the  verse  quoted  :  "  The  holy  city,  which 
exists  at  present,  in  which  also  the  holy  temple  is  established,  is  at  a  great 
distance  from  any  sea  or  river,  so  that  it  is  clear  that  the  writer  here  means 
figuratively  to  speak  of  some  other  city  than  the  visible  city  of  God."  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  that  the  mention  of  a  pure,  fresh  stream  flowing  through  the 
midst  of  Jerusalem  was  a  figure  of  a  very  striking  nature ;  and  we  say  that 
the  basis  of  this  magnificent  description  in  the  Apocalypse  lies  in  the  insufficiency 
of  the  water  supply  of  the  ancient  city.  The  life  of  the  future,  and  by  that  we 
mean  heaven  on  earth  as  well  as  heaven,  shall  be  as  different  from  that  which  you 
are  now  realising  as  the  water  supply  of  Jerusalem  would  be  if  a  river  flowed  in  the 
midst,  from  what  it  is  now  with  merely  Kidron  and  Bethesda  and  Siloam  and 
Solomon's  Pools.  1.  It  is  not  a  standstill  life :  no  one  can  stand  still  who  Hves 
with  God.  There  must  be  fresh  discoveries  of  truth  and  duty  every  day;  and 
fresh  inquisition  made  into  the  heights  and  depths  of  Redeeming  Love.  Abandon- 
ment to  God  must  mean  advancement  in  God.  2.  Neither  in  earth  nor  in 
heaven  is  the  life  to  be  an  intermittent  one.  There  should  be  no  such  word  as 
"revival"  in  the  dictionary  of  the  Christian  Church:  we  want  "life,"  not 
"  revival."  You  hear  people  saying  of  certain  religious  movings — "  They  are 
having  quite  a  revival " ;  alas !  and  were  they  dead  before  ?  Indeed,  I  am  sure 
this  intermittent  fountain  expresses  only  too  accurately  the  lives  of  many  of  us. 
The  best  that  God  can  do  with  us  is  to  make  us  an  occasional  blessing — a 
sorrowful  thing  to  confess  when  there  are  suffering  ones  around  waiting  and 
watching  the  surface  of  our  hearts  to  see  whether  there  is  any  moving  of  the  water. 
3.  It  is  not  a  life  for  which  the  world  is  too  strong,  and  which  cannot  therefore 
be  kept  pure.  It  is  not  figured  by  a  little  brook,  as  Kidron,  defiled  with  all  the 
impurities  of  a  city,  and  that  an  Oriental  city.  And  yet  how  many  lives  there 
are  of  which  we  have  to  say,  "  The  world  is  too  strong  for  them  "  ;  well-intentioned 
people,  but  feeble  in  grace,  and  who  have  received  but  httle  of  the  Life  of  God.     4. 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  703 

It  is  not  a  humanly-devised  life,  as  Solomon's  aqueducts.  Our  faith  stands  not 
in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God.  The  Divine  Life  is  not  sect,  and 
it  is  not  system.  The  channel  of  a  sect !  it  is  a  pipe  that  bursts  when  the  tide 
of  life  rises  beyond  a  certain  point.  The  channel  of  a  system  !  it  is  an  aqueduct 
through  which,  if  one  stone  be  taken  out,  the  water  ceases  to  reach  you.  If 
one  travels  on  the  continent,  one  can  see  (I  think  it  is  at  Avignon)  the  ruins 
of  the  ancient  Koman  aqueduct ;  but  the  Rhine  and  the  rest  of  the  rivers  of  God 
flow  on  still,  full  of  water.  5.  Finally,  we  may  say,  that  the  Life  is  one  of  absolute 
dependence,  and  is  conditioned  on  the  sovereignty  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb. 
Grace  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  the  portions  of  the  dependent  soul :  they  only  flow 
from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  {J.  Rendel  Harris.)  The  throre  of 
God  and  of  the  Lamb. — The  coronation  of  the  Lamb : — Regarding  here  the  mere 
grammar  of  the  words,  we  have  a  partnership  Deity  presented.  But  the  matter  I 
have  now  in  hand  is  not  the  plurality  encountered,  but  the  name ;  to  trace  the 
ascending  progress,  issued  in  the  final  coronation,  of  the  Lamb.  The  ascending 
stages  of  this  progress  we  shall  best  discover  if  we  glance  at  the  Scripture 
record  of  the  story.  The  word  "  lamb  "  begins  of  course  at  the  creature,  and  the 
creature  required,  first  of  all,  to  be  created,  having  just  the  qualities  of  innocence, 
inoffensiveness,  incapacity  of  resentment  and  ill-nature,  ready  submissiveness 
to  wrong,  necessary  to  the  intended  meaning,  and  the  finally  sacred  uses,  of 
the  word.  Lambs  of  nature  were  first-stage  symbols,  for  the  due  unfolding  of 
the  Lamb  of  religion.  Then  follows,  we  may  see,  a  process  in  which  artificial 
meanings  are  woven  into  and  aboiit  the  words  and  images  provided,  by  the 
religious  uses  of  sacrifice ;  for  God  is  now  to  be  displayed  in  the  dear  passivities 
of  sacrifice.  Abel.  Sacrifice  of  Isaac.  Passover  (Isa.  hi.  and  liii.).  At  last  the 
fulness  of  time  is  come ;  when  a  strange  new  prophet  appears,  announcing  the 
kingdom  of  God  now  at  hand.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the 
sin  of  the  world."  Now  at  last  the  advances  and  preparations  of  so  many  ages 
are  ended,  the  Lamb  of  God  is  come.  And  then  what  does  He  Himself  do,  three 
years  after,  when  He  encounters  the  two  disciples  going  back,  heavy-hearted,  into 
the  country,  but  open  to  them  all  the  ancient  scripture,  showing  out  of  it  how 
certainly  Christ  ought  to  sufifer,  and  so  to  be  the  Lamb  of  prophecy.  And  what 
does  He  give  them  to  see,  in  this  manner,  but  that  all  sacrifice  and  passover  are 
now  fulfilled  forever  in  His  Divine  passion  ?  Then,  passing  on  a  stage  farther,  we 
are  completely  certified  in  our  impressions,  by  the  discovery  that,  at  this  same 
Lamb  and  passover  blood,  all  apostolic  preaching  begins.  God's  new  gospel  of  life 
is  the  revelation  of  the  Lamb.  For  this,  says  Philip  to  the  eunuch,  is  the  prophet's 
"  lamb  that  was  dumb  before  His  shearers."  And  this,  says  Peter,  is  "  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot."  1.  What  does  it 
signify,  that  God  has  now  the  Lamb  throned  with  Him,  but  that  He  is  now  to  be  more 
and  more  distinctly  conceived  as  a  susceptible  being ;  to  be  great,  not  as  being  absolute, 
or  an  infinite  force,  not  as  being  impassive — a  rock,  a  sea,  a  storm,  a  fire  — but  as 
having  great  sentiments,  sympathies  and  sensibilities.  Nothing  has  been  so 
difficult  for  men  as  to  think  of  God  in  this  manner.  The  human  soul  is  over- 
borne, at  first  and  for  long  ages,  by  the  statural  dimensions  of  God ;  filling  up 
this  idea  with  mere  quantities ;  putting  omnipotence  in  the  foreground,  and 
making  Him  a  grand  positivity  of  force ;  adding  omniscience,  or  absolutely  intui- 
tive knowledge,  adding  also  will,  purpose,  arbitrary  predestination,  decrees : 
exalting  justice,  not  as  right  or  rectitude,  but  as  the  fearful  attribute  of  redress, 
that  backs  up  laws  regarded  mainly  as  rescripts  of  will  in  God,  and  not  as 
principles.  He  has  always  been  at  work  to  mend  this  defect  in  us  ;  protesting  by 
His  prophets,  in  the  matter  of  His  sensibilities,  that  He  is  "hurt,"  "offended," 
"  weary,"  "  was  grieved  forty  years,"  that  "  in  the  affliction  of  His  people  He  was 
afflicted,  and  bare  and  carried  them  all  the  days  of  old."  All  this  in  words  to  httle 
or  no  effect;  but  now  He  shows  us  in  the  Lamb,  as  the  crowning  fact  of  revelation, 
that  He  is  a  God  in  moral  sensibility — able  to  suffer  wrong,  bear  enemies,  gentle 
Himself  to  violence,  reigning  thus  in  what  is  none  the  less  a  kingdom,  that  it  is  the 
kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus.  Physical  suffering  is  of  course  excluded  by  the 
fact  of  His  infinite  sufficiency,  but  that  is  a  matter  quite  insignificant  for  Him, 
compared  with  His  moral  suffering.  Under  such  conceptions  of  God  we  of  course 
approach  the  great  matter  of  atonement,  in  a  wholly  different  predisposition.  We 
shall  look  for  something  that  belongs  to  the  Lamb,  something  in  the  nature  of 
suffering  patience,  and  sorrow.  What  we  call  grace,  forgiveness,  mercy,  is  not 
something  elaborated  after  God  is  God,  by  transactional  work  before  Him,  but  it  is 


704  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

what  belongs  to  His  inmost  nature  set  forth  and  revealed  to  us  by  the  Lamb,  in 
joint  supremacy.  2.  God's  nature  itself  is  relational  to  both  sin  and  redemption. 
Bometimes  we  begin  to  imagine  that  the  sense  of  sin  is  likely,  as  things  are 
just  now  going,  to  quite  die  out.  No,  the  Lamb  is  in  the  throne,  and  it  is 
impossible  henceforth,  that  a  God  unrelational  to  sin,  or  a  fate  unbeneficently 
relational,  should  ever  be  accepted  by  the  settled  faith  of  the  world.  Simply  to 
think  the  supreme  eminence  there  of  the  Lamb  is  to  look  on  Him  we  have  pierced, 
and  see  Him  rising  higher  and  yet  higher,  age  upon  age,  and  feel  the  arrows  that 
"were  hid  in  His  sorrows  growing  even  more  pungently  sharp  in  our  guilty  sensi- 
bility. All  the  more  resistless  too  will  be  the  stabs  of  bad  conviction,  that  they  are 
meant  to  be  salutary,  and  are  in  fact  the  surgery  of  a  faithful  healing  power.  We 
are  also  shown  by  this  revelation  of  the  Lamb  in  the  throne,  and  shall  more  and 
more  distinctly  see,  that  the  nature  of  God  is,  in  like  manner,  relational  to 
redemption.  The  two  points,  in  fact,  go  together  and  are  verified  by  the  same 
evidence.  It  is  not  for  one  moment  to  be  imagined  that  Christ  the  Lamb  has 
somehow  softened  God  and  made  Him  better.  He  came  down  from  God  as  the 
Lamb  that  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  the  gospel  He  gave  ua 
is  called  the  everlasting  gospel,  because  it  has  been  everlastingly  in  God,  and  will 
everlastingly  be.  God's  nature  is  so  far  relational  to  redemption,  that  His  glorious 
passibilities  are  bleeding  always  into  the  bosom  of  evil.  There  is  a  fixed  necessity 
of  blood,  and  He  has  the  everlasting  fountain  of  it  in  His  Lambhood.  So  that 
condemnation  for  evU,  or  sin,  is  not  a  whit  more  sure  to  follow  than  forgiveness, 
sweetened  by  self-propitiation.  3.  Having  the  Lamb  now  in  the  throne,  it  will  be 
more  and  more  clear  to  men's  thoughts  that  God's  most  difi&cult  and  really  most 
potent  acts  of  administration  are  from  the  tenderly  enduring  capacity  of  BU.S 
goodness,  represented  by  the  Lamb.  The  richness  and  patience  of  His  feehng 
nature,  in  one  word  His  dispositions,  are  the  aU-dominating  powers  of  His  reign. 
What  He  is  in  the  Lamb— determines  what  He  is  and  does  universally.  {H. 
Bushnell,  D.D.)  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  : — ^I.  "  Behold  the  lamb 
of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  Look  at  Him  in  the  dawn 
of  His  ministry,  when  first  He  comes  within  the  range  of  mortal  vision — a  man, 
a  lowly  man,  one  chosen  out  of  the  people.  He  lived  and  He  died  in  the  presence 
of  many  witnesses  :  what  further  evidence  could  be  desired  that  Jesus  was  a  man 
and  not  a  myth,  a  lamb-like  man,  and  none  of  your  pretenders  to  greatness  ?  His 
character,  too,  is  so  purely  natural  that  the  example  of  excellence  He  sets  needs  no 
explanation.  How  lamb-like  He  is  !  Thus  you  see  the  Lamb  of  God  among  men  : 
will  you  track  His  footsteps  still  farther  on  till  He  becomes  the  Lamb  of  sacrifice, 
and  actually  takes  the  sin  of  man  upon  Himself,  that  He  may  bear  its  penalty  ? 
II.  Behold  the  throne.  Let  us  see  it  first  from  the  Lamb's  side  of  it.  Of  course 
there  is  only  one  throne  :  God  and  the  Lamb  are  not  divided.  The  Lamb  is  God, 
and  the  interests  of  God  and  the  Lamb  are  one.  Acknowledging  the  oneness  of 
the  throne,  we  proceed  to  inspect  it  from  the  point  of  view  in  which  the  Lamb 
chiefly  challenges  our  notice.  You  will  remember  that  He  is  portrayed  to  us  as 
**  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne."  The  midst  of  the  throne  means  the  front 
of  the  throne,  according  to  the  Greek.  The  Lamb  was  not  on  the  throne  in  that 
vision,  but  standing  immediately  before  it.  That  is  a  position  in  which  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  would  have  us  see  Him.  To  the  awful  throne  of  God  there  could  be  no 
access  except  through  a  mediator.  The  throne  of  heaven  is  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb.  His  dominion  over  nature  always  appears  to  me  a  delightful 
contemplation.  Lord  of  all  the  realms  of  life  and  death,  His  providence  runs 
without  knot  or  break  through  aU  the  tangled  skeins  of  time.  All  events,  obvious 
or  obscure,  great  or  smaU,  are  subject  to  His  influence,  and  fostered  or  frustrated 
by  His  supremacy.  The  Lord  reigneth,  and  of  the  increase  of  His  government  and 
peace  there  shall  be  no  end.  Well,  that  is  the  aspect  of  the  throne  from  the  side  of 
the  Lamb.  Let  us  now  take  another  look  and  behold  the  throne  of  God.  The 
throne  of  God  is  the  throne  of  the  Lamb.  The  throne  of  God,  if  we  view  it  as 
sinners,  with  a  sense  of  guilt  upon  our  conscience,  is  an  object  of  terror,  a  place  to 
fly  from.  Henceforth  eternal  praises  to  His  name,  the  throne  of  God  is  the  throne 
of  the  Lamb.  It  is  a  throne  of  righteousness,  but  no  less  a  throne  of  grace. 
There,  on  the  throne  of  the  Almighty,  mercy  reigns.  According  to  the  merit  of  the 
sacrifice  and  the  virtue  of  the  atonement  all  the  statutes  and  decrees  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  are  issued.  The  altar  and  the  throne  have  become  identical. 
One  fact  remains  to  be  noticed — it  is  this :  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  is  in 
heaven.    We  must  pass  beyond  this  earthly  region,  and  join  the  company  of  those 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  705 

who  people  the  celestial  realm  before  we  can  see  the  throne  of  God,  so  as  to 
obtain  a  complete  view  of  it.  Is  not  this  among  the  chief  joys  of  heaven  ?  What 
hallowed  communion  with  Him  we  shall  there  enjoy.  In  His  Church  below  He 
has  given  us  some  pleasant  foretaste  of  His  sweet  converse  ;  but  there  the  Lamb 
that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  always  feed  them,  and  shall  lead  them  to 
living  fountains  of  water.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  2.  The  tree  of  life.— T/ie  tree  of  life  .-—As  we  gradually  are  being  drawn 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  end,  and  the  sentence  of  death  which  has  been  passed 
upon  us  becomes  more  imminent,  have  we  yet  tasted  of  the  tree  of  life  ?    Ah,  we 
shall  be  asked  before  we  enter  paradise  again,  not  what  riches  we  have,  not  what 
knowledge,  not  what  intelligence,  but  what  life  ?  whether  our  soul  is  alive  unto 
God?     Oh,  when  hundreds  and  hundreds  are  tasting  of  the  tree  of  knowledge, 
when  the  world  is  so  clever,  so  eager,  so  wicked,  would  that  more  tasted  of  the  tree 
of  life,  of  religion,  of  holiness !    And  the  tree  of  life  is  accessible  to  all ;  multiplied  it 
stands  on  each  side  of  the  river,  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  the  promised  land.  There 
is  an  open  church,  and  an  open  Bible,  and  open  privileges  for  every  one.  And  there 
is  fruit  to  be  found  on  that  tree  for  all,  not  only  for  the  good,  but  twelve  manner  of 
fruits :  fruit  for  this  hard,  weary  life,  fruit  for  the  tempted,  fruit  for  the  penitent, 
fruit  for  the  occupied,  fruit  for  every  one.     And  for  those  who  despise  the  fruit 
there  are  the  leaves.     Yes,  the  very  outskirts  of  religion  are  blessed  ;  yes,  even  to 
linger  in  these  courts,  to  hear  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  the  psalms,  "To  go 
with  the  multitude,  and  bring  them  forth  into  the  house  of  God  " ;  even  in  the 
scanty  service,  the  cold  devotion,  the  imperfect  knowledge,  there  is  a  leaf  from  the 
tree  of  Uf e ;  there  may  be  healing  in  it.     It  was  such  a  leaf  from  this  tree  that 
healed  the  fevered  soul  of  St.  Augustine,  fluttering  to  his  feet  charged  with  power 
and  virtue.     Many  an  old  wound  has  been  healed  over  by  the  buried  leaves  of  early 
training  ;  many  a  chance  word  which  has  winged  its  way  from  the  Bible,  or  some 
good  book  or  sermon,  has  proved  to  be  a  leaf  from  the  tree  of  life.     Ah,  yes,  if  you 
need  healing,  if  you  are  fuU  of  wounds  and  bruises  and  putrefying  sores,  if  you 
shrink  from  the  fruit,  still  there  is  heaUng  in  the  leaves.     In  the  very  outskirts  of 
reUgion  there  is  heaUng,  but  not  satisfaction.     Medicine  is  not  food,  but  also  food 
must  sometimes  be  preceded  by  medicine.     {Canon  Newbolt.)         The  tree  of  life  : — 
I.  The  tree  of  life  beabs  fruit.     "  Twelve" — symbol  of  plenty.   "  Every  month  " 
— symbol  of  constancy.     The  tree  of  life  is  never  without  plenty  of  fruit.    Every 
man  can  find  in  the  Cross  of  Christ  the  particular  blessing  that  will  suit  his  need. 
n.  The  tree  of  life  is  the  purifier  of  the  world.     Does  not  the  Cross  of  Christ 
heal  the  nations  ?   Does  it  not  turn  evil  into  good,  and  change  curses  into  blessings, 
and  so  maintain  the  balance  of  the  moral  world  ?     We  know  how  the  story  of  the 
Cross,  by  its  unselfish  teachings,  its  spiritual  influences,  its  pure  precepts,  its  noble 
principles,  has  laid  hold  of  nations,  countries,  and  empires ;  how  it  has  changed 
them  gradually,  powerfully,  successfully ;  how  it  has  lifted  them  up  from  superstition 
and  corruption  into  the  sweet  light  of  culture  and  purity  ;  how  it  has  consolidated 
them  and  made  them  powers  for  good  in  God's  world.     IH.  The  tree  of  life  is 
OUR  PROTECTION.     {J.  G.  Duvies.)         The  tree  of  life : — In  the  Authorised  Version  it 
is  not  easy  to  understand  the  statement  that  "  in  the  midst  of  the  street  and  on 
either  side  of  the  river  was  the  tree  of  life  "  ;     but  by  dividing  the  sentence  after 
the  word  "  street,"  as  is  done  in  the  Revised  Version,  all  is  made  easy  to  understand. 
You  have  the  picture  of  the  river  of  water  of  life  running  down  in  the  midst  of  the 
street ;  then  on  each  side  of  this  central  stream  you  have  a  row  of  trees  ;  and  these 
trees  are  all  described  as  •'  the  tree  of  life."     In  the  history  of  Genesis  the  tree  of 
life  appears  to  be  spoken  of  as  one  single  tree ;  it  was  an  exotic  there ;  only  one 
specimen  in  the  whole  garden ;  but  in  the  new  paradise  which  St.  John  saw,  it 
would  seem  to  have  grown  abundantly ;  "  on  either  side  of  the  river  "  does  not 
admit  of  the  supposition  of  one  single  tree ;  the  word  tree  must  be  generic  ;  as  we 
say  that  the  apple-tree  abounds  in  Devonshire,  or  that  the  vine  flourishes  in  France, 
meaning  that  Devonshire  is  a  land  of  apple-trees,  and  France  of  vines.     Hence  I 
have  spoken  of  a  row  of  trees  on  each  side  of  the  river ;  there  could  not  be  less  than 
one  row,  there  might  be  several.     Next  observe  what  is  said  about  the  "  twelve 
manner  of  fruits."     Those  of  you  who  have  visited  countries  where  the  orange-tree 
grows  will  understand  the  description  at  once :   you  will  remember  to  have  seen 
the  ripe  oranges,  the  small  green  fruit,  and  perhaps  the  blossom,  all  flourishing 
together  :  "  three  manner  of  fruits."     Multiply  this  by  a  process  of  heavenly  arith- 
metic, and  you  have  St.  John's  picture  of  the  tree  of  l5e  bearing  fruit  in  twelve 

45 


706  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

different  degrees  of  maturity ;  the  number  twelve  corresponding  to  the  months  of 
the  year.  So  that  the  tree  has  ripe  fruit  all  the  year  round ;  no  long  winter  of 
sterility;  no  anxious  spring  with  tender  leaves  and  delicate  blossoms,  and  fears 
concerning  east  winds  and  late  frosts ;  no  calm  decay  of  autumn,  after  the  fruit 
has  been  gathered  and  is  gone ;  not  this,  but  perpetual  sunshine  above,  perpetual 
supply  to  the  roots  of  living  water  below,  and  so  a  perpetual  bearing  of  fruit  for  the 
support  of  human  souls.  Putting  Genesis  and  Revelation  together,  I  think  we  may 
draw  the  conclusion  that  in  some  sense  the  tree  of  life  is  ever  necessary  to  the 
human  soul.  You  find  it  in  paradise,  you  find  it  in  heaven ;  it  flourishes  in  the 
first  creation  of  God,  it  flourishes  still  more  abundantly  in  that  new  creation  which 
St.  John  saw  in  his  vision.  We  may  safely  conclude  that  if  in  two  such  different 
creations  the  tree  of  life  was  a  prominent  feature  of  God's  work,  it  cannot  be  absent 
from  any  intermediate  dispensation,  or  at  all  events  that  it  is  ill  with  the  world, 
when  access  to  the  tree  of  Ufe  is  forbidden.  May  it  not  be  said  that  if  access  to  the 
tree  of  life  is  that  which  man  lost  when,  in  his  wilfulness,  he  determined  to  eat  of 
that  other  tree,  then  a  renewed  access  to  the  tree  of  life  is  just  that  which  Christ 
has  gained  for  humanity  by  His  Incarnation,  by  His  Cross  and  Passion,  by  His 
precious  death  and  burial,  by  His  glorious  Resurrection  and  Ascension,  and  by  the 
coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  May  we  not  say  that  the  vision  of  the  tree  of  life, 
which  St.  John  saw  in  all  its  heavenly  luxuriance  and  completeness,  is  the  true 
consummation  of  all  that  God  does  for  human  souls  upon  earth  by  the  means  of 
grace,  which  for  Christ's  sake  He  supplies  ?  There  is  one  other  view  of  the  subject 
which  I  should  like  to  bring  before  you.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  speak  of  the  tree 
of  hfe  without  thinking  of  the  antithesis  of  the  tree  of  knowledge.  I  observe  that 
one  of  our  publishers  has  adopted  as  his  colophon  a  picture  of  two  trees  bound 
together  by  a  scroU  which  carries  the  legend,  "  Arhor  Scientice,  Arbor  Vitce  "  (The 
Tree  of  Elnowledge,  the  Tree  of  Life).  H  it  be  meant  by  this  that  there  should  be 
alliance  and  harmony  between  human  knowledge  and  that  knowledge  which  is  life 
eternal,  I  think  the  motto  is  a  good  one  and  trae.  But  it  must  be  an  alliance  and 
harmony,  not  an  identification  or  a  confusion  of  one  with  the  other.  "  Knowledge 
is  power,"  according  to  a  well-known  aphorism,  but  knowledge  is  not  life.  And 
therefore  it  is  impossible  to  think  upon  the  tree  of  life  without  thinking  upon  that 
other  tree ;  the  tree  of  knowledge  bears  fruit  which  is  beautiful  to  the  eye  and  good 
for  food,  and  in  man's  present  condition  the  fruit  is  not  forbidden,  but  it  cannot 
take  the  place  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  ;  he  who  eats  of  it  will  hunger  again ; 
he  who  eats  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  will  hunger  no  more,  but  will  have  part 
in  the  eternal  life  of  God.  {Bp.  Harvey  Goodxoin.)  A  tree  : — Look  at  this  tree 
in  three  aspects.  I.  As  CENXRAiiLY  booted — "  In  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it." 
Christianity  is  a  life  weU  rooted  and  well  guarded — an  incorruptible  seed,  that  "  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever."  II.  It  is  essentially  vital.  It  is  "  the  tree  of  life."  Life 
of  all  kinds,  even  vegetable  and  animal,  is,  say  men  of  science,  inextinguishable. 
This  is  true  of  this  spiritual  life — this  life  of  Christianity  in  the  soul.  HI.  It  is 
marvellously  fbuitful — "  Which  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits."  How  abundantly 
fertile  is  living  Christianity  in  the  soul !  What  new  thoughts,  affections,  resolves, 
are  constantly  evolved.  IV.  It  is  always  seasonable  ;  yielding  its  fruit  every  month. 
'  The  fruits  of  living  Christianity  in  the  soul  are  always  seasonable.  V.  It  is 
UNivEBSALLY  HEALING — "  The  Icavcs  of  the  tree  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations." 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Twelve  manner  of  fruits. — The  tree  of  life  shaking  his  fruits 
and  leaves  among  the  nations : — I.  Speak  a  little  of  Christ  under  the  notion  of 
THE  tree  of  life.  1.  Somc  general  remarks  concerning  this  blessed  tree  here 
spoken  of.     (1)  Such  metaphorical  descriptions  of  Christ  are  very  common  and 


familiar  to  the  Spirit  of  God  in  Scripture.     (2)  Christ  is  a  tree  of  His  Fatjier's 

(3)  This  tree  of  life,  in  His 
small,  but  His  latter  end  doth  greatly  increase.     (4)  This  tree  of  life,  after  He  had 


planting  (John  xv.  1).     (3)  This  tree  of  life,  in  His  first  planting  and  budding.  He  is 


flourished  awhile  in  this  lower  world,  was  cut  down  by  the  sword  of  Divine  justice 
(Isa.  liii.  8).  (5)  Although  this  tree  of  life  was  cut  down  unto  death  by  the  hand 
of  justice,  yet  death  could  not  long  keep  his  dominion  over  the  tree  of  life.  (6)  He 
doth  now  in  His  exalted  state  excel  all  the  trees  of  the  wood  (Cant.  ii.  3).  (7)  This 
tree  of  life,  though  He  be  now  exalted  far  above  the  heavens,  yet  His  branches  bow  and 
bend  down  to  the  earth  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Word.  2.  Why  He  is  called,  in 
a  way  of  eminency,  "  the  tree  of  Ufe."  (1)  Because  He  is  the  original  and  fountain 
cause  of  our  life  both  spiritual  and  eternal.  (2)  He  is  the  material  cause  of  our 
life.  It  is  the  very  life  of  Jesus  that  is  in  the  soul  of  the  believer  (Gal.  ii.  20). 
(3)  He  is  the  purchaser  of  our  life,  and  so  He  is  the  meritorious  cause  of  life. 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  707 

(4)  He  is  the  preserving  cause  of  our  life  ;  He  maintains  and  holds  our  souls  in  life 
by  continual  supplies  and  communications.  (5)  He  is  the  final  cause  of  our  life. 
Ab  He  is  the  original,  so  He  is  the  end  of  our  life,  "  For  none  of  us  liveth  to  him- 
self," (fee.  (Rom.  xiv.  7,  8).  3.  What  sort  of  life  springs  out  of  this  tree  of  life. 
(1)  There  is  a  life  of  justification  in  opposition  to  legal  death.  (2)  A  life  of 
sanctification  or  of  holiness.  This  is  the  fruit  and  consequent  of  the  former.  (3)  A 
life  of  consolation  or  comfort,  for  He  is  "  the  consolation  of  Israel."  (4)  A  life  of 
glory  grows  out  of  the  tree  of  life.  4.  A  few  properties  or  qualities  of  this  life  that 
springs  out  of  the  tree  of  life.  (1)  It  is  a  Divifae  life ;  it  is  the  life  of  God  in  the 
soul.  (2)  It  is  of  all  others  the  most  excellent  life.  (3)  It  is  a  royal  and  a  princely 
life.  (4)  It  is  a  heavenly  life.  (5)  It  is  a  growing  life.  (6)  It  is  an  immortal,  durable, 
and  everlasting  life.  H.  The  situation  of  this  tree  in  the  city  of  God.  1.  The 
city  spoken  of  is  none  other  than  the  Church  of  God.  2.  This  city  has  streets  in 
it.  By  the  street,  I  understand  the  ordinances  of  Divine  appointment,  especially 
these  of  a  public  nature.  3.  Notice  here,  that  there  is  a  river,  which  is  said  to  run 
through  the  midst  of  the  city,  and  in  the  streets  of  it,  according  to  what  we  have 
(Psa.  xlvi.  4).  By  this  river,  the  whole  city  of  God,  aU  true  believers,  are  refreshed, 
supplied,  fructified,  cleansed,  and  quickened.  4.  Christ,  the  tree  of  life,  is  on  each 
side  of  the  river,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it.  (1)  A  living  Redeemer, 
though  He  be  in  heaven  exalted  at  "  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,"  yet 
still  He  is  to  be  found  by  His  people  upon  earth ;  yea.  He  is  in  every  part  of 
His  Church.  (2)  Christ  is  the  centre  of  His  Church  and  people ;  for  He  is  here 
said  to  be  in  the  midst  of  the  city :  as  the  heart  is  in  the  midst  of  the  body,  so 
Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  His  Church.  (3)  The  tree  of  life,  being  in  the  midst  of  the 
street,  says  that  Christ  is  a  common  and  public  good  unto  the  Church,  that  He  is  set 
up  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  inhabitants.  As  every  subject  in  Britain  may  say  of 
our  present  sovereign.  He  is  my  king,  because  he  is  set  as  a  public  good  to  the  whole 
body  politic  ;  and  as  every  soldier  of  an  army  may  say  of  the  principal  commander. 
He  is  my  general,  in  a  way  of  application,  and  have  recourse  to  nim  as  such  ;  so 
Christ,  being  the  common  Saviour  of  sinners,  the  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  of  His 
Church  by  office,  every  one  may,  in  a  way  of  particular  application,  claim  the 
benefit  of  Him  in  His  saving  offices.  (4)  They  who  would  find  Christ  must  seek 
Him  in  the  streets  and  broad  ways  of  gospel  ordinances.  (5)  Christ  is  to  be  met 
with,  not  only  in  public  ordinances  of  the  Church,  but  that  sweet  fellowship  with 
Him  is  to  be  had  also  in  the  more  private  retirements  of  the  Lord's  people  ;  for  here 
the  tree  of  life  is  not  only  in  the  street,  but  on  each  side  of  the  river,  through  all 
parts  of  the  city.  (6)  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  are  absolutely  necessary,  in 
order  to  the  sweetening  of  ordinances,  and  conveying  the  fruit  of  a  Redeemer's 
purchase  to  them  in  the  use  of  ordinances ;  for  here  the  pure  river  of  the  water  of 
life,  it  intermingles  itself  in  the  streets  of  the  city,  with  the  spreading  boughs  and 
branches  of  the  tree.  (7)  Christ  is  the  ornament  of  His  Church  and  people  ;  for 
the  tree  of  life  is  here  spoken  of  as  the  ornament  of  the  city  in  the  midst  of  its 
streets.  (8)  The  whole  city,  and  every  one  of  its  inhabitants,  dwell  or  abide 
under  the  shadow  of  the  tree  ;  for  the  tree  is  on  every  side,  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
street.  III.  The  febtllity  or  fruitfulness  of  this  tree  of  life  ;  it  bears  twelve 
manner  of  fruits,  and  yields  fruit  every  month.  1.  Some  of  the  fruits  of  the  tree 
of  life.  (1)  Let  us  take  a  view,  and  not  only  a  view,  but  a  tasting  of  the  fruits  of 
His  death,  (a)  It  is  by  His  death  that  an  angry  God  is  atoned  and  reconciled. 
(6)  The  debt-bond  that  justice  had  against  us  is  torn^  the  hand-writing  that  was 
contrary  to  us  is  cancelled  (Col.  ii.  14).  (c)  Everlasting  righteousness  is  brought 
in  when  it  was  quite  out  of  the  world,  {d)  By  His  death  the  covenant  is  confirmed 
with  many  (Dan.  ix.  27).  (2)  Let  us  view  some  of  the  fruits  of  this  tree  of  life,  in 
His  resurrection,  when  He  sprang  out  of  the  grave,  (a)  The  quickening  and  raising 
up  of  the  soul  that  was  dead  in  sin  is  a  fruit  of  the  resurrection  of  the  tree  of  life. 
(6)  Another  fruit  of  His  resurrection  is  the  discharging  of  oar  debt  that  we  were 
owing  to  Divine  justice,  (c)  Another  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  in  His  resurrection  is 
the  reviving  of  our  hopes  of  recovering  the  lost  inheritance  (1  Peter  i.  3,  4).  (d)  Our 
victory  over  sin  and  death  is  secured.  (3)  Let  us  view  and  taste  of  the  fruits  of  His 
ascension  unto  heaven,  (a)  The  leading  captivity  captive  (Eph.  iv.  8).  (6)  The 
conferring  of  ministerial  gifts  upon  men,  yea,  the  very  office  of  the  ministry  and 
ordinances  of  the  gospel  for  the  edification  of  His  mystical  body  (Eph.  iv.  8). 
(cj  The  downpouring  of  the  Spirit  in  a  more  plentiful  measure  than  under  the 
Old  Testament  dispensation.  Of  this  Christ  Himself  speaks  (John  xvi.  7).  {d)  The 
preparing  of  heavenly  mansions  for  us,  where  we  may  be  with  Him  for  ever,  is  a 


708  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 


fruit  of  the  exaltation  of  Christ  (John  xiv.  3).  The  head  being  above,  the  body 
shall  follow.  (4)  Let  us  view  and  taste  the  fruits  of  His  intercession,  which  are 
great,  glorious,  and  lovely,  (a)  Freedom  from,  and  strength  against,  temptation 
(Luke  xxii.  31,  32).  (6)  Boldness  and  confidence  toward  God,  and  acceptance  at 
His  throne  (Heb.  iv.  16).  (c)  Through  Christ's  intercession  we  have  a  ready- 
answer  unto  all  challenges  and  accusations  that  are  brought  in  against  us.  (d)  The 
assurance  of  the  effectual  application  of  all  the  benefits  of  His  purchase  and  legacies 
of  His  testament  is  a  fruit  of  His  intercession,  (e)  The  hearing  of  our  prayers,  the 
acceptance  of  our  persons  and  weak  services,  is  another  fruit  of  His  intercession. 
2.  Some  of  the  months  wherein  He  yields  fruit  to  the  souls  of  His  people.  (1)  There 
are  some  of  them  summer  months,  (a)  There  is  the  spring  month,  or  time  of 
conversion,  or  effectual  calling ;  the  tree  of  life  yields  fruit  then  to  the  soul, 
(b)  There  is  the  pleasant  summer  month  of  manifestations  and  discoveries  of  the 
Divine  glory  of  the  Lord's  countenance,  (c)  There  is  the  pleasant  and  sweet 
summer  month  of  access  to  God  in  duties  and  ordinances,  {d)  There  is  the  pleasant 
month  or  season  of  remarkable  deliverances  that  the  Lord  works  for  His  people 
either  from  spiritual  or  temporal  enemies,  (e)  There  is  the  pleasant  month  of  the 
renewed  or  lively  actings  of  faith  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  or  on  the  covenant 
and  promises.  (/)  There  is  the  month  of  a  lively  love  to  the  lovely  Jesus.  This 
is  a  pleasant  summer  month  in  which  the  soul  feeds  liberally  on  the  fruit  of 
the  tree  of  life.  (2)  As  there  are  summer,  so  there  are  winter  months,  in 
which  the  tree  of  life  yields  His  fruit,  (a)  There  is  the  sharp,  piercing  winter 
month  of  conviction,  reproofs,  and  challenges  from  the  Lord.  (6)  There  is  the 
dark  and  weary  winter  month  of  desertion,  (c)  There  is  the  weary  winter  month 
of  the  prevalency  of  indwelling  corruption,  when  the  soul  is  crymg,  "  Iniquities 
prevail  against  me  :  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  &c.  (d)  There  is  the  heartless 
winter  month  of  deadness,  dulness,  and  barrenness.  This  is  another  melancholy, 
weary  month,  {e)  There  is  the  stormy  month  of  inward  and  outward  trouble. 
(/)     There  is  the  melancholy  and  gloomy  month  of  death.    IV.  The  medicinal 

QUALITY  OF  THE  TREE  OF  LIFE  ;  HIS  VERY  LEAVES  ARE  FOR  THE  HEALING  OF  THE  NATIONS. 

1.  Whom  are  we  to  understand  by  the  nations  ?  I  answer,  AU  that  ever  sprung 
of  Adam,  every  creature  endued  with  a  reasonable  soul,  whether  of  Jew  or  Gentile. 

2.  What  diseases  do  the  nations  labour  under  which  make  them  need  the  healing 
leaves  of  this  blessed  tree  to  be  brought  unto  them  ?  Answer  in  general,  ever  since 
the  fall  of  Adam  the  whole  nations  of  the  earth  have  been  just  like  a  great  hospital 
of  diseased  persons  overrun  with  a  loathsome  leprosy.  And  if  you  still  ask  me 
What  is  to  be  understood  by  the  diseases  of  the  nations  ?  In  a  word,  it  is 
just  the  disease  of  a  depraved  nature  venting  itself  in  all  manner  of  sin  and  wicked- 
ness (Eph.  ii.  1-3  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9-11;  Eom.  i.  21,  22).  3.  What  are  we  to  understand 
by  the  leaves  that  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations  ?  The  expression  imports  that 
everything  in  Christ  is  useful  and  beneficial.  I  conceive  that  by  the  leaves  of  the 
tree,  which  have  a  healing  virtue  upon  the  nations,  we  are  in  a  particular  manner 
to  understand  the  doctrines,  promises,  histories  of  His  holy  Word,  by  which  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  and  faith  in  Christ  is  wrought  among  the  nations  of  the  earth 
(Psa.  cvii.  20).  4.  How  doth  it  appear  that  this  tree  and  the  leaves  of  it  are  for  the 
healing  of  the  nations.  (1)  It  appears  from  Scripture  prophecy.  Jacob  upon  his 
deathbed  foretold  that  the  gathering  of  the  nations  should  be  unto  the  blessed 
Shiloh.  So  likewise,  in  Isa.  xi.  10,  we  have  a  prophecy  to  the  same  purpose. 
(2)  It  appears  from  Scripture  promises,  particularly  the  promises  made  to  Abraham, 
"In  thee,"  i.e.,  in  thy  seed,  viz.,  in  Christ,  •'  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be 
blessed"  (Psa.  Ixxii.  17).  (3)  It  appears  from  the  commission  given  unto  the 
apostles  of  Christ  after  His  resurrection  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  (4)  It  appears  from  the 
obedience  that  the  apostles  of  Christ  yielded  unto  this  commission.  (5)  It  is  evident 
from  the  actual  healing  of  many  among  the  Gentile  nations  by  the  leaves  of  this 
blessed  tree.    V.  The  application.     1.  The  first  use  shall  be  in  a  few  inferences 

rom  the  whole.  (1)  From  what  has  been  said  about  this  tree  of  life  we  may  see 
that  paradise  is  again  opened  and  regained  for  us  by  the  second  Adam  to  great 
advantage.  (2)  See  what  a  glorious  and  excellent  society  the  Church  of  God  is, 
even  the  Church  militant,  which  is  but  a  faint  emblem  of  what  the  Church 
triumphant  will  be.  (3)  See  hence  what  a  glorious,  excellent,  sufficient,  and  suit- 
able Saviour  Christ  is  ;  He  is  the  tree  of  life,  the  fountain  of  life,  in  whom  all  our 
well-springs  are.  (4)  See  what  excellent  persons  believers  are.  Why,  they  are  the 
branches  and  twigs  of  the  tree  of  life.  (5)  See  hence  the  excellency  of  the  gospel, 
which  makes  a  discovery  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  brings  His  fruit  and  leaves  to  the 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  709 

nations  of  the  earth.  (6)  See,  from  what  has  been  said,  the  necessity  and  excellency 
of  the  grace  of  faith.  Why,  the  tree  of  life,  though  it  be  growing  in  the  midst  of 
our  streets,  yet  cannot  be  discerned  without  faith.  (7)  See  hence  the  necessity  of 
the  Spirit,  in  order  to  the  application  of  Christ ;  for  the  river  waters  the  whole  city, 
and  conveys  the  fruits  of  the  tree  of  life.  (8)  See  hence  how  inexcusable  unbelief 
is,  and  how  justly  they  perish  who  remain  in  unbelief  within  the  bosom  of  the 
visible  Church  where  Christ  is  preached.  2.  The  second  use  of  this  doctrine  shall 
be  by  way  of  trial  and  examination.  (1)  Has  the  life  of  the  tree  of  Ufe  ever 
entered  into  thy  soul  ?  (2)  Have  you  been  overshadowed  with  the  spreading  branches 
of  this  tree  of  life  ?  for,  as  you  heard,  the  tree  of  life  extends  its  branches  to  every 
corner  of  the  city.  Now  can  you  say  with  the  spouse  (Cant.  ii.  3)  ?  (3)  Have  any 
of  the  streams  of  the  river,  which  run  under  and  among  the  branches  of  the  tree  of 
life,  flowed  in  upon  thy  soul  ?  My  meaning  is.  Has  the  Spirit  of  Christ  entered 
into  thy  soul?  (4)  What  think  ye  of  the  fruits  of  the  tree  of  life?  for,  as  you 
heard,  He  bears  twelve  manner  of  fruitSj  and  yields  fruit  every  month.  Can  you 
say  with  the  spouse  that  you  not  only  "  sat  down  under  His  shadow  with  great 
delight,  but  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  your  taste  "  ?  (5)  What  healing  or  medicinal 
virtue  have  you  found  in  the  leaves  of  the  tree  which  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations  ?  (6)  When  you  get  leave  by  faith  to  feed  upon  His  fruit  and  to  apply  His 
leaves,  you  will  just  think  yourselves  in  paradise,  yea,  in  a  better  paradise  than 
Adam  was  in  when  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.  Oh,  it  will  be  the  very  pleasure  of 
your  life  and  the  joy  of  your  heart  to  be  viewing  the  pleasant  tree  of  life  and  to  be 
rejoicing,  now  and  then  plucking  of  his  fruit  in  the  streets  or  ordinances  of  His 
appointment.  3.  The  third  use  of  this  doctrine  shall  be  of  exhortation.  (1)  Unto 
all  in  general.  Oh,  sirs,  will  ye  come  to  the  tree  of  life,  for  the  gates  of  paradise 
are  opened  again,  (a)  Consider  what  life  is  to  be  had  by  coming  to  this  tree  of 
life ;  a  life  of  justification,  sanctification,  consolation,  and  of  eternal  glory ;  a 
Divine  life,  a  royal  hfe,  a  heavenly  life,  a  growing  life,  an  immortal  life ;  all  which 
I  spoke  to  in  the  doctrinal  part,  (b)  Consider  what  an  excellent  defence  thou  shalt 
find  under  the  shadow  of  this  tree.  Here  thou  shalt  find  a  defence — (i.)  Against 
the  wrath  of  an  angry  God,  who  is  a  consuming  fire,  (ii.)  Against  the  rage  of 
Satan,  (iii.)  From  the  fury  of  men.  (c)  Consider  the  excellent  qualities  of  the 
fruit  of  the  tree  of  life,  (i.)  It  is  pleasant  fruit,  sweet  to  the  taste  (Cant.  ii.  3). 
(ii.)  It  is  profitable  fruit ;  it  '•  cheereth  the  heart  of  God  and  man."  (iii.)  It  is 
plentiful  fruit.  Come  and  eat  thy  fill,  even  to  satiety  ;  nothing  will  be  missed,  the 
tree  is  laden,  (iv.)  There  is  variety  of  fruits  in  this  tree.  Some  fruit-trees  they 
bear  plenty  of  one  kind  of  fruits ;  but  here  is  the  excellency  of  this  tree,  that  it  has 
twelve  manner  of  fruits — fruits  of  all  sorts — adapted  to  the  necessity  of  the  soul, 
(v.)  The  fruits  of  the  tree  of  life  are  permanent  and  perennial,  always  continuing ; 
for  it  brings  forth  fruit  every  month,  every  season,  (vi.)  It  is  nourishing  fruit.  By 
the  fruit  of  this  tree  the  soul  is  made  to  grow,  and  "go  from  strength  to  strength, 
until  it  appear  before  the  Lord  in  Zion."  (d)  Take  a  view  of  the  leaves  of  the 
tree,  and  let  this  invite  you  to  come  to  it  in  a  way  of  believing,  (i.)  Art  thou  a 
blind  sinner?  Well,  here  is  a  leaf  of  the  tree  suited  unto  thy  disease  (Psa.  cxlvi.  8; 
Eev.  iii.  18).  (ii.)  Art  thou  deaf  that  thou  cannot  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  His 
Word  or  rod  ?  Well,  here  is  a  leaf  of  the  tree  of  life  for  healing  thy  disease  (Isa. 
XXXV.  5).  (iii.)  Art  thou  a  lame  sinner  that  cannot  walk  in  the  Lord's  way  ?  Here 
is  a  leaf  for  thee  (Isa.  xxxv.  6).  (iv.)  Art  thou  a  dumb  sinner  that  thou  cannot 
speak  a  word  in  the  matters  of  God,  cannot  pray,  nor  praise  ?  Well,  here  isa  leaf 
for  thy  disease  (Isa.  xxxv.  6).  (e)  Consider  that  as  the  tree  of  life  is  calculate  to 
thy  necessity,  so  it  is  ordained  for  thy  use  and  for  the  use  of  every  sinner  that  will 
make  use  of  it  by  faith  (John  iii.  14-16).  He  is  given  to  us  (Isa.  ix.  6).  (/)  Con- 
sider that  this  tree  is  accessible ;  for  He  is  in  the  midst  of  the  street.  And  though 
He  be  highly  exalted  and  lifted  up  above  the  heavens,  yet  His  boughs  stoop  and 
bend  down  to  the  very  ground  that  the  hand  of  faith  may  reach  His  fruits  and 
leaves  (Kom.  x.  6-8).  {g)  You  are  not  only  invited  but  commanded  to  eat  the 
fruit  and  apply  the  leaves  of  the  tree  by  faith.  This  is  the  very  work  of  God  which 
He  requires  of  you — ••  This  is  His  commandment,  that  we  should  believe  on  the  name 
of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  (h)  You  will  die  except  you  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life 
(John  viii.  24).  {R.  Erskine.)  Leaves  ...  for  the  healing  of  the  nations. — Healing 
leaves  : — I.  In  reference  to  heaven.  1.  The  heavenly  city  is  described  as  having  an 
abundance  of  all  manner  of  delights.  2.  As  everything  good  is  present,  our  text 
hints  that  nothing  ill  is  there.  3.  It  is  in  heaven,  according  to  our  text,  again,  that 
there  grows  the  tree  which  is  not  only  health  to  heaven,  but  which  brings  healing 


710  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

to  the  nations  here  below.  II.  In  beference  to  ourselves  below.  1.  All  the  nations 
are  sick.  All  the  nations  need  healing,  our  own  among  them.  Do  not  iniquities 
abound  ?  Go  to  the  West  End  and  see  its  fashionable  sin,  or  to  the  East  End  and 
see  its  more  open  wickedness.  And  all  individuals  in  every  nation  want  healing. 
The  evil  is  in  our  nature  from  the  very  beginning.  2.  There  is  but  one  cure  for 
the  nations — the  leaves  of  the  tree.  3.  Jesus  is  pictured  here  as  a  blessed  tree 
whose  leaves  heal  the  nations.  Now  the  point  of  the  text  is  this,  that  the  very 
leaves  are  healing,  from  which  I  gather  that  the  least  thing  about  Christ  is  healing. 
The  least  fragment  of  this  sovereign  remedy  has  omnipotence  in  it.  We  may  also 
learn  that  the  humblest  and  most  timid  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  wiU  save.  Pluck  a 
leaf  of  this  tree  by  thy  poor  trembling  faith  and  it  shall  make  thee  whole.  Beloved, 
after  we  have  been  saved  from  our  sin  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  it  is  very  wonderful 
how  everything  about  Christ  will  help  to  cleanse.  Study  His  example ;  it  will 
exercise  a  curative  power  over  you.  You  will  be  ashamed  to  be  selfish,  you  will  be 
ashamed  to  be  idle,  you  will  be  ashamed  to  be  proud  when  you  see  what  Jesus  was. 
If  we  take  His  precepts,  and  I  hope  we  prize  them  as  highly  as  we  do  His  doctrines, 
there  is  not  a  command  of  our  Lord  but  what  possesses  a  sacred  power,  by  the 
application  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  cure  some  fault  or  other  of  our  character.  Do 
thou  as  He  bids  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  made  whole.  His  least  words  are  better 
than  the  best  of  others.  4.  Then,  too,  this  medicine  heals  all  sorts  of  diseases.  The 
text  puts  it,  "  The  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations."  It  does 
not  say  of  this  or  that  malady,  but  teaches  us  that  the  medicine  is  universal  in  its 
curative  power.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Healing  leaves  : — I.  The  disease  or  the 
NATIONS.  1.  It  is  universal ;  affects  the  whole  race.  2.  It  is  deep  rooted.  Not  a 
surface  disease  ;  not  an  accidental,  but  a  constitutional  disease.  3.  It  exposes  man 
to  the  displeasure  of  God.  4.  It  is  the  source  of  all  the  misery  and  wretchedness 
of  man.  II.  The  remedy  supplied.  III.  The  application  op  the  remedy. 
{W.  D.  Ingham.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse. — The  curse  abolished : — I.  The 
ABSENCE  OF  ALL  CURSE  AND  MALEDICTION:  "And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse." 
How  much  is  contained  in  this  description  of  that  state,  negatively,  in  the 
absence  of  aU  evil !  1.  The  curse  pronounced  after  the  first  transgression.  But 
in  the  state  and  time  here  foreshown,  all  this  will  be  happily  reversed.  2.  The 
curse  upon  individual  persons.  Thus  it  fell  upon  Cain :  Gen.  iv.  11.  But  there 
shaU  be  no  more  of  this  curse,  for  there  shall  be  no  murderer  then  or  there. 
3.  The  curse  has  fallen  upon  cities  for  their  wickedness  and  impiety.  Thus  was 
Jericho  devoted  to  destruction.  But  this  curse  shall  be  no  more ;  for  there  shaU  be 
no  iniquity,  and  so  no  devastation,  neither  shall  there  be  any  Achan,  any  one 
to  trouble  God's  Israel,  and  bring  a  'Curse  upon  himself  and  it,  by  coveting 
any  forbidden  thing.  4.  Nations  also  have  been  accursed,  as  Israel  (Mai.  iii.  9 ; 
Isa.  xliii.  27,  28;  Dan.  ix.  11).  And  how  long  and  grievous  has  that  curse  been! 
how  bitter  that  cup  which  they  have  drained!  But  the  time  is  coming  when 
the  blessing  shall  come  upon  them  as  it  is  promised  them  (Mai.  iii.  12 ;  Zeph. 
iii.  15^  Jer.  xxxi.  40).  5.  One  of  the  three  great  portions  of  the  family  of  man — 
the  descendants  of  Ham,  the  third  son  of  Noah,  these  were  accursed  :  Gen.  ix.  25. 
And  how  awfully  has  this  curse  been  fulfilled !  What  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
our  fellow-creatures  are  held  in  the  grievous  bonds  of  slavery  1  But  then  there 
shall  be  no  more  hard  bondage,  no  cruel  taskmasters,  no  more  severing  of  the 
nearest  and  dearest  ties.  6.  There  was  the  curse  of  the  sinful  confederacy  of 
Babel.  But  in  the  world  to  come  there  shall  be  one  heart  and  one  tongue. 
7.  All  flesh  has  incurred  the  curse  of  the  transgression  of  God's  law  (Gal.  iii.  10). 
This,  in  the  unbeUeving  and  impenitent,  who  do  not  receive  and  obey  the  gospel, 
ends  in  that  most  woful,  final,  and  irreversible  curse  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  But  in  the 
happy  state  predicted  in  the  text,  there  shaU  be  no  more  transgression.  The  law 
will  be  written  in  indelible  characters  upon  the  heart.  8.  The  Son  of  God  was 
made  a  curse  (Gal.  iii.  13).  But  in  heaven  He  suffers  no  more  curse.  How  great 
the  change  1  9.  Some,  under  the  pressure  of  affliction,  have  cursed  the  day  of 
their  birth.  Thus  Job's  (Job  iii.  1),  and  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xx.  14).  But  in  the  world 
to  come  there  shall  be  no  affliction  to  cause  such  bitter  and  passionate  feeling. 
Now  Job  and  Jeremiah  bless  God  that  ever  they  were  born.  10.  Satan,  through 
Balak  and  Balaam,  sought  to  curse  the  people  of  God  (Numb,  xxiii.  7).  But  in  the 
world  to  come  Satan  will  not  be  there,  nor  Balaam  with  diabolical  counsel  to 
seduce  the  righteous  into  sin.    11.  A  solemn  curse  is  uttered  against  all  corrupters 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  711 

of  the  gospel  of  Christ  (Gal.  i.  9).  But  in  the  world  to  come  the  gospel  can  be 
darkened  and  perverted  no  more.  Then  it  will  be  seen  in  all  its  effulgence  and 
blessedness.  12.  Equally  solemn  is  the  curse  upon  all  who  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22).  But  will  there  be  any  in  that  world  who  do  not 
love  Christ — any  who  do  not  worship  Him?  Not  one  (chap.  v.  13).  II.  The 
PRESENCE  OF  THE  THRONE  OF  GoD  AND  OF  THE  Lamb.  1.  The  abiding  preseucc  of 
God.  2.  The  glorious  presence  of  God.  3.  The  glorious  presence  of  God  in  His 
redeeming  love.  For  it  is  "  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb."  III.  The 
EXALTED  PRIVILEGES  OF  God's  SERVANTS.  1.  "  And  His  Servants  shall  serve  Him." 
(1)  Perfectly,  without  sin.  (2)  Powerfully,  without  weariness.  (3)  Continually, 
without  intermission  or  end.  2.  "  And  they  shall  see  His  face."  (1)  All  present 
instrumentalities  for  the  knowledge  of  God  and  communion  with  Him,  will  be  done 
away.  (2)  All  present  views  of  God  will  be  infinitely  transcended.  3.  "  And  His 
name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  It  denotes  visibility  of  relation  to  God,  that 
we  are  His  servants  and  children,  and  that  God  is  not  ashamed  of  us,  but  wiU 
own,  acknowledge,  and  glory  in  us.  The  mark  of  our  belonging  to  Him  shall  be 
no  secret  mark,  but  open  and  conspicuous,  as  the  graving  of  "  Holiness  to  the 
Lord  "on  Aaron's  mitre.  {J.  T.  Parker,  M.  A.)  The  negative  happiness  of  the 
saints  in  heaven  : — I.  Who  the  persons  are  who  shall  be  thus  highly  favoured. 

1.  They  have  been  called  by  the  Word  and  convinced  by  the  Spirit  of  sin,  of 
.  unbelief  (John  xvi.  9) ;  have  been  deeply  affected  on  account  of  it,  and  alarmed 

for  the  consequences  (Acts  xvi.  30).  2.  They  have  received  Christ  in  the  gospel 
by  a  lively  faith,  through  which  their  freedom  from  the  curse  is  begun  in  this 
life  (John  v.  24  ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  3.  They  love  Christ,  and  consequently  are  delivered 
from  the  dreadful  anathemas  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22).  4.  It  is  their  care  and  endeavour,  as 
a  fruit  of  this  love  to  Christ,  to  give  sincere,  universal,  and  constant  obedience  to 
His  commandments  (Kev.  xxii.  14).  5.  They  consider  it  as  heaven  to  be  where 
God  and  His  Christ  are,  to  serve  Him,  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever  (Phil.  i.  23). 
6.  They  are  careful  to  maintain  good  works,  particularly  works  of  charity,  towards 
the  members  of  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  xxv.  34-41).  II.  The  happiness  of  those  who 
SHALL  BE  THUS  HIGHLY  FAVOURED.  1.  There  wiU  be  no  more  sin  in  such,  or  ever 
done  by  them,  to  occasion  any  curse  :  they  are  the  just  made  perfect  (Heb.  xii.  23). 

2.  There  will  be  no  more  wrath  in  God  to  inflict  any  curse :  once  He  was  angry 
with  them  on  account  of  sin  (Isa.  xii.  1 ;  Psa.  xxxviii.  3),  but  it  shall  not  be  so  any 
more  (Ezek.  xvi.  42).  3.  There  will  be  no  more  sentence  passed  against  them 
including  a  curse.  Once  they  were  subject  to  that  tremendous  sentence  (Gal.  iii.  10), 
but  never  shall  any  more  (John  v.  24).  4.  Security  against  every  degree  of 
separation  from  God  (Rev.  iii.  12).  5.  Exemption  from  all  the  evils  of  afflictions 
and  sufferings  which  are  so  common  here  (Isa.  xxxv.  10).  6.  There  shall  be 
no  person  who  is  a  curse  or  is  accursed  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.  Ill,  Whence  it  is  that  they  are  thus  blessed.  1.  The  love  of  God 
the  Father  is  the  original  cause.     2.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  meritorious  cause. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost,  with  His  gracious  influences,  is  the  efficient  cause  (Gal.  iii. 
13,  14;  2  Cor.  v.  5;  Psa.  cxliii.  10).  Conclusion:  1.  How  pleasing  are  the  prospects 
of  the  real  Christian  as  to  a  future  state !  2.  How  dreadful  the  future  of  the 
finally  impenitent  1  (T.  Hannam.)  The  curse  abolished  : — I.  There  shall  be 
NO  MORE  CURSE.  In  the  New  Jerusalem  the  deliverance  of  the  believer  from  the 
curse  shall  be  complete.  No  streak  of  gloom  shall  mar  the  brightness  of  joy's 
perfect  day.  All  sin  shall  be  shut  out,  and  therefore  also  all  penal  consequences  of 
sin.  What  a  great  word  of  salvation  is  this  1  Would  you  seek  to  realise  somewhat 
the  depth  of  meaning  in  it  ?  Look  abroad  at  the  widespread  spectacle  of  the 
world's  wretchedness.  In  the  New  Jerusalem  all  that  shall  have  come  to  an  end. 
There  shall  be  no  more  cruel  oppressions,  no  more  the  desolation  of  war,  no  more 
the  ravages  of  famine  and  plague,  no  more  •'  distress  of  nations,"  no  more 
blighted  homes  and  scathed  hearts.  But  look  into  your  own  hearts.  Each  child 
of  God  has  enough  in  his  own  experience  to  teach  him  the  meaning  of  the  curse, 
and  the  blessedness  of  the  deliverance  given  when  "  there  shall  be  no  more  curse." 
Every  carking  care  and  gloomy  fear,  all  suffering  and  all  sorrow,  constitute  parts 
of  the  same  great  curse  for  sin ;  and  all,  from  whatsoever  cause  they  spring,  the 
child  of  God  shaU  shake  off  in  glory.  The  heavy  load  of  toil,  poverty,  the 
hindering  body,  and  death  will  be  done  away.  Again,  the  curse  of  vanity,  which 
weareth  out  all  things,  shall,  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  have  worn  out  itself.  On 
earth,  and  under  the  curse,  every  promise  falsifies  itself,  and  every  hope  deceives 
(Jer.  xvii.  6).    Nothing  that  springs  from  the  root  of  the  flesh  ever  comes  to  fruit, 


712  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ran. 

but  in  apples  of  Sodom  and  grapes  of  Gomorrah.  Fruitlessness,  vanity,  is  the 
most  malignant  power  of  the  curse  ;  it  is  a  worm  gnawing  at  the  root  of  all  that 
is  most  fair.  But  in  the  New  Jerusalem  the  saints  shall  at  length  gather  the  fruit 
of  their  earthly  lives.  But,  above  all,  the  saints  of  God  shall,  in  the  eternal  glory, 
be  delivered  from  all  spiritual  distress.  It  is  sin,  spiritual  desertion,  and  doubts,  and 
fears,  .and  shame,  that  wound  the  Spirit.  And  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ? 
But  all  these,  too,  shall  have  come  to  an  end.  What  grief,  too,  does  the  power 
of  sin  still  remaining  in  us  cause  !  What  a  grief  to  a  true-hearted  Christian,  that 
he  feels  himself  making  so  little  progress  in  the  Divine  life  !  Finally,  what  bitter 
grief  it  causes  the  Christian  heart,  to  mark  the  dishonour  done  to  God  by  others, 
the  breaking  out  of  great  iniquities,  the  cold-hearted  worldliness  of  professors,  the 
hardened  indifference  of  sinners  alike  to  the  warnings,  the  rebukes,  the  invitations 
of  the  gospel !  II.  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it.  1.  God 
shall  be  present  in  glory,  because  there  shall  be  in  the  Holy  City  nothing  accursed, 
nothing  polluted,  and  no  suffering.  2.  There  shall  be  no  more  curse,  because  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  is  there.  It  is  by  the  coming  of  God  and  the 
Lamb  into  our  world  that  the  curse  is  expelled ;  and  it  is  in  the  Divine  power 
of  the  Lamb  of  God  enthroned  in  glory  that  the  curse  is  kept  at  bay,  and  never 
more  may  enter.  3.  The  positive  blessing  of  heaven,  the  "weight  of  glory," 
consists  in  this  presence  of  God.  The  kingly  power  of  the  Lamb  not  only  serves 
to  chase  from  the  streets  of  the  Holy  City  everything  that  defileth,  and  everything 
that  can  torment;  but  He  Himself  is  the  Sun  of  the  saints'  gladness  and  the 
Fountain  of  their  life.  That  the  Lord  God  shall  dwell  among  them  is  ever 
represented  as  the  sum  of  His  people's  blessedness.  {Jas.  Hamilton,  M.A.)  The 
curse  cancelled,  and  the  kingdom  begun : — I.  The  removal  of  the  curse.  Many 
are  the  curses  that  have  lighted  upon  earth — the  primeval  curse,  with  all  the  many 
curses  that  have  flowed  out  of  the  first  sin.  All  this  is  now  reversed ;  the  sentence 
is  cancelled;  the  curse  is  exchanged  for  blessing.  The  atmosphere  is  purged. 
The  sun  scorches  not  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  night.  Thorns  and  thistles 
disappear.  Fertility  is  restored  to  earth.  The  wolf  lies  down  with  the  lamb,  and 
the  leopard  with  the  kid  ;  and  there  is  nothing  found  to  hurt  nor  to  destroy  in  the 
holy  mountain  of  the  Lord.  There  is  the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness. 
II.  The  eternal  throne.  The  new  Jerusalem  has  come  down  out  of  heaven  from 
God.  The  great  kingdom  has  come.  III.  The  eternal  service.  •'  His  servants 
shall  serve  Him."  "  They  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple  *'  (chap.  vii.  15). 
IV.  The  ETERNAii  VISION.  ••  They  shall  see  His  face  "  (Psa.  xli.  12).  V.  The  etebnal 
inscription.  "  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  VI.  The  eternal  day. 
This  is  stated  negatively.  No  night,  no  need  of  lamp  nor  of  the  sun !  (Isa.  Ix.  19). 
Everlasting  day  !  Everlasting  light !  Everlasting  spring !  VII.  The  eternal  sun. 
"  The  Lord  God  giveth  them  light."  The  light  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  all  things 
material,  and  all  things  spiritual,  is  to  come  from  the  face  of  Jehovah  Himself— 
the  ONE  SUN  of  the  universe,  the  one  sun  of  the  soul !  VHI.  The  eternal  reign. 
"  They  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  A  bright  future  is  this  for  every  one  who 
has  received  the  testimony  of  the  Father  to  His  beloved  Son ;  for  on  our  reception 
of  that  testimony  does  our  right  to  that  kingdom  depend.  It  is  so  fair  a  prospect 
that  it  cannot  fail  to  influence  us  now.  1.  It  purifies  us.  For  all  in  it  is  pure 
and  perfect.  2.  It  invigorates.  The  prospect  of  an  inheritance  like  this  nerves  us 
for  conflict,  and  makes  us  invincible.  3.  It  cheers.  The  light  wiU  soon  swallow 
up  the  darkness.  The  glory  will  be  enough  to  make  up  for  all.  4.  It  comforts. 
Our  light  affliction  will  soon  be  swallowed  up  in  eternal  joy.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
The  perfect  life  : — "  No  curse  any  more  " — thus  the  last  chapters  of  the  Bible  are  in 
complete  antithesis  to  the  first.  I.  God,  as  Creator  and  Redeemer,  is  the  very  ground 
and  fount  of  all  our  existence,  and  in  that  perfect  life  of  the  hereafter  it  must  be 
yet  more  manifestly  true  that  '•  in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  " 
(Acts  xvii.  28).  1.  "  The  throne  of  God  shall  be  in  it  " — as  indicating  the  absolute 
supremacy  of  God.  "  The  Lord  reigneth  "  now,  but  His  reign  is  largely  a  reign 
of  suspension,  of  waiting,  of  patience.  If  He  does  not  crush  and  destroy  His 
enemies,  it  is  that  He  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9) ;  and 
if  He  does  not  immediately  deliver  His  servants  from  all  the  seeming  evil  of  life, 
it  is  because  they  need  the  discipline  of  pain  and  conflict,  that  they  may  be  truly 
fitted  for  the  perfect  life.  But  to  that  life  He  will  surely  lead  them  ;  and  even  here 
we  see  a  progress  towards  that  consummation,  as  regards  both  the  subdual  of  evil 
and  the  deliverance  and  victory  of  the  good,  2.  "  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb" — as  indicating  that  the  supremacy  shall  be  a  supremacy  of  love.    The 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  713 

people  of  God  are  familiarly  known,  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  alike,  as 
God's  flock ;  and  how  significant,  then,  that  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  should 
be  spoken  of  as  a  Lamb — a  Lamb  of  the  flock  of  God — one  of  themselves,  sharing 
their  nature,  and  living  their  life  I  II.  The  relation  to  this  bedeemino  God  op 
THE  redeemed  PEOPLE  is  Set  foith  under  three  aspects — service,  vision,  likeness. 
1.  "  His  servants  shall  do  Him  service."  The  true  idea  of  rest,  not  only  does 
not  exclude,  but  demands  service,  providing  there  be  adequate  motive,  scope, 
and  strength.  And  in  that  life  the  motive  shall  be  the  noblest,  the  scope  amplest, 
and  the  strength  untiring.  How  this  thought  ennobles,  by  anticipation,  the  proper 
training  of  our  faculties  here  1  2.  "  They  shall  see  His  face."  As  here,  so  there, 
there  shall  be  an  alternation  of  working  and  beholding,  of  service  and  of  fellowship. 
Our  thought  must  be  evermore  replenished  from  His  thought,  our  affection  from 
His  affection,  our  strength  from  His  strength.  Thus  the  ideal  shaU  be  ever 
growing  in  our  soul,  that  we  may  act  with  growing  intensity  and  success  on  the 
real — in  that  realm,  as  in  this,  achieving  victory  and  laying  hold  of  life.  3.  "  His 
name  shall  be  on  their  foreheads."  Such  shall  be  the  resultant  alike  of 
vision  and  of  service.  Thus,  by  taking  in  and  giving  out,  by  beholding  and 
serving,  shall  we  become  for  ever  like  the  God  we  love.  {T.  F.  Lockyer,  B.A.) 
The  curse  abolished  : — I.  The  scene  of  this  service  shall  be  as  the  paradise  op  God, 
— "  there  shall  be  no  more  curse."  Here  everything  connected  with  our  abode 
renders  the  most  delightful  service — for  such  is  the  service  of  God — irksomely 
laborious.  All  our  religious  efforts  proceed  on  this  very  fact,  that  we  work  on  an 
accursed  soil ;  that  our  iniquity  has  imposed  on  us  excessive  labour ;  and  that  in 
the  sweat  of  our  brow  we  must  eat  our  bread.  The  land  that  is  on  high,  inhabited 
by  the  servants  of  God,  is  subject  to  no  painful  or  disagreeable  vicissitudes.  H. 
Nor  shall  the  curse  extend  to  the  persons  of  the  saints,  for  there  His  servants 
shall  serve  Him  :  and  do  they  not  on  earth,  where  the  curse  is  found  ?  No :  they, 
it  is  true,  attempt  it ;  but  such  are  their  multiplied  infirmities,  that  they  confess, 
when  they  have  done  all,  they  are  unprofitable,  and  deserve  not  to  be  viewed  even 
as  the  hired  servant.  UI.  The  curse  shall  no  longer  influence  the  service 
they  bender  to  God.  '•  His  servants  shall  serve  Him."  Our  obedience  on  earth 
scarcely  deserves  the  name ;  our  sinful  dispositions  render  it  more  like  slavery.  We 
no  sooner  begin  to  live  unto  God,  but  conflict,  toil,  and  fatigue,  distinguish  our 
services.  Polluted  are  these  services,  in  fine,  as  that  which  is  corrupt  cannot  pro- 
duce what  is  pure,  servants  so  feeble  and  unholy  must  render  of  necessity  an 
unprofitable  obedience.  IV.  The  curse  pronounced  on  man,  is  banished  from 
PARADISE.  V.  It  may  be  observed,  that  as  soon  as  the  first  malediction  was  heard, 
the  historian  adds,  '•  So  He  drove  out  the  man."  "  And  they  shall  see  His  face  " ; 
shall  render  their  service  in  His  immediate  presence,  cheered  by  the  complacent 
smiles  of  His  gracious  approbation.  1.  By  way  of  improvement,  let  me  urge  on 
you  the  necessity  of  inquiring,  whether  you  are  the  servants  of  God?  "And  how 
shall  we  know  ?  "  Your  own  conscience  must  settle  the  point.  2.  Let  the  servant 
of  God  be  cheered  by  remembering  who  is  his  master.  Every  relative  character  is 
well  exemplified  and  sustained  by  Jehovah.  3.  Let  us  contemplate  the  happy 
termination  of  the  sacred  volume.  It  begins  with  the  entrance  of  crime  and  the  curse'; 
and  closes  with  the  abolition  of  sin  and  misery,  and  an  assurance  of  perfect  and 
perpetual  sanctity  and  joy.  {Wm.  Clayton.)  The  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb  shall  be  in  it. — The  immediate  presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb  in  heaven : — I. 
What  presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb  this  presence  upon  the  throne  is,  which 

MAKES   HEAVEN,  AND  THE  HAPPINESS   OF   IT,  TO   THE   SAINTS.       1.    The   preseUCC   of   His 

glory.  So  is  the  presence  of  God  upon  His  throne  expressed  (Jude  24).  By  the 
glory  of  God  is  meant  the  conspicuous  lustre  of  His  perfections  shining  in  the 
highest  excellency  of  their  brightness.  2.  A  second  view  of  the  presence  of  God 
upon  His  throne,  that  it  is  the  facial  presence  of  God,  the  presence  of  His  face. 
For,  in  the  next  verse  to  our  text,  it  is  added,  "  His  servants  shall  see  His  face." 
3.  His  immediate  presence,  manifested  no  longer  through  obscuring  mediums,  as  in 
our  present  state.  4.  His  countenancing  presence.  5.  The  fixed  and  abiding 
presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  6.  An  efficacious  and  influxive  presence.  U. 
Shew,  by  comparing  scripture  with  scripture,  what  manifestation  op  the  glory 
OF  God,  and  op  the  Lamb,  the  similitude  op  a  throne  points  out  unto  us,  as 
peculiar  to  heaven.  1.  The  throne  of  God  in  heaven  points  out,  that  there  is  the 
highest  manifestation  of  His  absolute  sovereignty  and  dominion  over  all.  2.  The 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  being  in  this  city,  hints  to  us,  that  as  kings  use  to 
display  all  their  glory  and  majesty  upon  their  thrones,  so  in  heaven  the  shining 


714  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

excellency  of    His  majesty    is    most    bright,   and  the  glory  of  His  i>erf actions 
most  splendid.     3.  A  throne  is  the  place  where  the  deepest  respect  and  homage  of 
subjects  is  paid  to  their  sovereign.     Heaven  is  the  place  where  God  hath  the  most 
solemn  worship  from  His  creatures,  all  His  courtiers  attending  about  His  throne 
with  a  pure  love  and  glowing  zeal.     4.  A  throne  is  a  place  where  solemn  addresses 
are  presented  and  answered.     It  is  to  God  in  the  heaven,  upon  a  throne  of  grace, 
that  we  are  directed  to  come  with  boldness,  "  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."    6.  The  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb,  expresseth 
this  to  us,  that  glorious  Christ  appears  not  only  in  His  Father's  glory,  which  is 
naturally  His,  as  He  is  one  God  with  the  Father,  but  also  in  that  glory,  honour 
and  majesty,  conferred  upon  Him  as  man  and  Mediator,  as  the  reward  of  His 
sufferings  and  obedience.    HI.  Shew  how  the  thbone  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  being 
IN  HEAVEN,  contributeth  TO  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  ITS  INHABITANTS.  1.  All  Contraries  to  hap- 
piness are  inconsistent  with  this  presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb ;  and  therefore  the 
least  opposite  to  blessedness  can  never  enter  into  this  city  where  this  throne  is. 
2.  As  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  being  in  this  city,  excludeth  all  contraries 
and  opposites  to  blessedness,  so  it  is  an  immediate  productive  cause  of  the  most 
perfect  positive  happiness  to  the  utmost  capacity  of  all  its  inhabitants.     3.  The 
glory  of  the  mediation  of  our  Eedeemer  will  appear  to  all  eternity,  in  this  city,  as 
the  procuring  cause  of  all  the  happiness  the  saints  possess  in  it,  and  the  glorious 
Mediator  Himself  shall  remain  for  ever  as  the  mean  through  whom  the  glory  and 
blessedness  of  God  shall  be  seen  by,  and  communicated  to  the  saints  in  heaven. 
Uses:  1.  Doth  the  throne  of   God   and  the  Lamb  make  the  happiness  of   the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  by  its  being  there  ?  then,  how  dreadful  will  your  misery  be, 
who  shall  for  ever  be  shut  out  of  this  city  where  this  throne  shall  be.     (1)  Your 
loss,  of  being  banished  from  the  presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  will  be  infinite.    (2) 
You  shall  then  have  a  full  sense  of  the  greatness  of  your  loss :  here  it  doth  not 
affect  you,  because  you  know  not  the  infinite  excellency  of  God  and  Christ ;  but 
then  your  eyes  will  be  opened,  and  your  understandings  cleared  to  know  this,  and 
so  the  greatness  of  your  loss,  from  what  you  shall  see  of  the  glory  of  Christ  upon 
His  tribunal.      (3)  If  you  are  banished  from  the  presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb, 
and  from  this  city  where  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is,  you  will  be  shut  up  in 
hell  under  positive  torments.  2.  The  people  of  God  should  comfort  themselves  in  the  hope 
of  being  for  ever  where  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  shall  be.    (1)  This  comfort  is 
to  you  who  have  received  a  whole  Christ  as  Prophet,  Priest  and  King,  and  believe 
upon  Him  with  a  Divine,  practical,  heart-purifying,  and  life-sanctifying  faith.     (2) 
This  comfort  is  to  you,  who  repent  and  are  converted  from  all  sin,  in  affection,  in 
purpose  and  endeavour,  unto  God  and  His  way .;  who  have  ceased  to  do  evil,  and 
learned  to  do  well.     (3)  This  comfort  appertains  to  the  upright.     {Jos.  Robe,  M.A.) 
Hla  servants  shall  serve  Wm. — The  serving  and  the  reigning  {with  ver.  5) : — Setting 
these  two  passages  together,  we  get  these   two  truths,  that   the  redeemed  are 
servants,  and  that  they  are  also  kings.      Their  eternity  is  to  be  an  eternity  of 
service,  and  an  eternity  of  dominion.     I.  Service.     His  servants  shall  serve  Him. 
They  are  the  servants  of  God,  and  the  servants  of  the  Lamb.     As  Christ  was  the 
Father's  servant,  so  do  we  become.    Let  us  ask,— 1.     When  this  service  begins  ? 
It  begins  at  conversion.     For  conversion  is  (1)  a  change  of  service ;  (2)  a  change  of 
masters ;  (3)  a  change  of  motive ;  (4)  a  change  of  work.     2.  How  it  begins  ?  Christ 
answers  this :  "  If  any  man  serve  Me,  let  him  follow  Me."    It  begins  by  taking  His 
yoke ;  by  taking  the  cross ;  by  denying  self  ;   or,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  by 
"obeying  from  the  heart  that  form  of  doctrine  which  was  delivered  unto  us."     3. 
How  it  is  carried  on  ?  By  a  life  of  devotedness  to  God  and  His  Christ  ;  by  doing 
His  will,  working  His  work,  carrying  out  His  plans,  running  His  errands,  looking 
after  His  interests.     4.  Where  it  is  carried  on  ?  First  here  on  earth,  and  afterwards 
in  the  new  Jerusalem  before  the  throne.     It  is  carried  on  everywhere ;  in  the  closet, 
in  the  family,  at  the  table,  round  the  hearth,  in  the  market,  in  the  shop,  in  the  field, 
on  the  highway — everywhere.    How  it  is  to  be  carried  on  hereafter  we  know  not.    In 
the  city  and  out  of  it ;  at  the  throne  and  away  from  it ;  all  over  space  ;  doing  every 
kind  of  work  ;  such  shall  be  the  service  hereafter.     5.  How  long  it  shall  last  ?   For 
ever.    It  has  a  beginning,  but  not  an  end.     It  is  an  eternal  service.    All  other 
services  are  bondage,  this  is  liberty :  all  others  are  drudgery,  this  is  blessedness 
throughout.     The  Master  now  waits  to  hire  you ;  will  you  not  be  hired  ?     11.  The 
DOMINION.     They  shall  reign  for  ever.     This  is  wholly  future.     1.  Who  are  these 
reigners?    They  are  men,  not  angels.     2.  Whence  came  they?     Out  of  sm,  out  of 
weakness,  and  persecution,  and  tribulation.     3.  How  did  they  become  what  they 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  715 

are  ?  They  washed  their  robes  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  They  believed  and 
became  sons  of  God.  4.  What  raised  them  to  this  dignity  ?  Grace ;  God's  free 
love.  5.  In  what  way  did  they  reach  the  throne?  They  fought  their  way  to  it.  6. 
How  extensive  is  this  dominion  to  be  ?  He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things. 
Heaven  and  earth  are  theirs.  "  Heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ."  7.  How 
long  is  it  to  last  ?  For  ever.  It  is  an  everlasting  dominion ;  a  kingdom  that  shall 
not  be  destroyed.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Servitude  and  royalty  (with  ver.  5) : — The 
servants  and  the  kings  are  identical,  they  are  alike  the  beings  written  in  the  Book 
of  Life ;  the  redeemed  from  the  earth  ;  those  who  have  entered  through  the  gates 
into  the  city.  I  take  this  twofold  word  from  among  the  final  promises  of  Him  who 
cannot  he,  not  now  to  look  upward  through  it  upon  the  brightness  of  the  eternal 
future,  but  to  see  the  light  of  that  future  cast  through  it  downward  on  our  present 
life.  I.  His  SERVANTS.  Such  is  the  title  of  the  glorified.  In  heaven  itself  there 
is  no  emancipation  from  the  bonds  of  God.  The  holy  nations  are  eternally  bound, 
in  absolute  obligation,  to  the  will  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  The  created  soul 
cannot  be  the  basis  of  its  own  being  ;  how  could  it  be  the  source  of  its  own  joy  and 
power,  or  the  law  of  its  own  eternity  ?  We  read  what  is  but  likely  when  we  read  that 
the  nearer  and  the  clearer  is  the  sight  of  the  Creator  granted  to  the  creature,  the  better 
the  creature  recognises  the  blessedness  of  self-surrender.  Now,  does  not  this  truth 
of  the  future  begin  to  be  realised  on  earth  ?  You  know  how  full  the  Scriptures  are 
of  the  idea  of  the  service  of  God ;  a  service  not  the  less  real  as  service  because  it 
can  also  be  viewed  as  •'  perfect  freedom  "  in  the  light  of  knowledge  and  love  ;  a 
service  not  meant  to  be  a  figure  of  religious  speech,  a  form  of  courtly  deference  to 
the  Majesty  above;  but  an  obligation  real  and  binding  ;  compelling  with  the  united 
power  of  the  love  and  the  law  of  God  (John  xiii.  13  ;  Acts  xxvii.  23  ;  1  Thess.  i.  10). 
II.  They  shall  reign.  Such  is  the  twin  promise  of  the  better  life.  The  bondmen 
of  the  Eternal,  in  that  existence  of  endless  duty,  shall  for  ever  reign.  Scripture 
does  indeed  largely  promise  honour  to  man.  Never  does  it  flatter  him  ;  this  ia 
part  of  its  Divine  manner.  But  of  hope  and  promise  it  grudges  nothing  to  him  if 
only  he  will  seek  it  in  the  way  of  Christ.  Poor  must  be  our  best  conjectures  of 
what  the  fuL&lment  will  be.  We  cannot  yet  understand  what  is  the  nobility  of 
being,  the  lofty  purity,  the  greatness  of  knowledge,  the  wealth  of  joy  and  power, 
which  are  indicated  in  the  figures  of  the  promise,  the  crowns  of  life,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  glory,  the  session  on  thrones,  and  this  reigning  as  of  kings  for  ever. 
But,  little  as  we  know  of  the  fulfilment,  the  process  towards  it  is  even  now  begun. 
Even  in  this  present  world  the  true  servant  of  God,  in  proportion  to  the  reality  and 
simplicity  of  his  servitude,  receives  also  some  foretastes  of  his  royalty.  Let  him,  ■ 
in  truth,  "  endure,  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible"  ;  and  it  will  bring  him  a  power  not 
his  own  over  and  amidst  the  visible.  He  will  tread,  by  his  Master's  strength, 
calmly  and  habitually,  on  besetting  sin  ;  he  will  turn  to  real  flight  the  alien  armies 
of  temptation ;  he  will  in  some  true  sense  and  measure  rule  amongst  influences  at 
enmity  with  his  Lord.  There  is  no  independence  upon  earth  so  strong,  and  so 
nobly  strong,  as  that  of  a  Christian  who  wills  wholly  to  be  Christ's  servant,  (if. 
C.  G.  Moule,  B.D.)  The  Divine  reign  within  the  soul  : — I.  That  the  Divine 
BEiGN  within  THE  SOUL  WILL  BANISH  ALL  MORAL  CURSE.  1.  That  the  unregenerate 
soul  of  man  is  under  the  dire  curse  of  sin.  2.  That  the  Divine  reign  tends  to  the 
ultimate  banishment  of  the  curse  of  sin  from  the  soul.  H.  That  the  Divine  reign 
within  the  soul  will  awaken  to  hallowed  service.  1.  The  Divine  reign  within 
the  soul  awakens  the  truest  feeling  of  service.  2.  The  Divine  reign  within  the  soul 
imparts  the  highest  capability  of  service.  3.  The  Divine  reign  within  the  soul 
reveals  the  best  opportunity  of  service.  HI.  That  the  Divine  reign  within  the 
SOUL  WILL  tend  TO  A  CLEAR  VISION  OF  GoD.  This  visioH  is — 1.  Sublime.  2. 
Attractive.  3.  Transforming  IV.  That  the  Divine  reign  in  the  soul  leads  to 
THE  DISSIPATION  OF  MORAL  DARKNESS.  What  a  glorious  privilege  and  capability  to 
be  equal  to  the  enjoyment  of  an  eternal  day — for  the  sun  never  to  set  upon  the 
activity  and  love  of  the  soul.  V.  That  the  Divine  reign  in  the  soul  leads  to 
MORAL  KiNGHOOD.  Lcssous  :  1.  That  the  throne  of  God  must  be  established  in  the 
soul  of  man.  2.  That  the  Divine  reign  in  the  soul  is  conducive  of  the  highest  good. 
3.  That  only  the  good  will  enjoy  eternal  moral  sunlight.  (The  Study.)  The 
heavenly  life : — I.  Heavenly  blessedness  consists  of  service.  Even  the  angels 
excel  in  strength  to  do  His  commandments.  We  shall  never  get  beyond  that.  The 
highest  blessedness  consists  in  being  beneficently  useful  and  reverently  obedient. 
Our  aim  should  not  be  to  become  ornamental,  but  to  render  perfect  service.  To 
Berve  God  without  imperfection,  without  the  frailty  of  this  human  nature  of  ours, 


716  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

without  the  sin  that  mixes  up  here  with  our  divinest  things ;  that  is  the  highest 
ambition  of  every  true  servant  of  God.  The  truth  emphasised  here  is  the  advance- 
ment of  the  true  servant  into  higher  spheres  of  service.  This  is  just  what  heaven 
will  do  for  us.  It  wUl  not  take  away  from  us  the  opportunity  or  capacity  for 
service,  it  will  only  ennoble  and  exalt  all.  Who  of  us  will  not  begin  to  serve  Him 
here  ?  Never  mind  where  you  begin.  It  may  be  in  the  back  kitchen,  or  in  the 
scuUery,  in  God's  great  house.  You  may  not  be  required  to  take  a  prominent  or 
honourable  part  in  it ;  go  on  and  do  the  little  work  you  have  to  do — do  it  well,  and 
according  to  the  fidelity  of  your  service  shall  be  your  progress,  until  at  last  you 
shall  enter  into  the  highest  celestial  meaning  of  a  service  that  began  amid  earthly 
infirmities  and  human  sin.  II.  The  Lord's  servants  shall  have  not  only  exaltation 
in  service,  but  also  fulness  of  vision — "  And  they  shall  see  His  face."  This  clear 
vision  of  God  is  spoken  of  by  Our  Lord  Himself  as  the  reward  of  purity.  "  The 
pure  in  heart  shall  see  God."  The  obedient  spirit  is  the  seeing  one.  The  doer 
must  ever  be  the  true  seer.  The  only  way  in  which  you  can  see  Him  face  to 
face  is  to  take  the  path  which  He  has  taken.  III.  His  name  SHAiiL  be  upon  their 
roBEHEADS.  The  face  of  God  seems  always  to  represent  the  revelation 
of  Him  by  vision,  and  His  name  the  revelation  of  Him  by  testimony.  In 
our  text,  those  who  see  His  face  are  represented  as  bearing  His  impress,  and 
carrying  the  sign  of  ownership  upon  their  foreheads.  The  forehead 
is  that  part  of  the  face  expressive  of  strength.  {D.  Davies.)  Heaven, 
as  a    state  of  service    unto    God    and    the  Lamb    before    the    throne  : — I.  The 

CHARACTERS  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  THE  LoRD's  SERVANTS    HERE,  AND    SHALL  BE  CONTINUED 

IN  His  service  to  serve  Him  in  heaven.  1.  If  you  are  such  servants  now,  as  shall 
be  admitted  to  serve  Him  in  heaven,  you  will  have  embraced  by  faith  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  covenant  of  grace.  2.  If  you  are  such  servants  now  as  shall 
serve  Him  in  heaven,  then  you  have  been  effectually  called,  possessed  by  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  quickened,  sanctified,  and  planted  by  Him  into  Jesus  Christ,  after  the 
likeness  of  His  death  and  resurrection  from  the  dead.  3.  If  you  are  His  servants, 
who  shall  serve  Him  not  only  in  this  but  the  coming  world,  you  will  have  renounced 
aU  other  lords  and  masters.  4.  If  you  are  the  servants  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  who 
shall  serve  Him  in  heaven,  you  will  live  under  a  sense  and  conscience  of  this  your 
dedication,  not  as  your  own,  but  God's.  5.  Are  you  devoted  and  addicted  to  the 
fear  of  God,  not  a  slavish,  but  filial  fear  of  Him?  II.  The  service  tou,  who  abb 
the  servants  of  God  now,  shall  be  employed  in  when  you  are  in  heaven.  1.  As 
to  the  matter  and  particular  kind  of  the  service  of  the  saints  in  heaven,  it  is  yet  a 
secret,  and  in  a  great  measure  unknown  to  us.  (1)  The  service  of  the  Lord's 
servants  in  heaven  excludeth  all  service  and  duty  which  imply  a  state  of  probation 
and  trial,  a  state  of  imperfection,  and  which  have  the  nature  of  means  leading,  by 
the  appointment  of  God,  to  salvation  with  eternal  glory  as  the  end.  (2)  The  service 
of  the  saints  in  heaven  will  contain  in  it  all  those  duties  that  the  relation  between 
the  Creator  and  the  creature,  the  Redeemer  and  the  redeemed,  doth  infer  in  an 
eternally  fixed  state  of  perfect  Jioliness  and  happiness.  (3)  Your  service  in  heaven 
wiU  be  such  as  the  angels  of  God  are  employed  in.  (4)  The  service  of  the  Lord's 
servants  in  heaven  will  be  the  service  of  special  and  immediate  attendance.  (5) 
Your  service,  who  are  now  the  servants  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  shall  be  the  service 
of  rulers  and  governors  in  the  life  to  come.  (6)  Your  service  and  work  in  heaven 
will  be  Sabbath-service  and  work.  (7)  Your  service  in  heaven  will  be  temple-service. 
(8)  Your  service  in  heaven  wiU  be  eucharistical  service,  consisting  in  the  exercise  of 
the  praising  graces,  and  performance  of  the  work  of  praise.  (9)  A  performance  of 
the  duties  of  love  to  aU  your  fellow-servants,  consistent  with  a  state  of  perfect 
blessedness  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  God,  wiU  be  service  in  heaven  to  God  and  the 
Lamb.  2.  In  what  manner  the  Lord's  servants  shall  serve  Him  in  heaven.  (1) 
Without  weakness.  (2)  Without  weariness.  (3)  Without  distraction.  (4)  With- 
out interruption  and  intermission  ;  there  shall  be  no  impediment  from  business,  or 
need  of  sleep.  (5)  Without  the  least  defect,  imperfection,  or  sin.  (6)  You  shall 
serve  Him  for  ever,  even  to  eternity.  Your  joys  shall  be  everlasting,  and  so  shall 
be  your  thankful  service.  HI.  Whence  it  is  that  they,  who  are  God's  servants 
now,  shall  serve  Him  in  heaven.  1.  From  the  sovereign,  rich,  and  free  grace  of 
God.  2.  From  the  merit  and  intercession  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  From  the  eflSciency 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  He  seals  the  servants  of  God  unto  the  day  of  redemption"  ; 
and  is  so  good  as  to  "  lead  them  into  heaven,  the  land  of  uprightness."  4.  From  the 
faithfulness  of  God.  5.  From  the  unchangeableness  of  God.  Conclusion:  1.  Is  it  a 
part  of  the  happiness  of  heaven  that  the  servants  of  God  and  the  Lamb  shall  serve 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  717 

Him  in  heaven  ?  then  hence  we  may  learn  that  heaven  is  a  state  of  eternal  service  to 
God  and  the  Lamb.  2,  Shall  the  Lord's  servants  now  serve  Him  in  heaven  ?  then 
there  is  more  honour  and  happiness  in  active  doing  holy  duties  than  we  are  well 
aware  of.  3.  Shall  these,  who  are  His  servants  now,  serve  Him  hereafter  in  heaven? 
Then  you  have  in  this  what  to  answer  to  the  atheist's  profane  query,  "  What  profit 
is  it  to  serve  God  ?  "  4.  Learn  from  this  clause  of  our  text,  in  its  connection,  that 
an  uninterrupted  serving  God,  and  an  uninterrupted  communion  with  God,  and 
enjoyment  of  Him  go  together.  {Jas.  Robe,  M.A.)  The  service  of  God  : — There 
is  not  a  little  in  the  temper  of  our  day  which  resists  the  thought  that  God  is  a 
Master.  Many  people  more  or  less  consciously  recoil  from  the  assertion  of  a  claim 
so  imperative  as  is  necessarily  involved  in  such  a  conception  of  the  Supreme.  Some 
absolutely  reject  religion  on  this  account ;  they  think,  or  speak  as  if  they  thought, 
that  their  independence  would  be  compromised,  their  dignity  insulted,  by  the  recog- 
nition of  a  Sovereign  in  heaven,  no  less  than  by  subjection  to  a  master  on  earth  ; 
perhaps  they  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  very  notion  of  a  God  claiming  to  have 
dominion  over  man's  whole  being  is  an  invention  of  the  governing  orders,  a  piece 
of  the  machinery  devised  by  their  class-selfishness  for  the  obvious  purpose  of  "keep- 
ing the  people  down."  Others,  who  cannot  dispense  with  religion  altogether, 
endeavour,  as  far  as  possible,  to  keep  the  idea  of  Divine  sovereignty  in  the  back- 
ground. Perhaps  they  may  in  part  be  under  the  influence  of  a  recoil  from  one-sided 
and  repellent  views  of  that  Sovereignty,  which  were  a  stumbling-block  to  believers 
in  the  Divine  moral  perfection.  But  the  reaction  must  be  worse  than  extravagant 
which  leads  men  to  emphasise  "  the  Fatherhood  of  God"  by  detaching  from  it,  in 
effect,  the  idea  of  paternal  authority  (Mai.  i.  6).  Given  the  idea  of  a  living  God, 
and  the  conviction  that  we  are  bound  to  serve  Him  follows ;  and  Scripture  does  but 
emphasise  the  conclusion  which  natural  reason  forces  upon  all  serious  theists.  "  I 
am  Thy  servant,"  is  the  burden  of  all  that  intercourse  between  the  human  soul  and 
its  God  which  pervades  and  vitalises  the  Psalter ;  and  the  prophet's  language  about 
"  the  Lord's  servant,"  passes  beyond  an  "  idealised  Israel  "  to  its  fulfilment  in  the 
obedience  completed  on  the  Cross.  And  although  the  gospel  is  a  "  law  of  Uberty," 
yet  no  delusive  spirit  from  the  pit  ever  uttered  a  deeper  falsehood  than  that  which 
could  confound  liberty  with  license,  or  deny  that  moral  law  is  involved  in  the 
relations  between  men.  St.  Paul  repeatedly  intimates  that  God's  moral  law  is  still 
to  be  the  rule  of  Christian  conduct;  he  speaks  of  the  "  law  of  the  Spirit  of  Life  in 
Christ  Jesus,"  and  of  our  "  fulfilling  the  requirements  of  the  law,"  very  much  as  St. 
James  speaks  of  the  "royal  law  of  liberty,"  and  as  St.  John  identifies  sin  with 
"  lawlessness."  Furthermore,  the  gospel  reveals  a  new  and  special  ground  of  the 
obligation  of  God's  service  ;  He  has  acquired  a  supernatural  right  over  us  in  virtue 
of  the  fact  of  our  redemption.  If  we  have  been  bought,  in  the  Scriptural  imagery, 
at  no  less  a  price  than  the  blood  of  God's  own  Son,  it  follows  that  "  we  are  not  our 
own  "  :  we  cannot  be  "  without  law  to  God,"  we  must  be  "  under  law  to  Christ" 
(1  Cor.  vi.  19  ;  ix.  21^.  If  we  call  Him  Saviour,  we  must  also  call  Him  King.  Two 
phrases  are  used  in  tne  New  Testament,  to  impress  this  thought  upon  us.  In  soma 
passages  a  word  is  used  which  originally  represented  the  condition  of  a  hired  servant 
(Acts  xxvii.  23;  Eom.  i.  9;  2  Tim.  i.  3;  Heb.  ix.  14).  But  as  if  this  term  were 
not  strong  enough  to  stand  alone,  the  relation  between  a  bondservant  or  slave,  and 
a  master  whose  rights  over  him  were  absolute — a  relation  which  Christianity  was  to 
undermine,  but  which  for  the  time  was  suffered  to  exist — is  utilised,  so  to  speak,  for 
the  purpose  of  enforcing  this  great  lesson  (Eom.  i.  1  ;  Gal.  i.  10 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Tit. 
i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1 ;  Rev.  i.  1 ;  James  i.  1 ;  Jude  i.).  In  the  text  both  phrases  are 
combined  :  "  His  slaves  shall  do  Him  service  for  wages."  Do  we  shrink  from  the 
austerity  of  this  language  ?  Do  we  fancy  that  it  makes  our  religion  servile — that  if 
apostles  used  it  in  their  own  time,  we  need  not  treat  it  as  symboUsing  a  permanent 
truth — that  it  is,  in  fact,  a  surviving  fragment  of  Judaism,  inconsistent  with  the 
higher  apostolic  affirmation,  "Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty?" 
Do  we  plead,  so  to  speak,  that  our  Lord  has  promised  us  the  truest  freedom  as  the 
result  of  an  effective  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  that,  on  the  last  evening  of  Hia 
earthly  ministry.  He  said  to  His  faithful  eleven,  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants, 
but  friends  "  ?  Well,  this  was  His  gracious  condescension,  assuring  them  that  their 
relation  to  Him  was  to  be  one  of  affectionate  confidence.  Blessed  be  His  name,  He 
does  not  keep  us  at  arm's  length  ;  He  does  not  treat  us  coldly,  sternly,  magisteri- 
ally :  we  are  to  be  "  willing,"  freewill  offerings,  "  in  the  day  of  His  power."  We 
are  to  be  made  "  sons  "  in  Him,  the  true  and  only -begotten  Son,  and  so  to  be  "  free 
ipdeed."     His  service  is  to  be,  in  a  most  true  sense,  perfect  freedom,  or  even  %  true 


718  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

royalty ;  but  it  must  needs  be  service,  if  He  is  what  He  is,  if  we  are  what  we  are* 
Take  just  one  noble  and  beautiful  instance  of  the  combination  of  obedience  and 
love,  of  service  and  joyfulness,  in  him  who  had  apparently  been  consecrated  to  the 
episcopate  by  St.  John,  and  who,  when  invited  to  save  his  life  by  uttering  some  form 
of  renunciation  of  Christ,  answered,  "Eighty-six  years  have  I  been  His  servant,  and 
He  has  done  me  no  wrong :  how,  then,  can  I  revile  my  King  Who  saved  me  ?  " 
(IF.  Bright,  D.D.)  The  triple  rays  which  make  the  white  light  of  heaven : — These 
words  give  us  three  elements  of  the  perfect  state  of  man — service,  contemplation, 
likeness ;  these  three  are  perfect  and  unbroken.  1.  The  first  element  in  the  perfect 
state  of  man  is  perfect  activity  in  the  service  of  God.  If  we  have  not  here  the 
notion  of  priesthood,  we  have  one  very  closely  approximating  towards  it.  That, 
then,  is  the  first  thought  that  we  have  to  look  at.  Now,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  a  very 
touching  confession  of  the  weariness  and  unsatisfactoriness  of  life  in  the  general 
that  the  dream  of  the  future  which  has  unquestionably  the  most  fascination  for 
most  men,  is  that  which  speaks  of  it  as  rest.  Now  this  representation  of  my  text  is 
by  no  means  contradictory,  but  it  is  complementary  of  that  other  one.  The  deepest 
rest  and  the  highest  activity  coincide.  They  do  so  in  God  Who  worketh  hitherto  in 
undisturbed  tranquilUty ;  they  may  do  so  in  us.  The  wheel  that  goes  round  in 
swiftest  rotation  seems  to  be  standing  still.  Work  at  its  intensest,  which  is  pleasur- 
able work,  and  level  to  the  capacity  of  the  doer,  is  the  truest  form  of  rest.  "  They 
rest  from  their  labours."  "  They  rest  not,  day  or  night."  From  their  labours? — 
yes  !  From  toil  disproportioned  to  faculty  ? — yes  !  From  unwelcome  work  ? — 
yes !  From  distraction  and  sorrow  ?— yes  !  But  from  glad  praise  and  vigorous 
service? — never!  day  or  night.  Then  there  is  another  thing  involved  in 
this  first  idea,  namely,  the  notion  of  an  outer  world  on  which  and  in  which 
to  work;  and  also  the  notion  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  in  which  the 
active  spirit  may  abide,  and  through  which  it  may  work.  Perhaps  it  may 
be  that  they  who  sleep  in  Jesus,  in  the  period  between  the  shuffling  off  of  this 
mortal  coil  and  the  breaking  of  that  day  when  they  are  raised  again  from  the  dead, 
are  incapable  of  exertion  in  an  outer  sphere.  At  all  events,  this  we  may  be  sure  of, 
that  if  it  be  so  they  have  no  desires  in  advance  of  their  capacities ;  and  of  this  also 
I  think  we  may  be  sure,  that  whether  they  themselves  can  come  into  contact  with 
an  external  universe  or  not,  Christ  is  for  them  what  the  body  is  to  us  here  now,  and 
the  glorified  body  will  be  hereafter :  that  being  absent  from  the  body  they  are  present 
with  the  Lord.  The  next  point  is  this  :  such  service  must  be  in  a  far  higher  sphere 
and  a  far  nobler  fashion  than  the  service  of  earth.  God  rewards  work  with  more 
work.  The  powers  that  are  trained  and  exercised  and  proved  in  a  narrower  region 
are  lifted  to  the  higher ;  as  some  poor  peasant-girl,  for  instance,  whose  rich  voice 
has  risen  up  in  the  harvest-field  only  for  her  own  delight  and  that  of  a  handful 
of  listeners,  heard  by  some  one  who  detects  its  sweetness,  may  be  carried  away  to 
some  great  city,  and  charm  kings  with  its  tones,  so  the  service  done  in  some  httle 
corner  of  this  remote  rural  province  of  God's  universe,  apprehended  by  Him,  shall 
be  rewarded  with  a  wider  platform,  and  a  nobler  area  for  work.  "  Thou  hast  been 
faithful  in  a  few  things,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things."  Notice  again, 
that  the  highest  type  of  human  service  must  be  service  for  other  people.  The  law  of 
heaven  can  surely  not  be  more  selfish  than  the  law  for  earth,  and  that  is,  "  he  that  is 
chief  est  amongst  you,  let  him  be  your  servant. "  The  last  point  about  this  first  matter 
is  simply  this — that  this  highest  form  of  human  activity  is  all  to  be  worship  ;  all  to 
be  done  in  reference  to  Him ;  all  to  be  done  in  submission  to  Him.  The  will  of  the 
man  in  His  work  is  to  be  so  conformed  to  the  will  of  God  as  that,  whatsoever  the 
hand  on  the  great  dial  points  to,  that  the  hand  on  the  little  dial  shall  point  to  also. 
Obedience  is  joy  and  rest.  To  know  and  do  His  will  is  heaven.  2.  Next,  look  at 
the  second  of  the  elements  here — "  They  shall  see  His  face."  Now  that  expression 
"  seeing  the  face  of  God  "  in  Scripture  seems  to  me  to  be  employed  in  two  somewhat 
different  ways,  according  to  one  of  which  the  possibility  of  seeing  the  face  is  affirmed, 
and  according  to  another  of  which  it  is  denied.  The  one  may  be  illustrated  by  the 
Divine  word  to  Moses :  "  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face.  There  shall  no  man  see 
Me  and  live  "  (Exod.  xxxiii.).  The  other  may  be  illustrated  by  the  aspiration  and 
the  confidence  of  one  of  the  psalms :  "  As  for  me,  I  shall  behold  Thy  face  in  righteous- 
ness." Where  is  the  key  to  the  apparent  contradiction  ?  Here,  I  think ;  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  manifest  God,  in  Him  only  do  men  draw  near  to  the  hidden  Deity,  the  King 
Invisible,  Who  dwelleth  in  the  light  that  is  inaccessible.  And  here  on  earth  we  see 
by  faith,  and  yonder  there  will  be  a  vision,  different  in  kind,  most  real,  most  im- 
mediate and  direct,  net  of  the  hidden  Godhood  in  itself,  but  of  the  revealed  God- 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  719 

hood  manifest  in  Jesus  Christ,  Whom  in  His  glorified  corporeal  Manhood  we  shall 
perceive,  with  the  organs  of  our  glorified  body,  Whom,  in  His  Divine  beauty  we  shall 
know  and  love  with  heart  and  mind,  in  knowledge  direct,  immediate,  far  surpassing 
in  degree  and  different  in  kind  from  the  knowledge  of  faith  which  we  have  of  Him 
here  below.  But  there  is  another  point  I  would  touch  upon  in  reference  to  this 
second  thought  of  our  text — viz.,  its  connection  with  the  previous  representation, 
"  They  shall  serve  Him,"  that  is  activity  of  service  in  our  outer  sphere;  "  they  shall 
see  His  face,"  that  is  contemplation.  The  Kabbis  taught  that  there  were  angels  who 
serve,  and  angels  who  praise,  but  the  two  classes  meet  in  the  perfected  man,  whose 
service  shall  be  praise,  whose  praise  shall  be  service.  3.  The  last  element  is  "  His 
name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  The  metaphor  is  taken  from  the  old  cruel 
practice  of  branding  a  slave  with  the  name  of  his  master.  And  so  the  primary  idea 
of  this  expression :  "  His  slaves  shall  bear  His  name  upon  their  foreheads,"  is  that 
their  ownership  shall  be  conspicuously  visible  to  all  that  look.  But  there  is  more 
than  that  in  it.  How  is  the  ownership  to  be  made  visible  ?  By  His  name  being  on 
their  foreheads.  What  is  "  His  name  "  ?  Universally  in  Scripture  "  His  name"  is 
His  revealed  character,  and  so  we  come  to  this  :  the  perfect  men  shall  be  known  to 
belong  to  God,  in  Christ,  because  they  are  like  Him.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Devoted 
service : — Caroline  Herschel,  the  sister  of  the  great  astronomer,  was  through  all  her 
life  the  most  attached  servant  to  her  brother.  She  called  herself  "  a  mere  tool,  which 
my  brother  had  the  trouble  of  sharpening."  She  learned  the  details  of  observing 
with  such  success  that  she  independently  discovered  eight  comets.  Her  devotion 
was  most  complete.  Wherever  her  brother  was  concerned  she  abolished  self,  and 
replaced  her  nature  with  his.  Having  no  taste  for  astronomy,  her  work  at  first  was 
distasteful  to  her,  but  she  conquered  this,  and  lived  to  help  his  work  and  fame. 
They  shall  see  His  face. — The  heaven  of  heaven : — The  Italians  so  much  admire  the 
city  of  Naples,  that  their  proverb  is,  "  See  Naples  and  die"  ;  as  if  there  remained 
nothing  more  to  be  seen  after  that  fair  bay  and  city  had  been  gazed  upon.  To 
behold  the  far  fairer  sight  mentioned  in  the  text  men  might  well  be  content  to  die 
a  thousand  times.  Forget  for  awhile  your  present  cares,  and  live  for  awhile  in  the 
future  which  is  so  certified  by  faithful  promises  that  you  may  rejoice  in  it  even  now ! 
I.  The  beatific  vision.  "  They  shall  see  His  face."  It  is  the  chief  blessing  of 
heaven,  the  heaven  of  heaven,  that  the  saints  shall  there  see  Jesus.  Christ  is  all  in 
aU  to  us  here,  and  therefore  we  long  for  a  heaven  in  which  He  shall  be  all  in  all  to 
us  for  ever  ;  and  such  will  the  heaven  of  God  be.  The  paradise  of  God  is  not  the 
Elysium  of  imagination,  the  Utopia  of  intellect,  or  the  Eden  of  poetry  ;  but  it  is  the 
Heaven  of  intense  spiritual  fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  the  beatific  vision  it 
is  Christ  whom  they  see ;  and  further,  it  is  His  "  face"  which  they  behold ;  by  which 
I  understand  two  things  :  first,  that  they  shall  Uterally  and  physically,  with  their 
risen  bodies,  actually  look  into  the  face  of  Jesus  ;  and  secondly,  that  spiritually  their 
mental  faculties  shall  be  enlarged,  so  that  they  shall  be  enabled  to  look  into  the  very 
heart,  and  soul,  and  character  of  Christ,  so  as  to  understand  Him,  His  work.  His 
love.  His  all  in  all,  as  they  never  understood  Him  before.  U.  The  sukpassino 
CLEARNESS  OF  THAT  VISION.  "  They  shall  see  His  face."  The  word  "  see  "  sounds  in 
my  ears  with  a  clear,  full,  melodious  note.  We  see  but  little  here.  "  We  walk  by 
faith,  not  by  sight."  Around  us  all  is  mist  and  cloud.  What  we  do  see,  we  see 
only  as  if  men  were  trees  walking.  The  saints  see  the  face  of  Jesus  in  heaven, 
because  they  are  purified  from  sin.  The  pure  in  heart  are  blessed :  they  shall  see 
God,  and  none  others.  They  may  weU  see  His  face  when  the  scales  of  sin  have 
been  taken  from  their  eyes,  and  they  have  become  pure  as  God  Himself  is  pure. 
They  surely  see  His  face  the  more  clearly  because  all  the  clouds  of  care  are  gone 
from  them.  Moreover,  as  they  have  done  with  sin  and  cares,  so  have  they  done 
with  sorrows.  They  see  His  face  right  gloriously  in  that  cloudless  atmosphere,  and 
in  the  light  which  He  Himself  supplies.  Moreover,  the  glorified  see  His  face  the 
more  clearly  because  there  are  no  idols  to  stand  betwen  Him  and  them.  III.  The 
MATCHLESS  PRIVILEGE  WHICH  THIS  VISION  INVOLVES.  We  may  Understand  the  words 
"  they  shall  see  His  face  "  to  contain  five  things.  They  mean,  first,  certain  salva- 
tion ;  secondly,  a  clear  knowledge  of  Him ;  thirdly,  conscious  favour ;  fourthly, 
close  fellowship ;  and  lastly,  complete  transformation.  IV.  Who  they  are  to  ^'hom 
THIS  choice  boon  IS  AFFORDED  BY  THE  DiviNE  MERCY.  "  They  shall  sce  His  face." 
Who  are  they  ?  They  are  all  His  redeemed,  all  the  justified,  all  the  sanctified. 
Some  are  taken  away  to  see  His  face  while  yet  young.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 

face  of  Jesus  : — "His  face"!  That  can  never  be  produced  upon  canvas;  that  is 
the  medium  of  Divine  revelation ;  that  is  the  type  of  perfect  humanity.    I.  Heaven 


720  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

POSSESSES  ONE  sPECiAii  ATTBACTioN — the  face  of  Jesus.  1.  This  chides  our 
idle  speculation.  The  presence  of  Jesus  makes  heaven,  and  to  see  His  face  is 
eternal  joy.  2.  Here  is  a  test  for  our  religious  desires.  Do  we  long  to  see 
Jesus  ?  n.  Heaven  will  continue  the  experience  of  earth.  1.  It  is  possible 
to  see  Jesus  now.  We  can  see  His  face  in  the  mirror  of  the  Word — dimly  in 
the  law,  gloriously  in  the  gospel.  We  can  see  it  smiling  from  the  Cross.  We 
can  see  it  in  the  gifts  of  His  heart.  2.  It  is  possible  to  realise  heaven  upon 
earth.  III.  Heaven  will  soothe  the  deepest  sighing  of  the  regenerated 
HEART.  IV.  Heaven  will  perfect  our  likeness  to  Jesus.  {Philip  Reynolds.) 
The  vision  of  God : — Of  all  the  happiness  and  honour  that  fill  that  city  of  glory, 
this  is  the  sum,  and  the  centre,  and  the  overflow :  "  They  shall  see  His  face." 

1.  Whose  face  ?  It  is  the  face  of  God ;  and  that  face  is  Jesus,  the  Word  made 
flesh ;  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  &c. ;  Hght  of  the  glory  of  God  is  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  the  face  of  majesty,  yet  the  face  of  love.  Like  unto  it  there  is 
not  any  face  in  earth  or  heaven — in  all  the  vast  universe  of  God — so  bright,  so  fair, 
so  perfect,  so  glorious,  so  Divine.  II.  Who  shall  see  it?  His  servants. 
•'  This  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord."  "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the 
King  in  His  beauty."  "  If  any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  My  Father  honour." 
in.  What  is  it  to  see  His  face  ?  See  Psa.  xli.  12 ;  Esther  i.  14 ;  2  Kings  xxv. 
19.  1.  Nearness.  These  servants  form  the  inner,  nay  the  innermost,  circle  of 
creation.  2.  Blessedness.  The  nearest  of  the  disciples  was  the  most  blessed,  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.  The  nearest  to  Him  in  heaven  will  be  the  most  blessed. 
3.  Honour.  To  see  the  king's  face  was  the  great  earthly  honour ;  so  is  it  the 
greatest  heavenly  honour.  4.  Power.  They  who  see  the  King's  face  are  His  coun- 
sellors. His  vicegerents,  the  doers  of  His  will.  Christ's  throne  is  theirs — for  "  he 
that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things."  This  seeing  of  the  face  of  God  and  His 
Christ  will  be :  (1)  Eternal.  It  cannot  end.  (2)  Unchangeable.  No  interruption ; 
no  eclipse ;  no  cloud ;  no  darkness ;  no  setting ;  no  dimness  of  eye ;  no  unbelief ; 
no  distance.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  facial  vision  of  God : — I.  Who  they  are 
THAT  shall  see  THE  FACE  OF  GoD  AND  THE  Lamb  IN  HEAVEN.     1.  All  real  belie vcrs. 

2.  The  Lord's  servants.  3.  The  pure  in  heart  (1  John  iii.  2,  3).  4.  The  righteous 
(Psa.  xvii.  15).  II.  What  is  imported  in  seeing  the  face  op  God  and  the 
Lamb.  1.  To  see  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  certainly  imports  being  in  the 
immediate  presence  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  2.  To  see  the  face  of  God  and  the 
Lamb  importeth  an  ocular  bodily  sight  of  a  sensible  Divine  glory ;  it  is  a  sight  of 
the  face  of  the  Lamb  of  God  incarnate,  and  in  the  nature  of  man,  with  a  glorified 
Buper-exalted  body.  3.  To  see  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  importeth  a  mental 
and  intellectual  sight  or  knowledge  of  the  glorious  perfections  of  God  and  the 
Lamb,  shining  in  their  brightest  lustre.  4.  To  see  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb 
certainly  importeth  such  a  discovery  and  view  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  was 
never  attained  by  any  in  this  life.  5.  To  see  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  im- 
porteth a  perfect  enjoyment  of  the  love  and  favour  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  a  sense 
and  feeling  of  this  favour,  and  the  blessed  fruits  and  effects  of  it,  6.  To  see  the 
face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  certainly  imports  a  humble  and  holy  confidence  and 
ability  to  look  upon  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  7.  To  join  them  together, 
immediate  and  familiar  communion  with,  and  the  enjoyment  of  God  and  the  Lamb 
are  hinted  to  us  in  this  expression,  as  the  attainment  of  the  saints  in  heaven. 
An  expression  of  more  wonderful  condescendency  cannot  be  used,  than  that  of 
Jehovah's  way  of  conversing  with  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiii.  11).  HI.  How  thh 
sight  of  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  tendeth  unto,  and  is  a  part  op  oub 
happiness  in  heaven.  1.  The  object  of  this  vision  is  the  face  of  God  and  the 
Lamb,  that  is,  the  glory  of  the  infinite  perfections  of  God,  shining  in  the  highest 
excellency  of  their  brightness.  2.  Consider  the  act  of  this  vision  itself,  it  is  a 
knowledge  of  God  and  His  glory — not  by  report,  as  all  the  knowledge  of  faith  we 
have  in  this  state  is  ;— not  by  reasoning,  as  here,  which  is  wearisome  and  uncertain, 
but  by  sight  or  knowledge  directly  taking  in  the  glory  manifested.  It  will  be  a 
vigorous  and  efi&cacious  sight,  the  faculty  being  strengthened  and  made  able  to  bear 
the  discoveries  of  this  glory  by  the  object  itself.  3.  Consider  the  effects  of  seeing 
the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  in  heaven :  by  this  we  shall  know  all  things  fit  for 
us  to  know.  IV.  What  reason  you,  who  are  the  servants  op  God  and  the 
Lamb,  now  have  to  be  assured  that  you  shall  see  His  face  in  heaven.  1.  You 
have  good  and  real  right  to  this  happiness,  upon  a  manifold  title,  such  as  God  the 
Father's  eternal  purpose  an4  election.  2.  God  hath  begotten  an  insatiable  desire  ia 
you  to  see  His  face  in  heaven.    3.  All  the  Redeemer's  offices  are  engaged  to  bring  all 


CHAP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  721 

His  servants  unto  God,  and  set  them  in  His  presence  for  ever.  V.  When  the 
Lokd's  servants  shall  be  admitted  to  see  His  face.  1.  Our  souls  shall,  imme- 
diately after  death,  be  admitted  to  see  God.  2.  The  most  eminent  season  of  our 
being  admitted  to  see  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is  the  day  of  the  resurrection  ; 
then  shall  our  bodies  be  raised  up  glorified,  and  reunited  unto  our  long-before  glori- 
fied souls.  (1)  To  all  the  hearers  of  the  gospel.  Let  it  be  the  great  scope,  end, 
and  business  of  your  lives,  to  attain  this  happiness  when  you  die.  (2)  Labour  to 
attain  to  a  more  certain  knowledge  and  assurance  of  this,  that  you  shall  see  His 
face  for  ever  in  heaven.  (3)  Think  much  upon  the  obligations  you  are  under  to 
God,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  this  hope  laid  up  for  you  in 
heaven  ;  and  live  in  the  continual  praises  of  the  ever-blessed  Three  in  One.  (4)  La- 
bour to  have  as  much  of  this  happiness  of  heaven,  of  the  vision  of  the  face  of  God 
and  the  Lamb,  here  upon  earth,  as  you  can  attain,  and  to  exercise  yourselves  much 
therein.  (5)  Live  in  the  earnest,  desirous,  patient  hope  and  expectation  of  this 
happiness  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven ;  this  is  good,  and  blessedness  next  to  the 
beatifical  vision  itself.  (6)  Let  the  foresight  of  this  glorious  happiness  mortify  you 
to  all  human  and  earthly  glory.  (7)  Keep  your  eyes  outward  and  inward,  as  these 
that  are  to  see  the  face  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  (8)  Study  holiness,  and  endeavour 
to  attain  much  of  it.  {Jos.  Robe,  M.A.)  The  heavenly  life:  the  living  God  with 
His  living  servants  :— The  Holy  Scriptures  maintain  a  consistent  and  marked 
reserve  in  respect  of  the  details  of  the  future  life.  God  calls  the  soul  first,  not  to 
reveries,  but  to  repentance.  I.  They  shall  see  His  face.  This  is  the  first  element 
in  the  promise.  It  needs  no  elaborate  proof  that  the  Bible  presents  the  presence  of 
the  personal  God  as  the  soul's  last  and  highest  hope.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven 
but  Thee  ?  "  "  In  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy  "  ;  "  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 
Nor  does  it  need  long  proving  that  this  supreme  hope,  in  all  views  of  the  future 
other  than  that  of  the  Bible,  is  either  absent  or  quite  secondary.  The  Buddhist 
votary,  far  from  longing  for  the  sight  of  a  Divine  Countenance,  desires  as  his 
summum  bonum — his  one  true  feUcity  (only  too  great  to  be  confidently  hoped  for) — 
the  dissolution  of  his  own  illusory  yet  weary  personality  into  the  deep  repose  of  a 
universe  of  non-existence.  The  Elysium  of  Virgil,  the  happy  fields  of  the  just, 
laborious,  and  noble-hearted,  is  nothing  but  a  pale  reflection  of  the  joys  of  earth, 
and  bears  not  a  trace  of  the  ruling  and  energising  power  of  a  Divine  Presence  in 
the  midst  of  it.  In  the  great  Mythus  of  Plato,  again,  the  chariot-borne  spectators 
of  reality,  the  personages  of  that  vast  festal  procession  which  climbs  up  the  steep 
sides  of  the  lower  sky  to  the  ideal  heaven,  behold  at  length  not  a  Divine  Counte- 
nance, loving  and  loved ;  they  discover  only  splendours  magnificent  but  cold : 
universals  as  they  are — aljsolute  justice,  temperance,  and  knowledge — but  not  One 
who  is  eternal  and  beatifying  love.  The  Pantheist,  ancient  or  modern,  western  or 
eastern,  hopes  only  to  sink  hereafter  somewhat  deeper  into  that  will-less  and  loveless 
absolute  which,  after  all,  he  holds  that  he  has  never  left ;  for  all  things,  in  his 
creed,  are  but  equally  and  always  parts,  and  no  more,  of  the  one  Being  in  its 
aimless  and  unbeheld  development.  It  is  the  Bible,  and  the  Bible  only,  that  makes 
the  presence  of  an  eternal  and  holy  Person  the  final  object  of  the  hopes  of  man. 
"  They  shall  see  His  face."  Heaven,  if  it  includes  the  idea  of  endlessness,  needs 
the  presence  of  a  Person  both  eternal  and  lovable,  if  it  is  to  be  not  happy  only, 
but  other  than  terrible,  to  the  created  and  limited  being.  It  is  a  woful  mistake  to 
feed  our  souls  in  prospect  on  the  food  of  the  presence,  not  of  the  Creator,  but  of 
the  creature.  Dreadful  would  be  the  ultimate  famine  in  the  bright  but  then  restless 
regions,  if  the  created  souls  were  left  there  to  subsist  for  ever  on  the  resources  of 
each  other  and  themselves.  "  They  shall  see  His  face — they  shall  be  satisfied  with 
His  likeness."  II.  And  His  name  shall  be  in  theib  foreheads.  We  look  on 
this  clause  now,  not  as  revealing  the  Lord  God's  influence  in  the  endless  life,  but 
as  witnessing  to  the  sustained  individual  personality  of  those  who  shall  be  admitted, 
in  that  endless  life,  to  behold  His  glory.  The  opinion  of  Pantheism  has  spread 
wide  and  deep,  in  many  and  most  various  regions  and  times.  It  is  indeed  a  seduc- 
tive evil,  an  error  singularly  attractive  to  many  fine  and  powerful  minds,  especially 
in  its  guise  of  a  quasi-worship  of  external  nature.  Yet  this  error  can  present  itself 
to  the  bewildered  soul  under  a  subtle  show  of  humility :  "  Slight  and  imperfect  being! 
why  claim,  or  why  fear,  an  endless  subsistence  ?  Shall  the  thin  flame  of  your  little 
life  glimmer  on  for  ever  through  the  windy  currents  of  an  illimitable  and  unresting 
universe  ?  No,  surely.  If  you  are  indeed  created,  still  in  no  sense  whatever  can  you 
stand  apart  from  the  Creator.  You  are  but  one  of  His,  or  rather  of  Its,  countless 
iphAses.    You  will  soon  be  dissolved  again  into  the  depths  of  His,  or  rather  of  Its, 

46 


722  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxii. 

existence."     But  to  the  whisperings  of  this  lie,  the  Holy  Scriptures,  strong  in  their 
historic  record,  in  their  unique  method  of  appealing  to  Divine  facts  to  attest  and 
teach   eternal   truths,   give   a  negative   equally   uncompromising    and    profound. 
Scripture  seeks  not  to  solve  the  often-attempted  riddle  how  the  Infinite  created  the 
finite  into  a  distinct  subsistence :  in  this  case,  and  in  that  of  the  origin  of  evil,  it 
leaves  in  emphatic  silence  just  the  two  problems  which  unchastened  human  specu- 
lation has  most  eagerly  pursued.    But  that  the  finite  was  created  into  that  myste- 
rious distinctness  ;  that  the  personality  of  man  is  real  and  permanent ;  this  truth 
the  holy  Book,  through  all  the  sixteen  centuries  of  its  growth,  presses  home  in 
countless  ways  on  the  heart  of  man — that  heart  in  whose  depths  the  truths  alike  of 
personality  and  of  guilt  find  their  sure  echo.     And  this  is  part  of  the  truth  of  this 
prophetic  verse.     "  His  name  shall  be,"  not  upon  floating  phases  of  an  Absolute 
Being,  but  upon  •'  their  foreheads."     {H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.)         Facing  the  sun : — 
Dr.  Clemance  said,  "  One  day  I  was  climbing  one  of  the  Alpine  range  of  mountains, 
near  the  boundary  line  between  France  and  Switzerland.    By  and  by  we  came  upon 
snow  and  icicles,  and  all  the  usual  attendants  in  the  train  of  winter ;  but  when  we 
got  higher  we  found  delightful  flowers  blooming,  in  all  the  beauty  of  floral  loveli- 
ness.   I  said  to  myself,  '  How  is  this  ?    Down  yonder  are  icicles  and  snow,  up  here 
are  those  exquisite  flowers.     The  secret  of  it  was,  that  this  part  of  the  mountain 
faced  the  sun,  while  the  other  was  turned  from  it.' "     So  not  unlike  this  is  the 
change  in  the  heart  of   him  who  turns  from  the  cold    world   of    sin    to    the 
warming  rays  of   the  Sun    of    Eighteousness.        His   name   shall   be   iu    their 
foreheads. — Three  inscriptions  with  one  meaning  (with  Exod.  xxviii.  36  ;  Zech.  xiv. 
20) : — These  three  widely  separated  texts  all  speak  of  inscriptions,  and  they  are  all 
obviously  connected  with  each  other.     Three  things,  then — the  priest's  mitre,  the 
horses'  bells,  the  foreheads  of  the  perfected  saints — three  aspects  of  the  Christian 
thought  of  holiness.    I.  The  pkiest's  mitre.     The  high  priest  was  the  official 
representative  of  the  nation.     He  stood  before  God  as  the  embodied  and  personified 
Israel.    For  the  purposes  of  worship  Israel  was  the  high  priest,  and  the  high  priest 
was  Israel.    And  so,  on  his  forehead,  not  to  distinguish  him  from  the  rest  of  the 
people,  but  to  include  all  the  people  in  his  consecration,  shone  a  golden  plate  with 
the  motto,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."     So,  at  the  beginning,  there  stands  a  protest 
against  all  notions  that  make  "  saint  "  the  designation  of  any  abnormal  or  excep- 
tional sanctity,  and  confine  the  name  to  the  members  of  any  selected  aristocracy  of 
devoutness  and  of  goodness.    All  Christian  men,  ex  officio,  by  the  very  fact  of  their 
Christianity,  are  saints,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.     It  is  a  very  unfortunate 
thing — indicating  superficiality  of   thought — that  the  modern  popular  notion  of 
"  holiness  "  identifies  it  with  purity,  righteousness,  moral  perfection.     Now  that  is 
in  it,  but  that  is  not  the  whole  of  it.     The  root-meaning  is  "  separated,  set  apart," 
and  the  word  expresses  primarily,  not  moral  character,  but  relation  to  God.     How 
can  a  man  be  separated  and  laid  aside  ?    Well,  there  is  only  one  way,  and  that  is 
by  self-surrender.    "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  is  self-surrender  of  will,  and  heart,  and 
mind,  and  everything.     And  that  surrender  is  of  the  very  essence  of  Christianity. 
What  is  a  saint  ?     Some  man  or  woman  that  has  practised  unheard-of  austerities  ? 
Somebody  that  has  lived  an  isolated  and  self -regarding  life  in  convent  or  monastery 
or  desert?     No !  a  man  or  woman  in  the  world  who,  moved  by  the  mercies  of  God, 
yields  self  to  God  as  a  living  sacrifice.     II.  The  horses'  bells.     Zechariah  has  a 
vision  of  the  ideal  Messianic  times,  and  of  course,  as  must  necessarily  be  the  case, 
his  picture  is  painted  with  colours  laid  upon  his  palette  by  his  experience,  and  he 
depicts  that  distant  future  in  the  guise  suggested  to  him  by  what  he  saw  around 
him.     So  we  have  to  disentangle  from  his  words  the  sentiment  which  he  expresses, 
and  to  recognise  the  symbolic  way  in  which  he  puts  it.    On  the  whole,  the  prophet's 
teaching  is  that,  in  the  ideal  state  of  man  upon  earth,  there  would  be  an  entire  abo- 
lition of  the  distinction  between  "  sacred  "  and  "  secular  "  ;   a  distinction  that  has 
wrought  infinite  mischief  in  the  world,  and  in  the  lives  of  Christian  people.     Let 
me  transfer  these  words  of  our  prophet  into  English  equivalents.     Every  cup  and 
tumbler  in  a  poor  man's  kitchen  shall  be  as  sacred  as  the  Communion  chalice  that 
passes  from  lip  to  lip  with  the  "  blood  of  Jesus  Christ "  in  it.     Every  common 
piece  of  service  that  we  do,  down  among  the  vulgarities  and  the  secularities  and 
the  meannesses  of  daily  life,  may  be  lifted  up  to  stand  upon  precisely  the  same  level 
as  the  sacredest  office  that  we  undertake.     The  bells  of  the  horses  shall  jingle  to 
the  same  tune  as  the  trumpets  of  the  priests  within  the  shrine,  and  on  all,  great 
and  small,  shall  be  written,  "Holiness  to  the  Lord."    Hallow  thyself,  and  all  things 
are  clean  unto  thee.    HI.  The  perfected  sa.ints'  foreheads.     It  is  only  the  name 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  723 

that  is  written  in  the  perfected  saints'  forehead.  Not  the  "  Holiness  unto  the 
Lord,"  but  just  the  bare  name.  What  does  that  mean  ?  Well,  it  means  the  same 
as  your  writing  your  name  in  one  of  your  books  does,  or  as  when  a  man  puts  his 
initials  on  the  back  of  his  oxen,  or  as  the  old  practice  of  branding  the  master's 
mark  upon  the  slave  did.  It  means  absolute  ownership.  But  it  means  something 
more.  The  name  is  the  manifested  personality,  the  revealed  God,  the  character,  as 
we  say  in  an  abstract  way,  the  character  of  God.  That  name  is  to  be  in  the  fore- 
heads of  His  perfected  people.  How  does  it  come  to  be  there  ?  Read  the  clause 
before.  "  His  servants  shall  see  His  face,  and  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads." 
That  is  to  say,  the  perfected  condition  is  not  reached  by  surrender  only,  but  by 
assimilation ;  and  that  assimilation  comes  by  contemplation.  The  faces  that  are 
turned  to  Him,  and  behold  Him,  are  smitten  with  the  light  and  shine,  and  those 
that  look  upon  them  see,  *'  as  it  had  been,  the  face  of  an  angel,"  as  the  Sanhedrin 
saw  that  of  Stephen  when  he  beheld  the  Son  of  Man  standing  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.  Alas !  alas  !  it  is  so  hard  for  us  to  live  out  our  best  selves,  and  to  show  to 
the  world  what  is  in  us.  Cowardice,  sheepishness,  and  a  hundred  other  reasons 
prevent  it.  In  this  poor  imperfect  state  no  emotion  ever  takes  shape  and  visibility 
without  losing  more  or  less  of  its  beauty.  But  yonder  the  obstructions  to  self- 
manifestation  will  be  done  away  ;  and  when  He  shall  be  manifested  "  we  also  shall 
be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory."  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  On  the  happiness  of 
heaven,  as  it  consists  in  a  conformity  to  God  and  the  Lamb  : — I.  Show  what  seems 

TO   BE    HINTED    IN   THIS    SCRIPTUBE,    CONCERNING    THE    HAPPINESS    OP    THE    SAINTS    IN 

HEAVEN,  AS  IT  IS  A  LIKENESS  TO  GoD  AND  THE  Lamb.  1.  The  saiuts  in  heavcu 
have  the  name  of  God  upon  them ;  that  is,  they  shall  have  upon  them  a  likeness 
unto,  and  resemblance  of  these  glorious  perfections,  whereby  God  hath  manifested 
and  made  Himself  known  unto  us,  called  His  Name  in  Scripture.  (1)  It  is  a 
likeness  to  God  in  His  moral  and  communicable  perfections  and  excellences.  (2)  In 
heaven  we  shall  be  like  God  in  happiness  and  glory.  2.  The  saints  in  heaven 
have  the  Lamb's  name  upon  them.  (1)  Their  souls  shall  be  like  unto  the  soul  of 
Jesus  Christ,  in  all  the  faculties  thereof.  *'  When  He  shall  appear,  we  shall 
appear  with  Him  in  glory,"  that  is,  not  only  as  pure  and  holy  creatures,  but  as 
glorious  and  happy  creatures.  For  Christ  shall  give  unto  them  the  same  glory 
which  the  Father  hath  given  Him,  and  this  not  only  unto  their  souls,  but  also,  (2) 
Unto  their  bodies ;  for  they  shall  be  like  unto  Christ  in  heaven  in  their  bodies. 
3.  The  name  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is  in  their  foreheads ;  that  is,  (1)  Their  rela- 
tion to  God  and  the  Lamb,  and  their  conformity  and  likeness  will  then  be  open, 
evident  and  apparent,  as  that  is  which  is  upon  the  forehead.  (2)  His  name  in 
their  foreheads  intimateth  this  unto  us,  that  our  likeness  to  God  and  the  Lamb  in 
heaven  will  be  glory.  Here  it  is  grace,  it  is  excellent,  though  it  is  most  in  the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart ;  but  in  heaven  it  not  only  is  excellent,  as  it  is  here,  but 
excellency  shining  and  appearing  openly  upon  them,  in  their  foreheads.  (3)  His 
name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads  doth  intimate  this  to  us,  that,  how  great  soever  the 
glory  of  the  saints  in  heaven  shall  be,  it  shaU  not  be  the  same  with  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  Lamb ;  it  is  only  a  likeness  of  it.  4.  His  name  shall  be  in  their 
foreheads  intimateth  to  us  that  the  glory,  given  unto  the  saints,  manifesteth  the 
glorious  perfections  of  God  and  the  Lamb ;  it  manifests  the  name  of  God,  that  is, 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb.     II.  Some  considerations  from  whence  it  will 

APPEAR    WHAT   A    CONSIDERABLE    PART    OF    THE    HAPPINESS    OF    THE    SAINTS   IN    HEAVEN 

THIS  LIKENESS  TO  GoD  AND  THE  Lamb  IS.  1.  If  DO  more  should  be  said  but  this, 
that  it  is  a  likeness  to  the  blessed  God  and  the  glorious  Mediator,  to  the  utmost  of 
our  capacity  it  expresseth  a  happiness  great  above  our  present  comprehension. 
2.  It  must  be  an  inconceivable  happiness,  seeing  it  is  the  final  result  and  issue 
of  the  eternal  wisdom  and  counsel,  project  and  purpose  of  God,  to  give  unto  His 
people  a  happiness  worthy  of  Himself  to  bestow,  and  such  as  should  never  make 
Him  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God.  3.  The  greatness  of  this  happiness  appeareth 
from  the  consideration  of  the  stupendous  means  made  use  of  to  accomplish  it.  It 
is  an  end  brought  about,  by  no  less  a  mean  than  the  incarnation  and  whole  media- 
tion of  the  Son  of  God.  4.  This  is  the  end  of  all  the  wishes,  endeavours  and 
expectations  of  the  people  of  God.  Conclusion:  1.  If,  upon  reflection,  you  find  or 
suspect  yourselves  to  be  wholly  unsuitable  to  this  blessedness,  apply  yourselves  to 
speedy,  diligent  and  incessant  endeavours  to  get  the  temper  and  disposition  of  your 
spirits  changed  and  fitted  thereto,  by  a  begun  likeness  to  God  and  the  Lamb  in 
holiness  and  purity.  Strive  to  get  His  image  and  likeness  deeply  engraven  upon 
your  souls,  by  a  work  of  regeneration  and  sanctification.     2.  Labour  not  only  after 


724  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

a  likeness  to  God  and  the  Lamb ;  but  to  let  the  world  see  it  in  your  lives,  and  to 
scatter  the  beams  of  it  in  your  conversations,  for  the  enlightening  a  dark  world ; 
or,  in  the  terms  of  our  text,  labour  to  have  as  much  of  the  name  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb  on  your  foreheads  now,  as  can  be.  (1)  By  word,  confessing  His  name. 
His  truths,  and  His  ways,  in  this  evil  and  adulterous  generation.  (2)  By  deeds,  in 
your  endeavouring  to  be  like  Him  in  yourselves,  especially  in  those  graces  and 
virtues,  whereby  you  may  commend  Him  and  religion  most  unto  strangers  and 
enemies.     {Jas.  Robe,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  There  shall  be  no  night  there. — The  light  of  the  Messed  : — This  declara- 
tion would  be  no  good  news  to  us  in  our  present  state.  Night  brings  rest  and 
refreshment  to  wearied  bodies,  and  often  over-laden  minds.  Yet  who  of  us  all 
remembers  to  give  thanks,  because  daylight  does  not  invite  us  unceasingly  to  toil 
and  anxiety?  But,  if  we  think  upon  the  subject,  we  shall  see  that  the  blessings  of 
the  night  are  all  connected  with  a  state  of  trouble,  labour,  and  imperfection. 
Hence  we  may  understand  there  being  in  heaven  no  time  of  sleep  and  darkness. 
For  centuries  we  have  been  trying  to  light  up  a  dark  world,  and  trying  in  vain. 
There  is  indeed  a  light  come  into  the  world,  but  it  shineth  in  a  dark  place.  It  is 
pleasant  news  to  many  that  Christ  died  to  save  sinners,  but  when  told  that  all  this 
was  to  bring  them  nearer  to  God,  to  enable  them  "  to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly 
lusts,"  then  the  greater  number  turn  from  the  light  and  plunge  back  into  the  dark- 
ness. Some  there  are  who  do  humbly  and  thankfully  accept  that  light.  Their 
path  shineth  more  and  more ;  yet  even  with  them  it  is  very  far  from  being  "perfect 
day."  They  have  light,  but  it  is  to  guide  them  through  darkness,  for  life  here  is, 
and  must  be,  "  this  night "  to  the  Christian,  though  he  sees  afar  off  the  rising  of  the 
dawn.  He  is  here  in  much  ignorance  of  God's  character,  works,  and  ways.  He 
knows  enough  to  save  him,  but  not  enough  to  satisfy  him.  God's  dispensations 
are  full  of  mystery ;  God's  dealings  in  his  own  case  are  often  a  trial  to  his  belief. 
Again,  Satan  tempts  the  Christian  to  doubt  the  love  of  God,  the  truth  of  God,  and 
the  word  of  God,  and  to  question  whether  he  is  really  in  a  state  of  salvation. 
At  times  he  feels  in  much  darkness  through  these  temptations;  almost  lost. 
"  There  shall  be  no  night  there."  Once  more,  the  Christian's  life  on  earth  is 
darkened  by  frequent  mourning,  and  by  death.  Fears  dim  his  vision,  friends 
pass  out  of  his  reach,  he  beholds  them  no  morel  But  there  are  no  graves, 
no  funerals,  in  heaven;  for  there  shall  be  no  more  sorrow,  nor  sighing,  nor 
any  night  there.  {F.  J.  Scott,  M.A.)  Heaven: — We  may  safely  say  that 
those  who  muse  much  on  heaven  are  often  privileged  with  such  foretastes  of  what 
God  hath  prepared  for  His  people,  as  serve,  like  the  clusters  of  Eshcol,  to  teach 
them  practically  the  richness  of  Canaan.  With  them  it  is  not  altogether 
matter  of  report  that  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  is  transcendently  glorious. 
They  have  waited  upon  the  Lord,  until,  according  to  the  promise  of  Isaiah,  they 
have  been  enabled  to  "  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles."    I.  With  our  present 

CONSTITUTION  THERE  WOULD  BE  NOTHING  CHEERING  IN  AN  ARRANGEMENT  WHICH  TOOK 

AWAY  NIGHT  FROM  OUR  GLOBE.  The  alternation  of  day  and  night,  the  two  always 
making  up  the  same  period  of  twenty-four  hours,  is  among  the  most  beautiful  of 
the  many  proofs  that  God  fitted  the  earth  for  man,  and  man  for  the  earth.  We 
know  that  other  planets  revolve  in  very  different  times  on  their  axis,  so  that  their  days 
and  nights  are  of  very  different  lengths  from  our  own.  We  could  not  live  on  one  of 
those  planets.  We  could  not,  at  least,  conform  ourselves  to  the  divisions  of  time ; 
for  we  require  a  period  of  repose  in  every  twenty -four  hours,  and  could  not  subsist, 
if  there  were  only  to  come  such  a  period  in  every  hundred,  or  in  every  thousand. 
And  besides  this,  it  is  very  easy  to  speak  of  night  as  the  season  of  dreariness 
and  gloom,  as  the  representative  of  ignorance  and  error — but  what  should  we  be  with- 
out night  ?  Where  is  there  so  eloquent  an  instructor  as  night  ?  What  reveals  so 
much  of  the  workmanship  of  the  ever-living  God  ?  So  that  there  is  not  necessarily 
anything  very  desirable  in  the  absence  of  night :  it  would  be  the  reverse  of  a  bless- 
ing to  us  in  our  present  condition,  and  would  imply  the  diminution  rather  than  the 
enlargement  of  knowledge.  What  then  are  we  to  learn  from  the  statement  that 
there  shall  be  no  night  in  heaven  ?  We  learn  much,  whether  it  be  the  natural,  or 
the  figurative,  night,  whose  total  absence  is  afl&rmed.  Night  is  now  grateful,  yea 
necessary,  to  us,  as  bringing  quiet  and  repose  to  overwrought  bodies  and  minds. 
But  all  this  arises  from  the  imperfectness  of  our  present  condition  ;  we  are  so  con- 
stituted that  we  cannot  incessantly  pursue  either  occupation  or  enjoyment,  but  must 
recruit  ourselves.    And  it  would  evidently  be  to  raise  us  very  greatly  in  the  scale  of 


CHAP.  XXII.]  ItEVELATION.  725 

animated  being,  to  make  it  no  longer  needful  that  we  should  have  intervals  of  rest ; 
body  and  soul  being  incapable  of  exhaustion,  or  rather  of  fatigue.  There  is  no  night 
there,  because  there  we  shall  need  no  periods  of  inactivity;  we  shall  never  be  sensible 
of  fatigue,  and  never  either  wish  or  want  repose.  It  is  given  as  one  characteristic  of 
Deity,  that  He  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  It  is  afl&rmed  moreover  of  the  four  living 
creatures  which  are  round  about  the  throne,  that  they  "  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying, 
Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  And, 
therefore,  I  read  the  promise  of  a  splendid  exaltation,  of  an  inconceivable  enlarge- 
ment of  every  faculty  and  capacity,  in  the  announcement  of  the  absence  of  night. 
And  though  it  be  true  that  night  now  discloses  to  us  the  wonders  of  the  universe,  so 
that  to  take  from  us  night  were  to  take  a  revelation  of  the  magnificence  of  creation, 
whence  comes  this  but  from  the  imperfection  of  faculties — faculties  which  only 
enable  us  to  discern  certain  bodies,  and  under  certain  circumstances,  and  which 
probably  suffer  far  more  to  escape  them  than  they  bring  to  our  notice  ?  Be  it  so, 
that  night  is  now  our  choice  instructor.  I  feel  that  night  is  to  cease  because  we 
shall  no  longer  need  to  be  taught  through  a  veil,  because  we  shall  be  able  to  read 
the  universe  illuminated,  and  not  require  as  now  to  have  it  darkened  for  our  gaze. 
I  shall  be  adapted  in  every  faculty  to  an  everlasting  day.  And  if  from  considering 
night  in  it^  more  literal,  we  pass  to  the  considering  it  in  its  metaphorical  sense,  who 
can  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  beauty  and  fulness  of  the  promise  of  our  text  ?  We 
take  night  as  the  image  of  ignorance,  of  perplexity,  of  sorrow.  Arid  to  afl&rm  the 
absence  of  night  from  the  heavenly  state  may  justly  be  regarded  as  the  aflarming 
the  absence  of  all  which  darkness  is  used  to  represent.  I  behold  the  removal  of  all 
mistake,  of  all  misconception  ;  conjectures  have  given  place  to  certainties ;  contro- 
versies are  ended,  ^^diflficulties  are  solved,  prophecies  are  completed,  parables  are 
interpreted.  I  behold  the  hushing  up  of  every  grief,  the  prevention  of  every 
sorrow,  the  communication  of  every  joy.  I  behold  the  final  banishment  of  what- 
soever has  alliance  with  sinfulness,  the  splendid  reimpressment  of  every  feature  of 
the  Divine  image  upon  man,  the  unlimited  diffusion  of  righteousness,  the  trium- 
phant admission  of  the  fallen  into  all  the  purities  of  God's  presence,  and  their 
unassailable  security  against  fresh  apostacy.  IE.  St.  John  is  not  content  with 
affirming  the  absence  of  night :  he  proceeds  to  assert  the  absence  of  those 

MEANS   OR   INSTRUMENTS   TO   WHICH   WE   ARE    HERE   INDEBTED    FOR    THE    SCATTERING   OP 

DARKNESS.  "  They  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun."  And  what  then  is  to 
make  their  perpetual  day?  "The  Lord  God  giveth  them  light."  The  whole 
apparatus  of  mirror,  and  temple,  and  sun,  will  be  taken  away,  because  we  shall  be 
admitted  to  the  beatific  vision,  to  all  those  immediate  manifestations  of  Deity 
which  are  vouchsafed  to  the  angel  or  the  archangel,  "  The  Lord  God  giveth 
them  light " ;  is  not  this  to  say  that  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  Himself  ?  for 
you  wUl  remember  what  is  affirmed  by  St.  John,  •'  This  then  is  the  message  which 
we  have  heard  of  Him,  and  declare  unto  you,  that  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no 
darkness  at  all."  And  therefore  God  in  some  ineffable  way  is  to  communicate 
Himself  to  the  soul.  There  will  probably  be  a  communication  of  ideas :  God 
will  substitute  His  ideas,  great,  noble,  luminous,  for  our  own,  contracted,  con- 
fused, obscure ;  and  we  shall  become  like  Him,  in  our  measure,  through  par- 
ticipating His  knowledge.  There  will  be  a  communication  of  excellences:  God 
will  so  vividly  impress  His  image  upon  us,  that  we  shall  be  holy  even  as  He  is  holy. 
There  will  be  a  communication  of  happiness :  God  will  cause  us  to  be  happy  in  the 
very  way  in  which  He  is  happy  Himself,  making  what  constitutes  His  felicity  to 
constitute  ours,  so  that  we  shall  be  like  Him  in  the  sources  or  springs  of  enjoyment. 
The  expression,  "the Lord  God  giveth  them  light,"  seems  to  indicate  that  our  future 
state,  like  our  present,  will  be  progressive  ;  there  is  to  be  a  continued  communica- 
tion of  light,  or  of  knowledge,  so  that  the  assertion  of  Solomon,  "  The  path  of  the 
just  is  as  the  shining  light  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day,"  may 
be  as  true  hereafter  as  here.  Whatever  may  be  the  attainments  of  the  just  man 
whilst  on  earth,  he  sees  only  "  through  a  glass,  darkly."  But  he  has  yet  to  pass 
into  a  scene  of  greater  light,  and  to  read,  in  the  opened  volume  of  God's  purposes, 
the  explanation  of  difficulties,  the  wisdom  of  appointments,  the  nice  proportions  of 
truth.  Then  shall  the  Divine  attributes  rise  before  him,  unsearchable  indeed  and 
unlimited,  but  ever  discovering  more  of  their  stupendousness,  their  beauty,  their 
harmony.  Then  shall  redemption  throw  open  before  him  its  untraveUed  amplitude, 
and  allow  of  his  tracing  those  unnumbered  ramifications  which  the  Cross,  erected 
on  this  globe,  may  possibly  be  sending  to  all  the  outskirts  of  immensity.  Then 
shall  the  several  occurrences  of  his  Ufe,  the  dark  things  and  the  bright  which 


726  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

chequered  his  path,  appear  equally  necessary,  equally  merciful;  and  doubt  give 
place  to  adoring  reverence,  as  the  problem  is  cleared  up  of  oppressed  righteousness 
and  successful  villany.  But  it  shall  not  be  instantaneous  ;  for  if  the  mysteries  of 
time  were  exhausted,  and  redemption  presented  no  unexplored  district,  God  would 
remain  infinite  as  at  the  first,  as  sublime  in  His  inscrutableness  as  though  ages  had 
not  been  given  to  the  searching  out  His  wonders.  Thus  will  the  just  proceed 
from  strength  to  strength ;  knowledge,  and  love,  and  holiness,  and  joy,  being 
always  on  the  increase ;  and  eternity  one  glorious  morning.  HI.  "  And  they  shall 
KEiGN  FOR  EVER  AND  EVER" — "they  shall  be  kings  for  ever  and  ever."  Wonderful 
assertion !  wonderful,  because  made  of  beings  apparently  insignificant.  Yes, 
of  us,  who  are  by  nature  "  children  of  wrath,"  of  us,  who  are  "  born  to  trouble 
as  the  sparks  fly  upwards,"  even  of  us  is  it  said,  "  They  shall  be  kings  for  ever  and 
ever."  And  on  what  thrones  shall  we  sit  in  heaven?  over  whom  shall  we  be 
invested  with  dominion  ?  I  connect  the  different  parts  of  the  verse ;  and  I  read  in 
its  last  clause,  only  differently  expressed,  the  same  promise,  or  prophecy,  which  I 
find  in  all  the  rest.  I  shall  reign  over  the  secrets  of  nature ;  all  the  workmanship 
of  God  shall  be  subject  to  me,  opening  to  me  its  recesses,  and  admitting  me  into 
its  marvels.  I  shall  reign  over  the  secrets  of  Providence  ;  my  empire  shall  gather 
back  the  past,  and  anticipate  the  future ;  and  all  the  dealings  of  my  Maker  shall 
range  themselves  in  perfect  harmony  before  my  view.  I  shall  reign  over  the 
secrets  of  grace ;  the  mediatorial  work  shall  be  as  a  province  subject  to  my  rule, 
containing  no  spot  in  all  its  spreadings  which  I  may  not  explore.  I  shall  reign 
over  myself  :  I  shall  be  thorough  master  of  myself :  no  unruly  desires,  no  undis- 
cipUned  affections :  I  shall  not  be  what  an  earthly  king  often  is,  his  own  base  slave : 
no  war  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  no  rebellion  of  the  will,  no  struggle  of  cor- 
rupt inclinations ;  but  with  all  that  true  royalty,  the  royalty  of  perfect  holiness,  I 
shall  serve  God  without  wavering,  and  find  His  service  to  be  sovereignty. 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  happiness  of  heaven,  as  it  is  a  state  of  uninterrupted 
light,  proceeding  immediately  from  God : — I.  Who  these  happy  persons  are  who 

SHALL   partake   OF   THIS   HAPPINESS.      II.    PoiNT    OUT    SOMETHING    OF    THE    HAPPINESS 

OF  HEAVEN  AS  EXPRESSED  THEREIN.  1.  The  happincss  you  shall  have  in  heaven  is 
light,  and  sweet  as  light.  (1)  Knowledge.  (2)  Purity.  (3)  Joy.  2.  There  shall  be 
no  intermission  of  that  happy  day  and  light  you  shall  have  in  heaven,  for  there  shall 
be  no  night  there.  3.  The  light  the  saints  have  in  heaven  is  not  by  such  means 
and  instruments  as  they  have  it  here.  4.  The  Lord  God  will  give  you  light  im- 
mediately from  Himself.  As  the  sun  is  seen  by  its  own  light,  so  will  God  be  known 
by  you  in  heaven.  He  will  cormnunicate  Himself  immediately  unto  you  for  your 
joy,  happiness,  and  satisfaction,  without  means,  and  be  instead  of  all  means ; 
for  you  shall  "behold  His  face,  and  be  satisfied  with  His  likeness."  5.  You 
shall  be  made  capable  in  heaven  to  take  in  this  light  from  the  Lord  God  to  your 
comfort  and  satisfaction.  6.  Your  light  of  all  kinds  in  heaven  shall  be  full  and 
perfect,  your  knowledge,  your  enjoyment,  your  conformity  to  His  image  shall  be 
f uU  and  perfect,  for  it  shaU  be  immediately  from  Himself.  7.  Your  light  from  the 
Lord  God  in  heaven  shall  be  everlasting  and  endless.  Conclusion  :  1.  Be  persuaded, 
without  delay,  to  enter  into  that  state  in  which  you  will  get  a  right  to  this  happi- 
ness, be  made  meet  for  it,  and  be  actually  admitted  into  it  when  you  die,  and  at  the 
resurrection  of  the  just.  2.  As  for  you  who  have  a  right  and  title  to  this  happiness, 
give  all  diligence  to  have  your  right  to  it  m'\de  clearer  to  your  knowledge  and  faith, 
and  kept  clear,  and  to  arrive  unto  the  full  assurance  of  the  hope  of  it  unto  the  end. 
{Jas.  Robe,  M.A.)  A  blessed  country  : — I.  Perfect  illumination.  1.  Material 
illumination.  "No  night."  2.  Individual  illumination.  "No  candle" — a  candle 
lights  only  one  or  two  persons.  3.  Universal  illumination.  "  Light  of  the  sun  " — 
illumines  the  world.  4.  Spiritual  illumination.  II.  Perfect  rest.  "  The  Lord 
giving  them  light."  1.  No  anxiety.  2.  No  exertions.  3.  No  dread.  HI.  Perfect 
triumph.  "  They  shall  reign."  1.  Over  self.  2.  Over  sin.  3.  Over  materialism. 
4.  Over  ignorance.  IV.  Perfect  continuance.  "For  ever" — unbroken  by  any 
shock,  or  change,  or  chance.  {Thos.  Heath.)  The  world  without  a  night : — I.  A 
REALM  ever  CLEAR  IN  VISION.  1.  There  will  be  no  error  in  our  conception  of  things 
there.  Far  enough  am  I  from  believing  that  we  shall  ever  see  all  things  in  heaven. 
There  will  always  be  universes  lying  beyond  the  ken  of  the  most  penetrating  eye. 
Nor  do  I  beUeve  that  different  minds  will  ever  have  exactly  the  same  view  of  things, 
see  things  in  exactly  the  same  light.  Our  views  will  necessarily  be  relative.  They 
will  be  true  to  us,  but  not  necessarily  true  to  others.  God  alone  can  see  the  whole 
of  a  thing.    We  only  see  sections  and  sides.     Not  only  does  it  appear  impossible, 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  727 

but  undesirable.    Diversity  of  view  gives  a  freshness  and  charm  to  society.     Still, 
our  range  of  vision,  though  limited,  and  our  views,  though  relative,  will  be  clear  and 
accurate.     2.  No  doubt  as  to  the  path  of  duty.     God's  Will,  will  radiate  on  every- 
thing without,  and  will  express  itself  in  every  impulse  within.     II.  A  realm  ever 
PURE  IN  CHARACTER.     There  are  the  holy  angels  whose  natures,  through  the  ages  of 
their  being,  have  never  been  clouded  with  one  impure  thought  or  touched  by  the 
thrill  of  one  unholy  passion.     The  redeemed  of  all  ages  are  there.     They  have  had 
their  robes  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.     Christ,  whose  love 
for  purity  was  so  unconquerable,  that  He  gave  His  life's  blood  to  cleanse  the  pollu- 
tion of  the  world,  is  in  the  midst  of  its  throne.     He  who  is  light,  and  in  whom 
there  is  no  darkness  at  all,  fills  with  the  sunshine  of  His  presence  the  whole  of  that 
blessed  scene.     HI.  A  realm  ever  beautiful  in  aspect.     1.  All  natural  beauties 
will  be  there.     2.  All  artistic  beauties  will  be  there.     The  very  instinct  of  genius  is 
to  invent,  imitate,  and  create,  and  there  genius  will  flourish  in  perfection.     3.  All 
moral  beauties  will  be  there.     The  beauty  of  holiness,  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  will 
adorn  every  spirit.     Thus  all  will  rejoice  in  each  other,  and  all  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
whence  all  their  beauty  came.    IV.  A  realm  of  ever  unchecked  progress.     1.  No 
check  to  the  advance  of  life.       The  vital  energies   will    always    be    increasing. 
Sinew  and  soul,  character  and  conscience,  will  be  ever  growing  in  force.     No  blight 
to  wither,  no  shadow  to  chill  there.     But  all  the  influences  that  play  around  existence 
there,  inspire,  invigorate,  and  uplift.     2.  No  checking  of  labour.     Our  range  of 
action  will  be  unrestrained.     We  shall  be  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord.     V.  A  realm  ever  joyous  in  spirit.     A  bright  day  sets  the  world  to  music. 
What    happiness,  then,   must    there  be  in  a  world  where   there  is  no  night. 
{Homilist.)        Light  the  blessing  of  heaven  : — 1.  There  shall  be  no  sin  there.     The 
works  of  darkness  are  excluded,  and  all  that  have  fellowship  with  them.    And 
more  than  that — the  past  sins  of  those  who  are  admitted  shall  not  enter  there  to 
haunt  them.     2.  There  shall  be  no  more  sorrow  there.     Heaviness  may  have 
endured  for  the  night,  but  this  is  the  morning-tide,  and  joy  cometh.     It  is  the 
harvest  of  joy  after  the  seed-time  of  tears ;  and  all  the  light  and  brief  afflictions  of 
the  mortal  life  shall  be  turned  into  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.     3. 
There  shall  be  no  chastisement  there.    The  fatherly  correction,  which  brought  them 
home,  shall  be  no  more.     4.  There  shall  be  no  trial  there,  and  no  temptation  any 
more.    For  they  have  endured,  and  are  blessed ;  yea,  they  have  endured  unto  the 
end,  and  they  are  saved.     5.  There  shall  be  no  weariness  there.     6.  There  shall  be 
no  ignorance  there ;  but  they  shall  aU  know,  even  as  also  they  are  known.    7.  There 
shall  be  no  decay  there.     Because  there  is  no  corruption,  there  shall  be  no  more 
*•  drawing  to  an  end  as  soon  as  we  are  born."    8.  There  shall  be  no  loneliness 
there.     For  this  also  is  of  the  night.     9.  There  shall  be  no  adversary  there — ^no 
spiritual  wickedness  any  more  to  wrestle  with  in  heavenly  places — no  powers  of 
darkness !     The  prince  of  this  world  is  cast  out  of  the  next ;  his  engines,  his  lies, 
his  fury,  all  are  spent.     10.  To  crown  all — There  shall  be  no  estrangement  from 
God  there ;  no  more  darkness  of  spirit ;  no  more  clouds  and  gloom  between  our 
spirits  and  their  Lord.     This  is  blessedness  indeed,  because  it  is  holiness !     But 
for  that  very  reason,  it  is  not  blessedness  for  all.     The  night-bird,  if  it  is  dis- 
turbed at  noonday,  is  only  blinded  by  the  sunbeams.      And  the  light  of  that 
world  will  be    indeed    insufferable    to    those    who    in    this    world    have    loved 
darkness  rather  than  light.      They  have  refused  to  come  to  the  light  because 
their  deeds  were  evil.    And  now  the  light  has  come  to  them,  and  made  their  deeds 
manifest.      They  have  had  their  choice.      And  their  place  henceforth  is  in  the 
outer  darkness,  lighted  only  by  the  fire  that  never  shall  be  quenched.     {Dean  Scott.) 
They  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever. — On  the  happiness  of  heaven  as  an  everlasting 
kingdom ; — I.  That  you,  who  are  the  Lamb's  faithful  servants  now,  shall  keign 
WHEN  YOU  come  TO  HEAVEN.     1.  I  give  you  somc  of  the  characters  of  those  to  whom 
heaven  is  promised  as  a  kingdom.     2.  Some  Scriptural  account  of  your  4:eign  in 
heaven.     (1)  As  to  what  it  shall  consist  in.    Your  reign  in  heaven  will  consist  in 
your  sharing,  and  communion  with  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  His  communicable  glory, 
according  to  your  capacity.     Your  reign  in  heaven  will  consist  in  your  immediate 
subjection  unto  God  and  the  Lamb.   Your  reign  in  heaven  will  consist  in  an  equahty 
with  the  angels  of  God  in  glory  and  happiness.     Your  reign  in  heaven  will  consist 
in  a  satisfying  possession  of  all  happiness  in  God.     (2)  The  quaHties  of  your  reign 
In  heaven,     (a)  You  shall  reign  there  gloriously.     (6)  You  shaU  reign  in  heaven 
jointly  and  severally  with  aU  the  saints,     (c)  Your  reign  in  heaven  will  be  quiet  and 
peaceable,  calm  and  undisturbed,   {d)  You  shall  reign  in  heaven  joyfully,  [e]  Your 


728  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxn. 

reign  in  heaven  shall  be  just  and  righteous.  (/)  Your  reign  in  heaven  shall  be  very 
long,  longer  than  the  thousand  years'  reign  of  the  saints  with  Jesus  Christ  upon  the 
earth.  It  will  be  for  ever  and  ever.  3.  Whence  it  is  that  you  shall  reign  in  heaven. 
(1)  The  original  cause  of  your  future  reign  in  heaven  is  the  sovereign,  rich,  free 
love,  and  grace  of  God  the  Father.  (2)  That  you  shall  reign  in  heaven  is  owing  to 
the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  (3)  That  you  shall  reign  in  heaven  will  be 
owing  to  the  effectual  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  calls  you  effectually  to  this 
kingdom  and  glory.  H.  The  happiness  op  heaven  is  "  for  ever  and  ever." 
1.  Your  reign  and  happiness  in  heaven  will  be  immutable :  if  it  admitted  any 
change,  it  would  not  be  for  ever  and  ever.  2.  Your  reign  and  happiness  in  heaven 
will  be  everlasting  and  without  all  end.  It  is  everlasting  life,  everlasting  consola- 
tion, an  eternal  inheritance,  an  eternal  weight  of  glory,  eternal  salvation,  pleasures 
for  evermore,  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.  3.  But  if  you  now  inquire 
what  the  eternity  of  heaven  and  the  happiness  of  it  is  founded  upon,  I  answer.  It  is 
founded  upon  the  eternity  and  unchangeableness  of  God  and  His  perfections,  in 
covenant  with  His  people  through  Jesus  Christ.  (1)  But,  particularly,  it  is  first 
founded  upon  the  eternity  and  unchangeableness  of  the  love,  grace,  mercy,  and 
kindness  of  God  to  them.  (2)  It  is  founded  upon  the  will  and  pleasure  of  God;  it 
is  His  express  will  and  pleasure  that  it  shall  be  so  (John  vi.  40).  (3)  It  is  also 
founded  upon  the  power  of  God,  that  is  not  only  almighty,  but  an  eternal  power ; 
and  the  strength  of  this  power  will  endure  for  ever,  to  make  you  happy  for  ever,  and 
to  lengthen  out  your  immortality.  (4)  It  is  founded  upon  the  holiness  of  God.  (5)  It 
is  founded  upon  the  justice  and  righteousness  of  God  (2  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  2  Thess.  i.  6, 7). 
Indeed,  not  justice  to  any  merit  in  your  own  works,  but  justice  to  Christ's  merits 
and  His  own  promise.  (6)  It  is  founded  upon  the  everlasting  efi&cacy  of  the  media- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ.  His  kingdom  and  glory,  into  which  you  shall  have  an  abun- 
dant entrance,  is  an  everlasting  kingdom  and  glory.  (7)  It  is  founded  upon  your 
eternal  union  and  communion  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  came  into  you,  not  to  stay 
for  a  time,  but  for  ever  (John  xiv.  16).  Infer  :  1.  Shall  your  reign  and  happiness 
be  for  ever  and  ever  ?  Then  hence  see  the  inconceivable  greatness  of  the  hope  and 
happiness  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven.  2.  Then  things  are  valuable  and  precious 
here  in  proportion  to  the  influence  they  have  in  bringing  us  to  the  enjoyment 
of  an  eternity  of  happiness.  3.  The  love  of  God  to  you  who  are  His  people 
is  incomprehensibly  great,  which  hath  designed  for  you  a  glory  not  only  so  great 
in  itself,  but  also  for  ever.  4.  Learn  hence  the  wisdom  and  sagacity  of  the 
people  of  God,  who  renounce  a  present  and  temporary  happiness,  and  choose  an 
unseen  and  future  blessedness  because  it  is  eternal.  6.  Then  let  me  prevail 
with  you  to  seek  after  this  eternal  happiness  first  and  most,  with  the  utmost 
earnestness,  industry,  and  self-denial.  6.  Then  let  the  servants  of  God  and 
the  Lamb  comfort  themselves  and  one  another  with  the  consideration  of  the 
eternity  of  their  reign  and  happiness  in  heaven.  7.  Let  the  consideration  of  the 
eternity  of  your  happiness  in  heaven  engage  and  excite  you  to  the  duties  of  holi- 
ness and  obedience.     {Jas.  Robe,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  And  when  I  had  heard  and  seen,  I  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet 
of  the  angeL — Transitions  : — How  to  bridge  the  epochs  of  change  in  our  lives,  how 
to  pass  from  our  visions  to  our  tasks,  from  our  apocalypses  to  the  light  of  common 
days,  for  which  they  are  to  prepare  us,  carrying  the  best  results  of  the  one  into  the 
other,  and  bringing  the  former  to  true  effect  in  the  latter ;  this,  surely,  is  something  we 
need  to  know.  These  transitions  are  among  the  things  to  be  counted  upon,  if  our  life 
have  any  sweep  and  movement  at  all.  We  ought  to,  but  do  not  always,  pass  through 
them  well.  The  heavenly  gales  which  should  have  wafted  us  on  to  ports  of  power 
and  usefulness  leave  us  with  strained  masts  and  torn  sails.  How  to  pass  through 
these  epochs  of  transition  without  dimming  the  glory  of  the  exalted  mood  is  a  ques- 
tion wotthy  of  our  most  earnest  consideration.  The  words  we  have  made  our  text 
have  bearing  on  this  subject.  They  report  the  immediate  sequel  to  the  sublimest 
mood  of  spiritual  exaltation.  Yet  that  sequel  was  a  sad  blunder,  involving  both 
sacrilege  and  sin.  Beginning  the  ethical  application  of  this  incident  on  the 
lowest  plane,  it  shows  us,  first,  that  great  men  may  make  great  mistakes  and 
eminent  saints  fall  into  grievous  sins.  This  should  make  us  careful,  humble,  and 
charitable.  We  are  apt  to  ask  for  a  perfection  in  others  which  we  know  does  not 
obtain  in  ourselves,  and  to  deem  our  own  virtue  proof  against  the  temptations  to 
which  others  have  succumbed.  Perhaps  the  worst  about  this  is  that  it  militates 
against  our  reverence  and  appreciation  of  good  men,  and  the  influence  and  inspira- 


CHAP,  nn.]  REVELATION.  729 

tion  of  their  real  worth,  when  we  discover  these  defects.  We  ask  for  perfection  in 
heroes,  prophets,  and  saints  ;  when  we  discover  the  fault,  which  mars  the  perfection 
but  not  the  essential  worth,  the  effect  of  the  work,  teaching,  and  life  is  impaired, 
and  perhaps  the  hero,  prophet,  or  saint,  exists  for  us  no  more.  The  truth  is,  God 
has  given  us  naught  that  is  perfect  save  Himself,  and  what  flows  directly  from  Him- 
self ;  and  He  has  no  perfect  representative  on  earth  save  Him  who  came  forth  from 
the  bosom  of  the  Father  and  was  one  with  Him.  But  one  life  in  which  God  is 
partially  revealed  in  any  mode  is  supplemented,  corrected,  and  completed  by  others. 
It  may  take  many  heroes  to  fitly  exemplify  the  power  of  God  working  in  humanity ; 
it  may  take  many  prophets  to  adequately  set  forth  the  truth  of  God  so  as  to  consti- 
tute a  full,  saving  revelation,  and  it-may  take  many  saints  to  worthily  illustrate  the 
principle  of  a  Divine  holiness  in  human  life,  and  there  is  a  completeness  and 
adequacy,  not  to  say  perfection,  in  the  aggregate  not  to  be  found  in  the  individual 
or  section.  But,  more  specifically,  the  text  underscores  a  point  of  special  peril  in 
moral  life.  That  point  is  the  vanishing  point  of  some  special  privilege,  exalted 
mood,  rich  and  radiant  experience,  or  larger  and  intenser  flow  of  life  in  any  mode. 
We  should  learn  to  translate  vision  and  transport  into  purpose  and  power.  We 
experience  the  spiritual,  intellectual,  or  emotional  effects  of  sermon  or  prayer. 
Then,  awakening  from  our  ecstasy,  we  straightway  fall  down  to  worship  before  the 
feet  of  the  angel  which  showed  us  these  things.  We  praise  the  sermon,  the  service, 
the  song,  and  magnify  those  who  have  ministered  therein.  All  the  subtle  idolatries 
of  sermon  and  service,  church  and  creed,  so  prevalent  in  this  time,  are  repetitions 
of  the  apostle's  error  in  falling  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  the  revelation  angel. 
Other  heavens  than  those  of  faith  are  opened  to  us,  and  other  apocalypses  than  those 
of  spiritual  vision  are  accorded  us — heavens  of  domestic  felicity  and  apocalypses  of 
human  beauty,  tenderness,  and  worth.  Angels  walk  by  our  side  and  show  us  these 
things,  transfiguring  earth's  dull  and  prosy  scenes,  revealing  to  us  the  heavens  of 
love,  opening  seals  of  affection  and  fellowship.  But  these  visions  fade,  for  they  are 
not  the  perfect  day,  that  abides ;  they  are  but  prophetic  gleams  of  a  coming 
dawn.  The  scene  closes.  The  ministering  spirit  is  summoned  from  our  side.  Our 
danger,  then,  is  of  falling  into  idolatry  of  the  departing  angel.  The  house  must  be 
kept  just  as  they  left  it.  The  clothes,  and  everything  the  loved  one  cherished,  must 
be  preserved  as  sacred  mementoes,  and  the  scenes  of  love's  vision  become  the  shrine 
of  love's  memorial  and  glorifying  devotion.  {J.  W.  Earnshaw.)  The  temptation 
to  creature  worship  : — This  incident  is  very  decisive  against  anything  approaching 
to  saint  or  angel  worship,  but  it  yields  a  still  deeper  lesson  suited  to  our  times, 
which  is  this,  that  the  most  devout,  the  holiest  of  men,  may  be  betrayed  into  thus 
falling.  When  we  consider  the  state  of  things  in  the  modern  Church  of  Rome,  two 
things  strike  us  with  astonishment.  The  first  of  these  is  the  length  to  which  this 
Church  goes  in  encouraging  the  invocation  of  angels  and  departed  saints.  This  is 
an  increasing  evil.  It  is  greater  now  than  ever  it  has  been  before.  In  Eomish 
countries  the  worship  of  the  Virgin  in  the  way  of  Invocation  far  exceeds  the 
worship  paid  to  any  Person  in  the  Ever-Blessed  Trinity.  Theologians,  it  is  true, 
make  a  distinction  between  the  worship  paid  to  the  Virgin  and  saints  and  that  paid 
to  the  Persons  in  the  Adorable  Trinity,  but  the  vast  mass  of  worshippers  know  of  no 
such  distinction.  This,  then,  is  the  first  thing ;  but  another  matter  which  fills  us 
with  astonishment,  and  some  even  with  misgiving,  is  this,  that  notwithstanding  this 
idolatry,  so  many  devout  minds  have  been  won  to  this  corrupt  Church,  and  have 
themselves  gone  very  far  in  this  direction.  How  can  it  be,  we  ask,  that  men  who 
know  Scripture,  and  who  unquestionably  have  their  souls  alive  to  the  things  of  God 
and  of  Christ,  can  yet  pay  this  idolatrous  worship  ?  This  is  staggering  to  some,  but 
not  if  we  read  aright  this  very  place  of  Scripture.  For  here  we  have  an  apostle, 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  called  and  taught  by  Christ  Himself,  one  of  those  who  had 
drunk  in  His  profoundest  teaching,  twice  needing  the  reproof,"  See  thou  do  it  not ; 
worship  God."  Now,  how  could  this  be  ?  I  suppose  none  of  you  have  ever  been 
tempted  to  do  such  a  thing  as  worship  an  angel,  or  a  saint,  or  the  Blessed  Virgin  ? 
It  is  the  very  last  temptation  you  are  likely  to  be  troubled  with.  How,  then,  was  it 
possible  that  this  temptation  should  as§ail  an  apostle  ?  Because,  I  answer,  he  had 
a  revelation  granted  to  him  such  as  you  or  I  are  not  likely  to  have,  because  we  are 
utterly  unworthy  of  it.  It  is  not  for  us  who  have  never  been  so  favoured,  who, 
perhaps,  some  of  us,  have  never  believed  in  an  angel  at  all — who  have  never  realised 
or  tried  to  realise  our  companionship  with  angels,  or  how  God  works  by  them — it  is 
not  for  us  to  judge  this  apostle ;  but  it  may  be  well  for  us  to  learn  somewhat  from 
him.    How  grand,  then,  beyond  expression,  must  these  visions  of  the  New  Jerusalem 


730  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

and  its  inhabitants  have  been  if  they  could  so  affect  an  apostle  who  had  lain  in  the 
bosom  of  Jesus  Himself !  {M-  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  Worship  : — The  theme  contained 
in  this  one  word  •*  worship"  is  much  larger  and  profounder  than  any  of  us  assume. 
We,  all  of  us  are  likely  to  take  it  for  granted  that  we  know  what  "  worship"  is. 
Our  simplest  idea  of  it  identifies  it  with  the  public  services  of  the  Church  and  with 
family  and  private  devotions.  The  word  "  worship  "  necessarily  associates  itself 
with  these.  But  these  do  not  by  any  means  exhaust  its  meaning.  Let  us  inquire, 
then,  more  in  detail  what  worship  is ;  then  we  may  possibly  be  able  to  see  how 
necessary  it  is  to  the  lifting  all  our  faculties  into  a  receptive  attitude  towards  that 
Divine  life  out  of  which  our  life  continually  comes.  1.  Worship  implies  some  sort 
of  knowledge.  Agnosticism  cannot  worship.  It  may  not  be  intellectualised  know- 
ledge, and  yet  it  must  be  of  the  nature  of  knowledge.  Many  an  unschooled  man  is 
intuitively  a  more  knowing  man  than  is  many  a  schooled  man.  His  insight,  judg- 
ment, wisdom,  are  more  trustworthy.  I  believe,  however,  that  every  man,  in  being 
a  man,  constitutionally  that  is,  has  knowledge  enough  of  God  to  create  in  him 
worshipful  tendencies  and  aspirations.  In  order  to  a  fulness  of  knowledge  there 
must  be  a  fulness  of  humanity,  and  there  has  never  been  but  one  in  whom  dwelt 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  2.  Let  us  say,  then,  that  worship  is  the  effort 
of  the  soul  to  realise  the  Divine  presence  and  to  partake  of  the  Divine  life.  When 
the  soul  is  perpetually  as  conscious  of  the  Divine  presence  as  of  the  presence  of  an 
external  world,  and  partakes  of  the  Divine  life  as  really  and  as  consciously  as  we 
partake  now  of  each  other's  life,  then  worship  becomes  no  longer  an  act  to  which 
we  compel  ourselves,  but  a  state — the  constant  state  of  the  soul  before  God — as  real, 
as  natural,  as  unforced,  as  genial,  as  sufficing,  as  gently  reciprocal  as  that  of  two 
souls  who,  together  in  the  same  place  and  under  the  same  conditions  live  one  life. 
*'  Beholding  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  ever  doing  it,  constantly  doing  it,  sitting  with 
eyes  fixed  like  an  artist  student  before  a  great  masterpiece,  until  the  work  becomes 
so  real  and  living  that  it  speaks  quietly,  silently,  with  unsyllabled  speech  to  the  soul 
of  the  man  beholding,  until  his  feeling  is  changed  and  his  ideas  are  changed. 
The  old  igriorant  self  is  no  longer  there — into  the  image  of  the  great  master  he  is 
changed,  and  the  change  keeps  going  on  from  state  to  state,  each  an  advance  upon 
the  other,  and  all  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Great  Master  entering  into  him  and  subduing 
him.  3.  There  must  also  be,  as  has  been  suggested  by  the  greatest  of  living  English 
statesmen,  a  sufficient  self-knowledge.  This  is  the  fijst  indispensable  condition  for 
a  right  attitude  towards  the  Eternal.  Then,  too,  there  must  be  a  suitable  frame  of 
the  affections — that  humility  and  aspiration  which  self-knowledge  ought  to  bring ; 
and,  again,  sustained  mental  effort,  in  which  each  worshipper  recognises  that  he  is 
a  priest  unto  God ;  to  carry  our  whole  selves,  as  it  were,  with  our  own  hands  into 
that  nearer  presence  of  God,  putting  aside  every  distraction  of  the  outward  sense,  so 
that  the  feeling  I  am  a  living  soul  in  the  presence  of  the  living  God  may  be  the 
controlling  thought.  Is  it  not  Ruskin  who  says,  "There  is  only  one  place  in  the 
human  soul  that  God  can  occupy — the  first  place  "  ?  To  offer  Him  the  second 
place  is  to  offer  Him  no  place  at  all.  How  much  of  our  public  presentation  of  our- 
selves in  Church  services  fails  of  being  worship  I  need  hardly  suggest.  Formal 
worship  ceases  to  be  worship.  There  is  no  worship  when  the  heart  is  not  in  it,  and 
yet  worship  is  a  Divine  command,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
Him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  4.  There  must  be  some  imperious  necessity  in  our 
nature  why  we  should  worship,  or  such  a  command  would  not  be  recorded.  There 
are  some  faculties  which  have  the  telescopic  power  to  draw  the  distant  near :  to 
make  that  visible  which,  in  the  non-exercise  of  them,  remains  Invisible.  On  its 
upper  side,  the  faith  faculty  has  this  use.  Does  not  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  speak  of  it  in  this  wise :  '•  Now,  faith  is  the  giving  substance  to  things 
hoped  for — the  proving  of  things  not  seen  "  ?  Doubt  refuses  to  act,  but  faith  acts, 
and  so  gets  its  proofs  of  things  not  seen.  The  imagination,  again,  is  the  right  royal 
faculty  of  the  soul.  Without  it  we  should  have  no  poets  and  no  prophets — many 
painters  we  might  have,  mere  copyists,  but  no  artists ;  no  great  masters  in  any 
department  of  things..  We  say  such  men  have  •'  genius  " — the  Bible  says  "  vision." 
They  see,  while  we  reason  as  to  whether  we  can  see  or  not.  Faith,  imagination,  vision, 
these  are  the  wings  of  the  soul— its  faculties  which  help  it  to  soar,  to  bring  the 
distant  near — to  worship.  If  we  were  doomed  to  a  prosy,  mathematical,  legal,  com- 
mercial life,  there  would  be  no  need  of  them.  When  God  gave  them  He  said  to 
man  in  the  giving,  "  Thou  shalt  worship."  We  are  living  in  the  midst  of  a  spiritual 
world,  whose  presence,  if  we  are  living  rightly,  i.e.,  according  to  God's  laws  for  life, 
will  be  as  real  to  us  as  is  the  presence  of  the  material  world.     This  spiritual  world 


CHAP,  xxn.]  RErELATIO^\  781 

contains  facts  which  we  cannot  deny,  such  as  these — intellect,  conscience,  reason, 
imagination,  affection,  will — none  of  these  are  material  facts.  No  chemist,  how- 
ever minute  and  thorough  his  analysis,  can  find  them  in  matter.  They  do  not 
belong  to  the  material.  They  mus;  inhere  in  some  substance  not  material.  Is  it 
not  reasonable  to  infer  that  we  are  here  not  to  develop  the  material  world,  except 
fts  a  secondary  object,  but  to  develop  ourselves,  these  mental  and  spiritual  powers 
in  OS  ?  That  if  we  fail  in  developing  these  our  failure  is  complete  ?  And  in  order 
to  do  it  we  must  worship  that  which  is  above  us.  There  is  no  other  way.  The 
highest  response  we  are  capable  of  giving  to  the  spiritual  world  around  us  is  the  act 
we  call  worship.  It  is  an  attitude  of  soul,  yet  an  act  with  an  infinite  variety  in  it. 
They  who  stand  and  wait  before  God  in  speechless  expectancy,  their  face  ever  God- 
ward,  even  when  making  no  verbal  prayer,  oflferiug  no  syllabled  request,  yet  hoping 
ever  in  God,  are  true  worsiiippers.  Wherever  there  is  a  soul  delighting  in  God, 
rejoicing  in  God.  there  is  worship.  The  perfected,  glorified  humanity  will  be  one 
in  which  the  wori^bip  of  God  is  an  instinct ;  a  state  of  habit,  an  attitude  of  soul 
unforced  and  universal.     (R.  Thotnas.)  The  great  int^iUition  : — This  invitation 

is — I.  Vkrt  blksskp — "  Worship  God."  Not  man,  nor  angels,  nor  self.  1.  By 
studying  His  book — *'  Seal  not  the  sayings."  etc.  2.  By  believing  His  truth.  3.  By 
proclaiming  His  gospel  whether  it  be  pleasant  or  unpleasant  to  the  carnal  mind 
(vex.  11).  This  invitation  is — II.  Very  urgk^t.  For — 1.  The  time  is  short  (ver.  10). 
•'  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  2.  The  reward  is  dependent  upon  conduct— blessings 
to  the  obedient,  disgi-ace  to  those  who  continue  without.  3.  The  promise  is  only 
limited.  The  invitation  is — III.  Very  diqxifikd.  1.  In  consequence  of  its  Author 
— Jesus  Christ,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega.  Ac.  Not  a  doctrine  or  an  invitation  but 
comes  from  Him  in  His  own  voice.  2.  In  consequence  of  its  importance, 
God  is  the  Highest  Being  in  the  universe,  and  to  worship  Him  is  the  noblest 
employment.  3.  In  consequence  of  the  Assistant.  The  Saviour  speaks  and  all 
things  re-echo  His  words.  *•  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say.  Come."  {Homiliit) 
Christ,  th4!  object  of  %cor$hip : — There  are  two  propositions  laid  together  in  these 
words  :  the  one  negative— you  must  "  worship  "  nothing  that  is  not  **  God  "  ;  and 
the  second  positive — whatever  is  "  God,"  '*  worship."  Therefore  at  once,  if  Christ 
is  God,  He  is  to  be  *•  worshipped."  And  it  needs  only  to  be  quite  sure  of  His  God- 
head, to  be  certain  also  that  not  only  we  may.  but  that  we  ought  to  pray  to  Him — 
"Worship  God."  Suffice  it,  then,  just  to  remind  you  of  one  or  two  passages, 
which  are  the  simplest  upon  that  subject.  In  prophecy — "His  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful.  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God."  In  praise — **  Unto  the  Son  He 
saith,  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever."  In  teaching — "  Without  controversy, 
great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,  God  was  manifest  in  the  desh."  In  argument — 
"  But  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners, 
Christ  died  for  us  " — the  whole  foroe  and  sequency  of  the  thought  lying  in  Christ 
being  God.  In  Christ's  ovra  testimony — "  I  and  My  Father  are  one  " — **  he  that 
hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  But  let  us  see  more  distinctly  what  actual 
Scriptural  example  and  sanction  there  is  for  paying  this  adoration,  and  addressing 
cor  petitions  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  certain  that  when  He  was  upon  earth 
many  did  come  and  make  supplication  to  Him  with  every  external  demonstration 
of  worship — kneeling,  bowing,  falling  to  the  ground.  And  Christ  never,  in  a  single 
instance,  put  away  the  worship,  or  reproved  the  worshipper,  or  denied  the  prayer. 
It  is  mattes  of  fact,  too,  that  Christ  told  us  that  "  all  men  were  to  honour  the  Son, 
even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  And  a  part,  a  great  part  of  the  Father's  honour,  is 
the  prayer  and  the  praise  which  His  creatures  offer  Him.  And  we  have  the  same 
truth,  stated  often  in  the  New  Testament,  upon  a  wider  range.  For  it  is  a  name 
several  times  given  to  Christians — those  who  call  upon  the  name  of  Christ.  And 
not  to  multiply  more,  it  is  beyond  all  question,  that  in  that  world,  which  is  the 
copy  of  us  all — not  the  angels  only,  but  the  saints,  do  all,  with  one  accord,  direct  their 
loftiest  strains  and  their  devoutest  worship  to  Jesus  Christ.  We  do  not  wonder,  then, 
that  resting  itself  upon  this  authority  of  Scripture,  it  has  been  the  habit  of  the  Church 
always  to  pray  to  Christ.  In  the  whole,  both  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  Churches, 
the  custom  has  been  universal,  and  never  questioned,  to  pray  to  Christ.  Alas !  for  that 
man  or  that  Church  which  would  evex  forbid  us,  in  song  or  in  supplication,  to 
worship  Him,  "  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,"  who,  blending  so  comfortably  the 
wonders  of  His  majesty  with  the  tenderness  of  His  brotherhood  and  tl^e  humilia- 
tions of  His  sufferings,  has  said  freely  to  the  whole  world,  "  Come  unto  Me.  all  that 
travail  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  (J.  Vaugfum,  M.A.)  He 
tliat  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still  .  .  .  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy 


732  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

BtUL — The  misery  of  the  unjust  and  impure,  and  the  happiness  of  the  righteous  and 
the  holy : — Our  first  remark  on  this  passage  is,  how  very  palpably  and  how  very 
nearly  it  connects  time  with  eternity.  The  character  wherewith  we  sink  into  the 
grave  at  death,  is  the  very  character  with  which  we  shall  reappear  on  the  day  of 
resurrection.  The  moral  lineaments  which  be  graven  on  the  tablet  of  the  inner 
man,  and  which  every  day  of  an  unconverted  life  makes  deeper  and  more  indelible 
than  before,  will  retain  the  impress  they  have  received  unaltered  by  the  transition 
to  the  future  state  of  our  existence.  Our  second  remark  suggested  by  this  Scripture 
is,  that  there  be  many  analogies  of  nature  and  experience  which  even  death  itself 
does  not  interrupt.  There  is  nought  more  familiar  to  our  daily  observation  than  the 
power  and  inveteracy  of  habits,  insomuch  that  any  decided  propensity  is  strengthened 
by  every  new  act  of  indulgence  ;  any  virtuous  principle  is  more  firmly  established 
than  before  by  every  new  act  of  resolute  obedience  to  its  dictates.  The  law  which 
connects  our  actings  of  boyhood  or  of  youth  with  the  character  of  manhood,  is  the 
identical  law  which  connects  our  actings  in  time  with  our  character  in  eternity.  Be 
he  a  saint  or  a  sinner,  he  shall  be  followed  with  his  own  ways,  so  that  when  fixed 
in  his  own  place  of  everlasting  destiny,  the  one  shall  rejoice  in  eternity  in  the  pure 
elements  of  goodness  which  here  he  loved  and  aspired  after ;  the  other,  the  help- 
less and  degraded  victim  of  those  passions  which  lorded  over  him  in  life,  shall  be 
irrevocably  doomed  to  the  worst  of  all  torments — the  torments  of  his  own  accursed 
nature,  the  inexorable  tyranny  of  evil.  Our  third  remark  suggested  by  this  Scrip- 
ture is,  that  it  affords  no  very  dubious  prospective  of  the  future  hell  and  future 
heaven  of  the  New  Testament.  If  it  indeed  be  true  that  the  moral  rather  than  the 
material  be  the  main  ingredient,  whether  of  the  coming  torment  or  the  coming 
ecstacy,  then  the  hell  of  the  wicked  may  be  said  to  be  already  begun,  and  the 
heaven  of  the  virtuous  may  be  said  to  be  already  begun  in  the  breast  of  the  good 
man.  The  one,  in  the  bitterness  of  an  unhinged  and  dissatisfied  spirit,  has  a  fore- 
taste of  the  wretchedness  before  him ;  the  other,  in  the  peace,  and  triumph,  and 
complacency  of  an  approving  conscience,  has  a  foretaste  of  the  happiness  before  him. 
Each  is  ripening  for  his  own  everlasting  doom,  and,  whether  in  the  depravities  of 
the  one  or  in  the  graces  of  the  other,  we  see  materials  enough  either  for  a  worm 
that  dieth  not,  or  for  the  pleasures  that  are  for  evermore.  But,  again,  it  may  be 
asked,  will  spiritual  elements  alone  suffice  to  make  up  either  the  intense  and 
intolerable  wretchedness  of  a  hell,  or  the  intense  beatitudes  of  a  heaven?  In 
answer  to  this  question,  let  us  go  in  detail  over  the  different  clauses  of  the  verse 
now  submitted  to  your  consideration,  and  let  us  first  turn  your  attention  to  the 
former  of  these  receptacles ;  and  we  ask  you  to  think  of  the  state  of  that  heart,  in 
respect  of  sensation,  which  is  the  seat  of  a  concentrated  and  all-absorbing  selfish- 
ness, which  feels  for  no  other  interest  than  its  own,  and  holds  no  fellowship  of  truth, 
or  honesty,  or  confidence  with  the  fellow-beings  around  it.  The  man  of  cunning 
and  concealment,  however  dexterous  or  triumphant  in  his  wretched  policy,  is  not 
at  his  ease.  The  stoop,  the  downcast  regard,  the  dark  and  sinister  expression  of 
him  who  cannot  lift  up  his  head  among  his  fellow-men,  or  look  his  companions  in 
the  face,  are  the  sensible  proof  that  he  who  knows  himself  to  be  dishonest  feels 
himself  to  be  degraded ;  and  the  inward  sense  of  dishonour  which  haunts  and 
humbles  him  here,  is  but  the  commencement  of  that  shame  and  everlasting  con- 
tempt to  which  he  shall  awake  hereafter.  Now,  this  is  purely  a  moral  chastisement, 
and,  apart  altogether  from  the  infliction  of  violence  or  pain  on  his  sentient  economy, 
is  enough  to  overwhelm  the  spirit  that  is  exercised  by  it.  Let  him,  then,  that  is 
unjust  now,  be  unjust  still — and  in  stepping  from  time  to  eternity  he  carries  in 
his  own  distempered  bosom  the  materials  of  his  coming  vengeance  along  with  him. 
Character  itself  will  be  the  executioner  of  his  own  condemnation  ;  and  instead  of 
each  suffering  apart,  the  unrighteous  are  congregated  together  as  in  the  parable 
of  the  tares,  where,  instead  of  each  plant  being  separately  destroyed,  the  order  is 
given  to  bind  them  up  in  bundles  and  burn  them.  But  there  is  another  moral 
ingredient  in  the  future  sufferings  of  the  wicked,  besides  the  one  we  have  now 
spoken  of,  suggested  by  the  second  clause  of  our  text,  and  from  which  we  learn  that 
not  only  will  the  unjust  man  carry  his  fraud  and  falsehood  along  with  him  to  the 
place  of  condemnation,  but  that  also  the  voluptuary  will  carry  his  unsanctified 
habits  and  unhallowed  passions  thitherward.  "  And  he  who  is  filthy,  let  him  be 
filthy  still."  The  loathing,  the  remorse,  the  felt  and  conscious  degradation,  the 
dreariness  of  heart,  each  following  in  the  train  of  guilty  indulgence  here— these 
form  but  the  beginning  of  his  sorrows,  and  are  but  the  presages  and  precursors  of 
that  deeper  wretchedness  which,  by  an  unrepealed  law  of  our  moral  nature,  the 


OHAP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  733 

same  character  entails  on  its  possessor  in  another  state  of  existence.  They  are  but 
the  penalties  of  vice  in  embryo,  and  may  give  at  least  the  conception  of  what  these 
penalties  are  in  full.  It  will  add  inconceivably  to  the  darkness  and  disorder  of  that 
moral  chaos  in  which  the  impenitent  shall  spend  their  eternity,  when  the  uproar  of 
the  bacchanalian  and  licentious  passion  is  thus  superadded  to  the  selfish  and 
malignant  passions  of  our  nature,  and  when  the  frenzy  of  unsated  desire,  followed 
up  by  the  languor  and  compunction  of  its  worthless  indulgence,  shall  make  up  the 
sad  history  of  many  an  unhappy  spirit.  Before  quitting  this  part  of  the  subject,  we 
have  just  one  remark  to  offer.  It  may  be  felt  as  if  we  had  overstated  the  force  of 
mere  character  to  beget  a  wretchedness  at  all  approaching  the  wretchedness  of  hell, 
seeing  that  that  character  is  often  realised  in  this  world,  without  bringing  along 
with  it  intolerable  discomfort  or  distress.  Neither  the  unjust  nor  the  licentious 
man  is  seen  to  be  so  unhappy  here  as  to  justify  the  imagination,  that  there  these 
characteristics  will  have  the  power  to  effect  such  anguish  and  disorder  of  spirit  as  we 
have  now  been  representing.  But  it  is  forgotten,  first,  that  this  world  presents  in 
its  business,  its  amusements,  and  its  various  gratifications,  a  refuge  from  the  mental 
agonies  of  reflection  and  remorse  ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  governments  of  the  world 
offer  a  restraint  against  those  outbreakings  of  violence  which  would  keep  up  a  per- 
petual anarchy  in  the  species.  But  we  now  change  this  appalling  picture  for  a 
delightful  contemplation.  The  next  clause  of  the  verse  suggests  to  us  the  moral 
character  of  heaven.  We  learn  from  it,  on  the  universal  principle,  that  as  they 
that  are  unjust  shall  be  unjust  still,  so  also  the  righteous  now  shall  be  righteous 
still.  Just  imagine,  for  a  moment,  that  honour,  and  integrity,  and  benevolence, 
were  perfect  in  the  world ;  that  each  held  the  property,  the  rights,  the  reputa- 
tion of  his  neighbour  to  be  dear  to  him  as  his  own ;  that  the  suspicions,  and 
the  jealousies,  and  the  heart-burnings,  whether  of  hostile  violence  or  envious 
competition,  were  altogether  banished  from  human  society;  that  the  emotions, 
at  all  times  delightful,  of  good- will  on  one  side  were  ever  and  anon  calling  the 
emotion,  no  less  delightful,  of  gratitude  back  again  ;  that  truth  and  tenderness  held 
their  secure  abode  in  every  family  ;  and,  in  stepping  forth  among  the  wider  com- 
panionship of  life,  that  each  could  confidently  rejoice  in  every  one  he  met  with  as 
a  brother  and  a  friend,  we  ask  of  you  if,  by  this  simple  change— a  change,  you  will 
observe,  in  nothing  else  than  the  morale  of  humanity — though  winter  should  repeat 
its  storms  as  heretofore,  and  every  element  of  nature  were  to  abide  unaltered,  yet, 
in  virtue  of  a  process  and  revolution  altogether  moral,  would  not  our  millennium 
be  begun,  and  a  heaven  on  earth  be  realised  ?  Now,  let  this  contemplation  be 
borne  aloft,  as  it  were,  to  the  upper  sanctuary,  where,  we  are  told,  "  there  are  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect;  where  those  who  were  once  the  righteous  on 
earth  are  righteous  still."  Let  it  be  remembered  that  nothing  is  admitted  there 
which  worketh  wickedness  or  worketh  a  lie ;  and  that,  therefore,  with  every  viru- 
lence of  evil,  detached  and  dissevered  from  the  mass,  there  is  nought  in  heaven  but 
the  pure,  the  transparent  element  of  goodness.  Think  of  its  unbounded  love,  its 
tried  and  unalterable  faithfulness,  its  confiding  sincerity ;  think  of  the  expressive 
designation  given  it  in  the  Bible :  "  The  land  of  uprightness."  Above  all,  think 
of  the  revealed  and  invisible  glory  of  the  righteous  God,  who  loveth  righteousness, 
there  sitting  upon  His  throne  in  the  midst  of  a  rejoicing  family.  Himself  rejoicing 
over  them,  because  formed  in  His  own  likeness ;  they  love  what  He  loves ;  they 
rejoice  at  what  He  rejoices  in.  The  last  clause  of  the  verse  is,  "  Let  him  that  is 
holy  be  holy  still."  The  two  clauses  descriptive  of  the  character  and  the  place  of 
celestial  blessedness  are  counterparts  of  the  two  clauses  descriptive  of  the  character 
and  the  place  of  eternal  woe.  He  that  is  righteous  in  the  one  stands  compared 
with  him  that  is  unjust  in  the  other ;  he  that  is  holy  in  the  one  stands  contrasted 
with  him  that  is  licentious  in  the  other.  But  I  would  have  you  to  gittend  to  the  full 
extent  and  significance  of  the  term  holy.  It  is  not  abstinence  from  outward  deeds 
of  profligacy  alone ;  it  is  not  a  mere  recoil  from  impurity  in  action.  It  is  a  recoil 
from  impurity  in  thought ;  it  is  that  quick  and  sensitive  delicacy  to  which  even  the 
very  conception  of  evil  is  offensive ;  it  is  a  virtue  which  has  its  residence  within, 
which  takes  guardianship  of  the  heart,  as  of  a  citadel  or  in  violated  sanctuary,  in 
which  no  wrong  or  worthless  imagination  is  permitted  to  dwell.  It  is  not  purity  of 
action  that  is  all  we  contend  for ;  it  is  exalted  purity  of  heart — the  ethereal  purity 
of  the  third  heaven ;  and  if  it  is  once  settled  in  the  heart,  it  brings  the  peace, 
and  the  triumph,  and  the  untroubled  serenity  of  heaven  along  with  it.  In  the 
maintenance  of  this,  there  is  a  conscious  elevation  ;  there  is  the  complacency,  I  had 
almost  said  the  pride,  of  a  great  moral  victory  over  the  infirmities  of  an  earthly 


734  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

and  accursed  nature ;  there  is  a  health  and  a  harmony  in  the  soul,  a  beauty  of 
holiness  which,  though  it  effloresces  in  the  countenance  and  the  manner  and  out- 
ward path,  is  itself  so  thoroughly  internal  as  to  make  purity  of  heart  the  most  distinc- 
tive evidence  of  a  work  of  grace  in  time — the  most  distinctive  evidence  of  a  charac- 
ter that  is  ripening  and  expanding  for  the  glories  of  eternity.  {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 
Only  one  probation : — What  is  your  life  ?  A  question  of  solemn  import  to  every  one 
of  us.  Viewed  simply  as  to  its  brevity,  the  present  life  is  a  vapour,  a  dream,  a  tale 
told ;  but  viewed  in  its  relation  to  eternity  and  man's  everlasting  destiny,  it  assumes 
an  awful  amount  of  importance.  The  most  solemn  aspect  of  the  present  life  is, 
that,  brief  and  transitory  as  it  is,  it  is  the  only  period  in  which  our  depraved  and 
guilty  nature  may  experience  a  moral  and  spiritual  renewal.  Viewed  in  this  light, 
it  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the  awful  significance  of  the  life  that  now  is. 
Whatever  be  your  character  when  you  sink  into  the  grave  will  be  your  character 
when  you  rise  on  the  resurrection  morn.  I.  That  there  is  but  one  probation. 
The  whole  Bible  is  written  on  this  supposition.  In  admonitions,  warnings, 
entreaties,  threatenings,  and  promises  all  presuppose  that  there  is  only  one  pro- 
bation. The  vast  agencies  put  into  operation  for  reclaiming  erring  man  imply  that 
this  is  his  only  chance.  The  infinite  pains  and  toils  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  His 
agencies;  the  persistent  efforts  of  Satan  and  his  agents  indicate  that  the  final 
issue  of  the  battle  is  to  be  decided  here.  1.  This  truth  is  confirmed  by  the  universal 
consciousness  of  men.  Somehow  or  other  man  everywhere  feels  that  if  he  fails 
here,  he  fails  for  ever.  The  idea,  more  or  less,  haunts  him  through  life.  Hence 
his  dread  of  futurity.  Wherever  the  notion  of  futurity  obtains,  the  mind  generally 
associates  with  it  the  idea  of  fixedness,  changelessness.  There  are  two  perversions  of 
this  truth  among  men.  In  some  heathen  lands  the  doctrine  of  the  transmigration 
of  souls  obtains.  But  this  is  a  perversion  wilfully  adopted  because  more  congenial 
to  the  depraved  heart  than  an  inexorable  destiny.  Popery  has  also  perverted  this 
truth,  so  deeply  fixed  in  the  human  soul,  by  teaching  its  vassals  to  pray  and  pay 
for  the  souls  of  the  departed,  that,  by  the  intercessions  of  the  priesthood,  they  may 
be  delivered  from  purgatory  or  have  their  sufferings  mitigated.  It  cannot  be  denied 
that  there  is  in  the  deepest  heart  of  humanity  an  intuitive  sense  that  the  world  to 
come  is  one  of  fixedness.  This  is  true  not  only  of  Bible  lands,  but  of  heathen 
countries ;  of  the  barbarous  as  well  as  of  the  civilised.  Pagan  men,  by  their  costly 
ceremonials,  their  pilgrimages  and  penance,  are  seeking  to  set  themselves  right  with 
their  gods ;  but  is  there  not  underlying  all  these  cruel  rites  the  conviction  that  this 
life  is  the  only  period  in  which  such  a  reconciliation  may  be  effected  ?  Moreover, 
we  think  it  a  wise  and  gracious  provision  that  there  should  be  but  one  probation. 

2.  The  prospect  of  a  second  probation  would  tend  to  counteract  upon  the  mind  of 
man  the  influences  of  the  first.  If  you  knew  to  a  certainty  that  you  were  going  to 
have  a  second  probation,  the  inevitable  tendency  of  a  depraved  heart  would  be  to  say, 
"  I  may  safely  resist  any  good  influences  that  come  upon  me  during  my  earthly  life," 
since  I  am  certain  of  having  them  again,  or  similar  ones,  in  another  state  of  being. 

3.  The  knowledge  of  a  second  probation  would  furnish  an  inducement  to  delay. 
The  procrastinating  principle  would  be  strengthened.  Even  now,  with  the  know- 
ledge that  there  is  but  one  probation,  untold  numbers  delay  until  it  is  too  late,  and 
utter  ruin  overtakes  them.  4.  Man  would  enter  upon  his  second  probation  with 
hardened  sensibilities  and  confirmed  habits.  Frequent  resistance  of  truth  would 
render  him  less  susceptible.  The  probability  of  conversion  would  be  less.  5.  And 
then,  in  case  he  passed  the  second  without  repentance,  his  condemnation  would  be  so 
much  greater.  Surely  it  is  hell  enough  for  you  to  endure  the  penalties  of  resisting 
the  moral  agencies  of  one  probation,  without  incurring  the  more  awful  condemnation 
resulting  from  resisting  the  additional  agencies  of  a  second  probation.     II.  When 

PROBATION   IS   over,  CHARACTER  IS   UNALTERABLY  FIXED.      Men    WCddcd  tO  their  lusts, 

and  unwilling  to  abandon  the  wretched  connection,  entertain  the  vague  notion  that 
there  is  some  inherent  power  in  death  to  change  the  moral  character,  as  if  the  soul 
must  necessarily  undergo  some  process  of  change  for  the  better  in  its  passage 
between  this  world  and  the  next.  This  delusion  holds  many  captive  by  its  spell. 
There  is  not  a  syllable  breathed  in  the  inspired  volume  to  suggest  such  a  theory. 
Death  is  nowhere  represented  as  a  moral  renovator.  It  is  true  it  changes  the 
aspect  of  the  body.  By  severing  it  from  the  soul,  death  subjects  the  body  to  decay, 
corruption,  and  decomposition.  But  death  touches  not  the  soul.  It  affects  not  the 
character;  it  leads  the  soul  through  no  purifying  stream,  nor  bathes  it  in  any 
cleansing  fountain.  Death  is  a  disrobing,  but  it  is  a  disrobing  of  the  body  and  not 
of  character.    You  cannot  place  your  sins  and  habits  in  the  grave  with  your  body, 


CHAP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  735 

there  to  moulder  and  decay.  Your  friends  cannot  do  this  for  you.  No.  Every 
pollution  uncleansed  by  atoning  blood  the  soul  must  carry  with  it  into  the  dread 
future.  Christ  alone  is  the  Purifier.  Besides,  if  your  hope  be  well  founded,  if 
death  must  necessarily,  by  some  mysterious  process,  change  your  character,  why  do 
you  fear  death  ?  If  it  can  and  will  remove  evil  from  your  nature,  and  fit  you  for  a 
higher  world,  it  will  be  your  benefactor,  your  friend.  Why  therefore  stand  in  awe 
of  death  ?  The  agencies  which  regenerate  are  brought  to  bear  upon  man  only  in 
the  present  state  of  being.  The  only  power  that  can  change  the  human  soul  from 
a  state  of  sin  to  a  state  of  holiness  is  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  world  we 
now  occupy  is  the  only  theatre  of  the  Divine  Spirit's  operations,  the  only  land 
through  which  the  streams  of  salvation  flow.  Probation  is  not  so  much  a  test  of 
character  as  a  test  of  the  effects  of  God's  truth  on  character.  III.  That  character 
WELL  CONSTITUTE  OUR  WEAL  OR  WOE  IN  THE  COMING  WORLD.  The  text  implies  that 
your  retribution,  if  wicked,  will  consist  in  your  being  wicked  for  ever ;  if  filthy,  in 
being  filthy,  morally  polluted,  for  ever.  Even  on  the  supposition — a  supposition 
which  we  do  not  admit — that  there  will  be  in  the  future  world  no  elements  of  retri- 
bution  without  us,  yet  it  is  certain  that  we  shall  find  them  within  us,  if  unforgiven 
and  unholy.  These  elements  are  stored  up  in  every  guilty  man's  bosom.  They 
are  not  now  in  full  play.  In  this  world  of  mercy  they  are  under  restraint.  They 
sometimes  haunt  and  harass  the  transgressor  here.  In  the  world  to  come,  these 
materials  of  vengeance  will  be  let  loose  upon  him  without  check  or  hindrance  of 
any  kind.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  conceive  fully  the  difference  between 
your  feelings  when  revelling  in  mirth  and  sin,  and  your  feelings  afterwards  when 
you  come  to  reflect  upon  your  conduct.  Presently,  however,  you  are  cast  on  a  bed 
of  sickness,  where  you  lie  languishing  and  miserable.  Companions  are  gone.  The 
light  of  enjoyment  has  fled.  Memory  is  busy  recounting  the  past,  looking  back  on 
the  scene  so  gladsome.  Oh,  what  a  different  aspect  does  it  wear  in  the  retrospect ! 
Keflection  turns  it  into  agony.  Your  body  may  be  racked  with  pain,  but  there  is  a 
keener,  deeper,  intenser  anguish — anguish  of  mind.  So  intolerable  does  this 
become  in  some  men  that  refuge  is  sought  in  self-destruction.  If,  then,  by  the 
united  action  of  memory  and  conscience  all  this  anguish  and  agony  may  be  pro- 
duced here  in  a  world  where  there  are  so  many  restraints  and  alleviations,  where 
mercy  lifts  her  banner  to  allure  the  guiltiest,  and  where  the  hope  of  salvation  sheds 
its  radiance  upon  the  most  depraved,  how  much  more  terrific  will  these  engines  of 
torture  become  in  a  world  where  there  are  no  restraints,  no  alleviations  !  By  every 
transgression  you  are  treasuring  up  wrath.  Your  own  guilty  hand  has  already 
gathered  an  awful  store,  and  yet  you  go  on  accumulating.  God  in  His  mercy  holds 
it  from  falling.  It  is  suspended  by  the  gracious  interposition  of  the  Mediator.  But 
when  the  border  line  is  crossed,  when  probation  is  over  and  the  reign  of  mercy 
closed,  voices  shall  be  heard  ringing  through  the  universe,  the  voice  of  violated  law, 
the  voice  of  abused  mercy,  the  voice  of  despised  love,  "  In  the  name  of  the  Holy 
Trinity  cut  all  loose."  Then  the  storehouse  of  memory  and  conscience  will  be 
thrown  open.  The  pent-up  vengeance,  the  accumulations  of  your  guilty  life,  will 
fall  upon  you  and  overwhelm  you.  Then  there  is  the  idea  of  being  associated  with 
those  who  are  actuated  by  the  same  passions,  and  that  for  ever.  There  are 
neighbourhoods  known  to  be  so  notoriously  bad,  so  infested  with  base  and  dangerous 
characters,  that  you  would  not  dare  to  enter  them  alone  even  in  the  day-time.  If 
there  be  so  much  dread  of  approaching  such  characters  here,  with  all  the  vigilance 
of  police  and  the  restraints  of  law,  what  must  it  be  in  a  world  where  all  the  wicked 
in  the  universe  are  gathered  together,  without  any  of  the  restraints  of  conscience, 
or  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  of  law,  where  they  shall  know  no  law  but  their  own  guilty 
passions,  and  when  these  passions,  finding  no  means  of  gratification,  must  prey 
upon  themselves  and  upon  each  other?  Guilty  men  will  need  no  demon  tormentors 
in  the  world  of  retribution.  Man  will  there  be  his  own  tormentor.  His  own  bosom 
will  contain  materials  of  wrath  which  eternity  cannot  exhaust.  The  gloomy  atmo- 
sphere of  the  world  of  retribution  wiU  thus  be  thronged  with  the  visible  and  awful 
forms  of  your  sins.  You  will  have  to  live  with  them.  They  will  constitute  the 
furies  that  shall  hunt,  harass,  and  torment  you.  Escape  them  you  cannot.  The 
same  principle  applies  to  the  reward  of  the  good.  "  He  that  is  righteous,  let  him 
be  righteous  still."  It  is  confirmed  by  your  own  experience  that  your  happiness 
depends  not  on  what  you  possess,  not  on  circumstances,  not  on  locality,  not  on 
friendships,  not  on  surroundings,  not  so  much  on  what  you  have  as  on  what  you 
are.  The  elements  of  my  happiness  are  not  without  me  but  within  me.  It  is  what 
I  am  that  makes  me  miserable  or  happy.     Make  me  holy,  and  you  make  me  happy. 


736  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxir. 

Leave  me  in  my  guilt  and  sin,  and  you  leave  me  miserable.  The  redeemed  will 
rejoice  in  a  holy  character  and  in  the  certainty  that  it  will  never  more  be  tainted. 
Here  you  are  agitated  with  a  thousand  fears  lest,  in  a  moment  of  weakness  and 
un watchfulness,  the  enemy  should  gain  the  advantage  over  you,  and  you  should 
forfeit  your  righteousness  :  but  there  you  will  be  for  ever  redeemed  from  all  such 
fears  by  the  gracious  declaration  of  your  Lord,  "  He  that  is  righteous,  let  him  be 
righteous  still :  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy  still."  You  have  seen  the  dewdrop 
trembling  on  the  blade  of  grass,  and  glittering  with  varied  hues  in  the  morning 
light.  The  sun  rises  and  kisses  it  away.  It  seems  lost  and  irrecoverable.  Not  so. 
That  dewdrop  has  disappeared,  but  it  is  not  destroyed.  It  is  in  safe  keeping.  It 
is  held  in  trust  by  the  faithful  atmosphere,  and  will  descend  in  dew  again  upon  the 
earth  when  and  where  most  needed.  So  God  treasures  up  every  good  thing  that  you 
have  done,  or  said,  or  felt,  or  thought  for  Him  and  His  great  Name.  You  have 
sown  purity  and  you  shall  reap  it.  God  will  reward  you  according  to  what  you 
have  done  in  the  body.  Now,  what  more  shall  we  say  unto  you  ?  If  it  be  true 
that  you  are  at  this  moment  occupying  the  only  world  where  character  may  bo 
changed  and  where  regenerating  forces  are  in  operation,  how  important  that  you 
should  come  to  a  right  decision  at  once,  this  very  moment.  {Richard  Roberts.) 
Moral  character  becoming  unalterable : — I.  If  it  is  not  altered  before  death  it 
is  not  likely  to  be  altered  at  death.  There  is  no  opportunity  afforded  at  death 
for  such  a  work  as  this.  II.  If  it  is  not  altered  before  death  it  is  not  likely  to  be 
altered  by  death.  There  is  no  tendency  in  bodily  changes  to  effect  spiritual 
reformation.  Such  changes  in  the  body  are  constantly  going  on  here. 
Wrong  moral  principles  and  habits  do  not  pass  away  from  us  as  the  particles 
of  our  body  depart  day  after  day  and  year  after  year.  III.  If  it  is  not  altered 
before  death  it  is  not  likely  to  be  altered  after  death.  1.  A  change  in  moral 
character  can  only  be  effected  by  the  force  of  moral  truth.  2.  We  cannot  conceive 
of  moral  truth  in  a  mightier  form  than  we  have  it  here.  3.  The  longer  the  force  of 
truth  is  resisted  the  less  likely  is  it  to  succeed.  (Homilist.)  Permanence  of 
character  .-—These  words  are  usually  applied  to  the  future  state,  and  properly  so. 
They  also  refer  to  this  present  life,  as  seen  in  the  fact  that  character  is  permanent ; 
that  along  the  same  lines  we  have  hitherto  progressed  we  shall  in  all  human 
probability  continue  to  go.  1.  Notice,  in  confirmation  of  this  statement,  the  small 
number  of  reformations  from  evil  practices.  Where  one  does  return  multitudes 
never  leave  the  husks  of  sin  and  come  to  their  Father's  house.  2.  Notice  how  few 
enter  an  evil  course  late  in  life.  Prison  reports  show  the  inmates  to  begin  their 
crooked  ways  between  ten  and  fifteen  years  of  age.  One  criminal  traced  his  career 
of  sin  back  to  childhood  when  he  pilfered  a  few  pennies.  3.  The  conservatism  of 
age  is  another.  The  moral  character  which  one  has  attained  at  thirty-five  is  a 
trustworthy  index  of  what  he  will  be  to  the  end.  Every  year  you  delay  becoming  a 
Christian  helps  to  fix  you  in  indifference,  and  render  conversion  less  and  less 
probable.  4.  Certain  duties  grow  out  of  these  facts.  (1)  The  duty  of  forming  the 
character  of  those  who  are  in  a  plastic  state.  (2)  The  duty  of  forming  our  own 
characters.  (3)  Do  not  shrink  from  these  duties  as  being  too  heavy  to  perform. 
You  must  meet  them.  If  you  shirk  them  they  remain  for  ever  neglected,  and  at 
your  peril.  To  doubt  is  disloyal,  to  falter  is  to  sin.  (G.  F.  Thwing.)  The  sunward 
side  of  habit  .-—One  of  our  quaint  earlier  English  poets  sings — 

*'  We  are  but  farmers  of  ourselves,  yet  may 
If  we  can  stock  ourselves  and  thrive,  uplay 
Much  good  treasure  for  the  great  rent-day." 

It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  mighty  forces  working  for  you  instead  of  against  you,  so 
enabling  you  "  to  uplay  much  good  treasure  for  the  great  rent-day."  Mr.  Emerson 
puts  the  matter  well :  "  The  water  drowns  ship  and  sailor  like  a  grain  of  dust ;  but 
trim  your  bark,  and  the  wave  which  drowned  it  will  be  cloven  by  it,  and  carry  it 
like  its  own  foam,  a  plume  and  a  power."  But  there  are  certain  vast  moral  forces 
at  work  within  every  one  of  us,  which  make  life  if  they  be  working  for  us  ;  which 
make  death  if  they  work  against  us.  Habit  is  such  a  moral  force.  Think  of  the 
laws  controlling  habit.  1.  "  Habit  diminishes  feeling  and  increases  activity"—*.^., 
the  empire  of  a  musician  over  an  instrument.    At  first  all  sorts  of  feelings  against 

dislike  of  practice,  inability  to  deftly  use  the  fingers,  &c. ;  and  also  only  slow  and 

laboured  activity  both  of  mind  and  body.  But  when  the  empire  has  been  estab- 
lished, all  these  hindering  feelings  have  been  overcome,  and  activity  has  become  so 


CHAP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  737 

easy  as  to  be  almost  spontaneous.  2.  "  Habit  tends  to  become  permanent  and  to 
exclude  1;he  formation  of  other  habits."  (1)  See,  then,  what  a  boon  it  is  if  a  man 
get  this  force  of  habit  working  in  him  and  for  him  on  the  side  of  righteousness  and 
nobleness !  Habit  of  pure  thinking  and  feeling.  Habit  of  prayer.  Habit  of 
Bible-reading.  Habit  of  church-going.  Habit  of  a  scrupulous  integrity.  Habit 
of  steadily  seeking  to  please  and  test  things  by  the  Lord  Christ.  Habit  of 
testimony  for  Jesus.  (2)  But  if  you  are  bound  by  evil  habits  and  so  have  this  great 
force  working  against  you  instead  of  for  you,  break  at  once  their  force  by  one  grand 
volition  for  Christ,  and  He  will  impart  power.  The  legend  on  the  banner  of  John 
Hampden's  regiment  in  the  battle  of  Englishmen's  rights  against  a  law-breaking 
Stuart  dynasty,  tells  the  way  into  the  breaking  of  bad  habits  and  into  the  possession 
of  habits'  sunward  side.  On  one  side  the  banner  was  written,  "  God  with  us  "  ;  on 
the  other  side,  "  Vestigia  nulla  retrorsum*' — no  steps  backward.  {W.  Hoyt,  D.D.) 
Truth  and  its  results  on  character : — The  direct  bearing  of  this  statement  is  that  of 
an  argument  for  the  waiting  and  publishing  of  these  revelations,  and  the  holding 
of  them  up  to  the  view  of  all  men,  over  against  the  non-efifect  or  ill-effect  they  may 
have  upon  the  wicked  and  unbelieving,  or  upon  the  Antichrist  and  his  adherents, 
who  is  emphatically  the  unjust  and  unclean  one.  Though  "  wicked  men  and 
seducers  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,"  and  even  wrest  what  is  herein  predicted  of 
them  as  if  it  were  a  license  for  their  wickedness  or  a  fixing  of  it  by  an  irresistible 
necessity,  and  so  are  only  the  more  encouraged  and  urged  on  in  their  injustice  and 
abominations  ;  still,  this  is  not  to  prevent  the  freest  and  fullest  proclamation  of  the 
whole  truth.  Let  the  unjust  one  be  the  more  confirmed  in  his  unbelief  and  wicked- 
ness— let  the  filthy  one  go  on  in  his  idolatries  and  moral  defilement  with  all  the 
greater  hardihood  and  blasphemy — that  is  not  to  restrain  the  making  known  of 
what  shall  come  to  pass.  If  it  accelerates  the  antichristian  development,  and  the 
wicked  are  only  the  more  indurated  in  their  wickedness,  let  it  so  be.  Though  the 
sun  breed  pestilence  and  death  in  the  morasses,  and  only  hasten  putrefaction  in 
what  is  lifeless  and  rotten,  it  must  not  therefore  be  blotted  from  the  heavens,  or 
hindered  from  shining  into  our  world.  There  is  another  side  to  the  question.  If 
it  is  an  ill  thing  to  what  is  ill,  the  life  of  what  is  living  requires  it.  Believers  must 
be  forewarned  and  forearmed,  or  they  too  will  be  deceived  and  perish.  And  if  the 
wicked  are  made  the  wickeder,  the  righteous  and  holy  will  be  the  holier,  and  without 
it  cannot  be  defended  and  kept  as  they  need  to  be.  Therefore,  let  not  this  holy 
book  be  sealed  up,  nor  its  grand  prophecies  shut  off  from  the  fullest  record  and  the 
most  unreserved  proclamation.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  stereotyping  of  human 
character: — There  comes  a  time — there  will  come  a  time  to  each  one  of  us — when, 
whatever  we  are,  that  we  shall  be ;  when  the  seal  of  permanence  will  be  set  upon 
the  spiritual  condition ;  when  the  unjust  man  shall  be  unjust  for  ever,  and  the 
righteous  man  shall  be  for  ever  righteous.  I  know  of  nothing  more  serious,  in 
itself  more  alarming,  than  this  reflection.  There  is  no  one  now  living  in  sin  who 
does  not  intend  at  some  future  time  to  turn  from  it  and  be  saved.  And  we  all  have 
great  reliance  upon  the  power  of  the  human  will.  We  all  think  that  what  we  are 
we  are  because  we  choose  so  to  be  ;  and,  at  all  events,  that  what  we  wish  to  be  in 
the  future  we  can  be  and  we  shall  be.  And  we  know  from  God's  Word  that  we  are 
to  a  great  extent  dealt  with  on  this  supposition  (Psa.  xcv.  7,  8  ;  Ezek.  xviii.  32). 
And  we  know  that  in  early  years  there  is  a  great  susceptibility  of  impressions.  A 
death  in  a  family,  a  sin  discovered  and  punished,  nay,  a  single  sermon,  has  often, 
in  God's  hands,  changed  the  course  of  a  young  life  from  evil  to  good.  And  it  is  so 
both  ways.  A  particular  companionship,  casual  in  its  origin,  has  led  a  young 
person  into  foUy  or  worse  than  folly :  the  companionship  is  broken  off  as  casually 
as  it  was  formed  ;  the  snare  is  broken  with  it,  and  the  young  life  delivered.  And 
we  observe  a  wonderful  versatility  and  changeableness  in  that  part  of  life.  From 
year  to  year,  almost  from  week  to  week,  we  have  seen  a  vicissitude  and  an  altera- 
tion. One  week  thoughtful,  diligent,  exemplary ;  the  next  week  trifling,  idle, 
troublesome.  One  month  an  attentive  hearer,  a  reverent  worshipper;  the  next 
month  uninterested  in  the  things  of  God  ;  a  listless  and  languid  listener ;  a  careless, 
indifferent,  almost  profane,  member  of  the  congregation.  Thus  the  experience  of 
one  part  of  life  seems  almost  to  encourage  the  hope  that  the  unjust  man  may  not 
be  unjust  for  ever ;  almost  to  suggest  the  fear  that  the  righteous  man  may  not  be 
for  ever  righteous.  And  we  cling  to  that  hope,  for  others  and  for  ourselves.  I 
may  spend,  we  say,  forty  or  fifty  years  in  sin  and  ungodliness,  and  yet  have  twenty 
or  thirty  years  for  faith  and  calling  upon  God.  And  the  Christian  minister,  and 
the  Christian  man  knows,  indeed,  no  such  thing  as  a  limit  or  a  terminus  of  God's 

47 


738  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

mercy  and  of  God's  grace.  But  we  feel  that  there  is  also  a  truth,  and  a  very 
solemn  and  needful  truth,  on  the  side  of  the  text  which  speaks  of  the  permanence, 
of  the  unchangeableness,  of  human  character.  Yes,  for  one  man  who  changes,  a 
thousand  change  not.  They  pass  on  through  life,  and  they  end  it  even  as  they 
began.  He  who  in  childhood  was  a  spoilt  and  wayward  child,  he  who  in  boyhood 
was  an  idle  and  self-willed  boy,  he  who  in  youth  was  a  passionate  and  a  dissolute 
young  man,  he  who  in  manhood  was  a  self-seeking  and  a  worldly  man,  will  pro- 
bably be  in  old  age  an  avaricious  or  an  irreligious  old  man,  and  in  the  end  one 
who  has  had  his  portion  in  this  life,  has  received  his  good  things  here,  and  must 
look  only  for  evil  things  hereafter.  The  experience  of  life  as  a  whole  does  not 
encourage  the  hope  of  many  sudden  changes,  of  many  reversals  of  character,  of 
many  bad  beginnings  and  good  endings.  As  a  general  rule,  the  unjust  man  will 
be  unjust  still,  and  the  righteous  and  holy  will  be  holy  and  righteous  still.  But,  at 
all  events,  this  will  be  true  at  a  certain  point,  after  a  certain  time.  The  connection 
of  the  words  before  us  shows  that  it  will  be  so  as  the  end  draws  on  ;  when  Christ's 
coming  is  instant  there  will  be  no  change  in  human  character.  When  the  last 
conflict  once  sets  in  there  will  be  no  room  and  no  time  for  changing  sides.  When 
the  armies  are  once  marshalled  for  their  final  encounter,  there  will  be  no  fresh 
desertions  and  no  new  enlistments.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  What  a  man  takes  into 
the  other  world : — If  we  look  at  it  truly,  his  past  life  is  just  the  one  thing  that  a 
man  does  take  with  him  when  he  dies.  He  takes  himself.  And  that  self  is  the 
product  of  all  his  past  experience  and  action.  As  an  oak  bears  in  itself  the  results 
of  every  shower  that  through  long  years  has  freshened  it,  of  every  gale  that  has 
toughened  it  or  stripped  its  boughs,  of  the  sunshine  that  has  fed  it,  and  the 
drought  that  has  parched  it ;  so  a  man,  when  he  stands  at  the  end  of  life,  is  what 
he  has  been  made  by  all  his  joys  and  sufferings  and  actions.  That  is  what  he 
takes  into  the  other  world — his  own  character.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christian 
character  not  gained  in  sickness : — "  One  should  think,"  said  a  friend  to  the  celebrated 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  "  that  sickness  and  the  view  of  death  would  make  men  more 
religious."  "  Sir,"  replied  Johnson,  "  they  do  not  know  how  to  go  to  work  about  it. 
A  man  who  has  never  had  religion  before  no  more  grows  religious  when  he  is  sick 
than  a  man  who  has  never  learned  figures  can  count  when  he  has  need  of  calculation." 
Character  and  crises : — Conduct  is  always  reaching  crises  and  entering  upon  its 
consequences.  It  may  be  cumulative  in  degree,  and  reach  crises  more  and  more 
marked;  it  may  at  last  reach  a  special  crisis  which  shall  be  the  judgment  when 
the  soul  shall  turn  to  the  right  or  left  of  eternal  destiny.  (T.  T.  Hunger,  D.D.) 
Finality  in  character : — When  the  future  life  begins  every  man  will  see  Christ  as 
He  is,  and  the  sight  of  Him  may  of  itself  bring  a  finality  to  his  character  and 
destiny,  as  it  discovers  each  man  fully  to  himself.  {President  Porter.)  Deeds  and 
destiny  : — Sow  an  act  and  you  will  reap  a  habit ;  sow  a  habit  and  you  will  reap  a 
character;  sow  a  character  and  you  will  reap  a  destiny.  {W.  M.  Thackeray.) 
Death  fixes  character : — The  hour  of  death  may  be  fitly  likened  to  that  celebrated 
picture  in  the  National  Gallery,  of  Perseus  holding  up  the  head  of  Medusa.  That 
head  turned  all  persons  into  stone  who  looked  upon  it.  There  is  a  warrior  repre- 
sented with  a  dart  in  his  hand ;  he  stands  stiffened,  turned  into  stone,  with  the 
javelin  in  his  fist.  There  is  another  with  a  poignard  beneath  his  robe,  about  to 
stab ;  he  is  now  the  statue  of  an  assassin,  motionless  and  cold.  Another  is  creeping 
along  stealthily,  like  a  man  in  ambuscade,  and  there  he  stands  a  consolidated  rock ; 
he  has  looked  only  upon  that  head,  and  he  is  frozen  into  stone.  Such  is  death. 
What  I  am  when  death  is  held  before  me,  that  I  must  be  for  ever.  When  my  spirit 
departs,  if  God  finds  me  hymning  His  praise,  I  shall  hymn  it  in  heaven;  if 
He  finds  me  breathing  out  oaths,  I  shall  follow  up  those  oaths  in  hell.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  I  come  quickly;  and  My  reward  is  with  Me. — The  coming  of 
Christ : — Learn  hence — 1.  That  the  notices  of  our  Lord's  coming  are  usually,  in 
Scripture,  ushered  in  with  great  solemnity,  with  a  mark  of  attention  and  observa- 
tion. "Behold  1"  (Jude  7).  2.  That  the  special  distribution  of  rewards  and 
punishments  is  reserved  till  the  second  coming  and  appearance  of  Jesus  Christ; 
"  My  reward  is  with  Me,  to  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  work."  3.  That  it 
is  our  wisdom  and  duty  to  represent,  by  actual  and  solemn  thoughts,  the  certain 
and  speedy  coming  of  Christ  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  the  world.  (W. 
Burkitt,  M.A.)  To  give  every  man  according^  as  his  work  shall  be. — Work 
appointed  and  rewarded  by  Christ : — "  The  modern  majesty,"  says  Carlyle, 
"  consists  in  work.  What  a  man  can  do  is  his  greatest  ornament,  and  he 
always  consults  his  dignity  by  doing  it."    I.  Christ  appoints  bybbt  Chbistian's 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  739 

WORK.  1.  Each  has  his  own  work  to  do  for  Christ.  2.  Each  must  receive  the 
appointment  from  Christ  Himself.  3.  Each  one,  therefore,  is  responsible  to 
Christ  alone.  II.  Christ,  bbturnino,  brings  with  Him  every  man's  reward. 
♦*  Behold !  "  A  call  to  attention,  energy,  and  eager  expectation.  The  startling 
character  of  this  announcement — "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  When  Christ  comes 
He  wiU  bring  every  man's  reward  or  recompense.  His  clear  knowledge  of  the  life 
and  work  of  each  of  the  vast  multitude.  The  reward  will  be  in  proportion  to  the 
work  done.  {Samuel  B.  Strihling.)  Man  meeting  his  actions  again  : — In  the 
province  of  Amherst,  in  Burmah,  the  foresters  cut  down  the  teak  wood  far  up  the 
country,  then  cast  their  logs  into  the  river  and  let  them  float  down  the  stream.  In 
some  instances  they  will  float  two  hundred  miles,  when  they  are  caught  by  a  cable 
stretched  across  the  river.  They  are  then  brought  ashore  and  stored.  When  the 
foresters  come  down,  every  man  knows  his  logs  by  his  own  private  mark.  Such 
are  all  our  labours  and  actions.  They  are  so  many  logs  cast  upon  the  stream  of 
time  and  floated  on  to  eternity.  When  we  reach  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ 
we  shall  find  them  each  presenting  the  characteristic  mark  we  have  stamped 
upon  it.  (Chas.  Graham.)  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega. — Alpha  and  Omega: — 
I.  Bring  certain  truths  to  the  text.  1.  Our  Lord  may  well  be  described  as 
the  Alpha  and  Omega  in  the  sense  of  rank.  He  is  Alpha,  the  first,  the  chief,  the 
foremost,  the  first-bom  of  every  creature,  the  eternal  God.  But  though  our  blessed 
Lord  is  thus  Alpha — the  first — He  was  once  in  His  condescension  made  Omega,  the 
last.  Marshal  the  creatures  of  God  in  their  order,  in  the  dread  day  when  Jesua 
hangs  upon  the  Cross,  and  you  must  put  Him  for  misery,  for  weakness,  for  shame 
as  the  last,  the  Omega.  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  Alpha  and  Omega  in  the  book  of  Holy 
Scripture.  3.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the  great  law  of  God.  The 
law  of  God  finds  not  a  single  letter  in  human  nature  to  meet  its  demands.  You 
and  I  are  neither  Alpha  nor  Omega  to  the  law,  for  we  have  broken  it  altogether. 
We  have  not  even  learned  its  first  letter — "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart,"  and  certain  I  am  we  know  but  very  little  of  the  next — "  thy  neigh- 
bour as  thyself."  But  if  you  would  see  the  law  fulfilled,  look  to  the  person  of  our 
blessed  Lord  and  Master.  II.  Now  we  will  take  the  text  itself,  and  show  what  are 
the  truths  which  we  assuredly  believe  to  be  in  it.  1.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is 
Alpha  and  Omega  in  the  great  alphabet  of  being.  Beckon  existences  in  their  order, 
and  you  begin — "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word."  Proceed  to  the  conclusion. 
What  then  ?  What  is  the  Omega  ?  Why  assuredly  Jesus  Christ  would  still  be 
**  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.  Amen."  2.  Jesus  Christ  is  Alpha  and  Omega  in 
the  alphabet  of  creating  operations.  Who  was  it  that  began  to  make  ?  Not  an 
angel,  for  the  angel  must  first  be  made.  Did  matter  create  itself  ?  Was  there  an 
effect  without  a  cause  ?  It  is  contrary  to  our  experience  and  our  reason  to  believe 
any  such  thing.  The  first  cause  stands  first,  and  the  first  cause  is  God  in  the 
Divine  Trinity,  the  Son  being  one  Person  of  that  Trinity.  He  is  Alpha  because 
His  hand  first  of  all  winged  angelic  spirit,  and  made  His  ministers  a  flame  of  fire. 
As  He  alone  began,  so  His  power  maintains  the  fabric  of  creation ;  all  things 
consist  by  Him.  If  this  world  shall  be  rolled  up  like  a  worn-out  vesture,  He  shall 
roll  it  up ;  if  the  stars  shall  wither,  it  shall  be  at  Jesu's  bidding.  He  shall  do  it  all, 
even  until  the  end  shall  come,  for  He  is  Omega  as  well  as  Alpha.  3.  Christ  is  Alpha 
and  Omega  in  all  covenant  transactions.  Everywhere  the  Lord  Jesus  is  to  be  con- 
sidered not  as  the  friend  of  a  day,  or  our  Saviour  only  in  His  life  on  earth,  but  as 
the  Lamb  slain  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  the  anointed  Mediator  set 
up  from  everlasting  days.  4.  Jesus  Christ  is  certainly  Alpha  and  Omega  in  all 
salvation  work  as  it  becomes  apparent  in  act  and  deed.  If  you  have  been  led  to 
know  your  own  emptiness — if  you  have  received  from  His  Spirit  a  hungering  and  a 
thirsting  after  righteousness,  go  not  to  the  law  ;  look  not  within  ;  but  come  to  the 
Alpha,  drink  and  be  satisfied.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  life  is  near  its  close  ;  if  you 
have  been  preserved  in  holiness  ;  if  you  have  been  kept  in  righteousness,  remember 
still  to  trust  in  the  Omega ;  for  these  words  follow — "  He  that  overcometh  shall 
inherit  aU  things ;  and  I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  My  son."  III.  A  few 
THINGS  which  FLOW  OUT  OF  THE  TEXT.  1.  Sinner,  saint,  let  Jesus  be  Alpha  and 
Omega  to  thee  to-day  in  thy  trust.  2.  If  you  have  trusted  Him,  let  Him  be  Alpha 
and  Omega  in  your  love.  3.  Surely  He  should  be  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  our 
life's  end  and  aim.  What  is  there  worth  living  for  but  Christ  ?  4.  He  should  be 
the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  aU  our  preaching  and  teaching.  If  you  leave  out  Christ, 
you  have  left  the  sun  out  of  the  day,  and  the  moon  out  of  the  night ;  you  have  left 
the  waters  out  of  the  sea,  and  the  floods  out  of  the  river;  you  have  left  the  harvest 


740  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

\  /  out  of  the  year,  the  soul  out  of  the  body ;  you  have  left  joy  out  of  heaven,  yea, 
'  you  have  robbed  all  of  its  all.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  the  Alpha  and  Omega: 
— This  declaration  is  made  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  oft-repeated  in  this  book  to 
give  it  emphasis.  It  indicates  the  supremacy  and  absolute  government  of  the 
Kedeemer-God.  All  creatures,  all  things,  all  relations  and  dispensations  have  their 
source  in  Him,  and  will  find  their  end  in  Him.  I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  real 
Alpha  akd  Omega  of  the  present  order  of  things.  He  is  over  it  all,  and  in  it 
all,  and  the  life  of  it  all,  and  the  genius  of  it  all,  and  the  substance  and  end  of  it 
all.  By  right  of  office  the  headship  and  kingship  of  it  belong  to  Him.  Before  any 
creature  or  world  existed,  the  eternal  "  Alpha "  was.  He  is  the  '•  Everlasting 
Father,"  as  Isaiah  styles  Him — the  Father  of  all  the  angels  in  heaven,  as  well  as 
of  all  mankind.  Creative  power  begins  with  and  ends  in  Him.  Providence  is  the 
executor  of  His  will.  Redemption  underlies  all  the  arrangements,  counsels,  and 
purposes  of  God.  Here  is  our  confidence.  The  Gospel  promise  cannot  fail,  for  it 
is  the  word  of  Him  who  abideth  for  ever,  the  will  of  Him  who  is  supreme  over  all, 
and  the  work  of  Him  who  made  the  earth  and  the  stars.  II.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  the  Divine  manifestations  made  to  the  creatures  or 
God.  We  have  in  the  material  universe  a  most  wonderful  manifestation  of  God. 
•  All  His  natural  attributes  are  thereby  brought  to  light,  and  we  are  confronted  with 
Deity.  But  the  light  of  nature  affords  but  an  imperfect  and  uncertain  idea  of  God. 
His  moral  perfections  are  His  chief  glory,  and  nature  reveals  nothing  of  these.  It 
is  the  plan  and  work  of  human  redemption  which  most  clearly  and  signally  makes 
God  known  to  man,  and  even  to  angels.  This  work  has  Christ's  mediation  for  its 
basis,  Christ's  atonement  for  its  grand  expression,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  its 
efficient  agent.  To  accomplish  it  all  power  has  been  given  to  Christ,  and  all 
creatures,  and  all  things  in  heaven  and  on  earth  are  made  subservient  to  Him. 
Not  that  Christ  is  a  mere  manifestation  of  God.  He  is  as  distinctly  a  person  as 
the  Father.  But  it  is  in  Christ  only  that  God  speaks,  shines  forth,  acts.  The 
glory  of  the  Godhead  shines  for  us  only  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  see  in 
Him  God's  moral  perfections  as  well  as  His  natural  attributes.  The  goodness  and 
mercy  and  hoUness  and  justice  of  God  find  fearful  expression  in  the  person 
and  work  of  the  incarnated  One.  III.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures.  He  is  the  central  character,  the  life,  the  essence,  the  burden, 
and  the  substance  of  them.  To  set  forth  Jesus  Christ  as  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life,  is  their  chief  end.  He  is  the  first  promise  of  mercy  made  to  man,  and 
equally  the  last.  His  office,  work,  and  history  are  blended  and  interwoven  with 
the  whole  structure  of  revelation.  IV.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  man's 
SALVATION.  Christ  is  the  finisher  of  our  salvation  as  well  as  its  author.  He  com- 
pletes whatsoever  He  begins.  He  never  leaves  or  forsakes  one  who  has  felt  His 
pardoning  mercy,  until  he  is  safe  in  heaven.  He  will  wash  out  the  last  stain  of 
guilt  from  the  soul,  conquer  the  last  enemy,  and  present  us  faultless  before  His 
Father's  throne  with  exceeding  glory.  V.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of 
THE  LIFE  OF  GoD  IN  THE  SOUL  OF  THE  BELIEVER.  B;^  nature  we  are  dead  in  sin, 
and  no  will  or  power  of  man  can  give  us  life.  Christ  is  our  life.  He  only  has 
power  to  raise  us  up  from  the  death  of  sin ;  to  keep  us  alive  ;  to  cause  us  to  grow 
in  grace,  and  assimilate  us  to  the  character  of  God.  VI.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and 
Omega  of  the  saints'  final  glory.  Heaven  is  the  culmination  of  Christ's  power 
and  of  Gospel  blessedness.  Then  will  it  be  made  manifest  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
indeed  "  the  Alpha  and  Omega "  of  God's  eternal  government ;  the  head  of  all 
creatures;  the  end  of  all  manifestations;  the  substance  of  all  things;  the  glory  of 
all  economies ;  the  fountain  of  all  being.  1.  We  infer  from  this  subject  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  an  indispensable  necessity  to  every  one  of  us.  For  it  is 
only  in  Him  that  we  attain  to  the  real  end  of  our  being.  2.  How 
real  and  how  fearful  is  the  sin  of  living  away  life  and  probation  aside 
from  the  service  and  glory  of  Jesus  Christ.  {J.  M.  Sherwood.)  Christ, 
the  Alpha  and  Omega: — That  it  is  Christ  who  here  speaks,  no  one  can 
doubt.  The  words  that  immediately  precede  separate  the  speaker  from  every 
created  angel :  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly ;  and  My  reward  is  with  Me,  to  give  every 
man  according  as  his  work  shall  be."  These  words  involve  a  claim  to  Deity.  This 
is  given  in  the  Old  Testament  as  a  title  of  Jehovah,  distinguishing  Him  from  the 
idols  of  paganism  (Isa.  xliv.  6).  I.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  in  relation  to 
creation  and  providence.  Christianity  is  at  this  day  the  great  upholder  of  Theism 
in  the  world.  It  has  unspeakably  distanced  Judaism.  But  Christianity  is  more 
than  the  witness  of  simple  Theism.     There  is  a  trinity  in  its  unity,  and  this  gives  it 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  741 

a  richness,  a  grandeur,  an  adaptability  to  the  fallen  state  of  man  of  which  mere 
Theism  is  incapable.  Hence  the  Son  shines  in  the  Christian  firmament  as  the  true 
God,  along  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  thus  the  Divine  works  of 
Creation  and  Providence  are  connected  with  His  name.  "  And  thou,  Lord,  in  the 
beginning  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth  ;  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of 
Thy  hands."  There  is  a  grandeur  in  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  Creation  to  which 
even  science  and  philosophy,  however  reason  also  teach  it,  find  it  hard  to  rise. 
Much  of  the  professed  Theism  of  our  day  runs  into  Pantheism  by  lifting  up  the 
Creation  to  something  like  the  Divine  level,  or  losing  itself  in  some  ascending  series 
without  a  true  summit.  But  Scripture  gives  to  God  the  glory  of  this  truly  Divine 
work,  without  either  lifting  the  creature  too  far  in  the  scale,  or  separating  the 
divinity  unduly  from  it.  And  thus,  while  it  guards  true  Theism  by  the  doctrine  of 
Creation,  it  further  guards  it  by  making  God  create  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ.  But 
while  we  ever  thus  claim,  and  even  reclaim  Creation  for  Christ,  not  less  Providence 
also ;  for  the  one  involves  the  other.  The  system  of  things,  though  by  law  and 
order  it  makes  a  system,  cannot  be  left  without  the  special  control  of  its  Author  ; 
and  thus  we  are  told  of  the  Saviour,  that  He  "  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of 
His  power,"  and  that  "  in  Him  all  things  consist."  He  who  is  the  Creator  and 
Upholder  must  also  be  the  Last  End  of  all  things,  the  Omega  as  well  as  the  Alpha, 
though  nothing  greater  is  said  of  our  Lord  in  the  whole  Bible ;  and  thus  the  whole 
from  first  to  last  hangs  together.  H.  I  am  thus  led  to  speak  of  Christ  as  the  Alpha 
and  Omega  in  relation  to  redemption.  We  feel  at  first  as  if  there  were  a  contrac- 
tion of  horizon  when  we  turn  from  the  vast  realm  of  Creation  and  Providence  to 
that  of  Kedemption.  But  this  impression  is  soon  corrected.  Rather  Creation  and 
Providence  are  liker  the  stage  on  which  the  great  events  of  sacred  history,  which  is 
the  centre  of  all  histories,  are  to  be  transacted.  1.  I  remark  then  that  Christ  is  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  in  regard  to  Redemption  as  a  Divine  saving  plan.  We  cannot 
ascend  to  the  origin  of  this  plan ;  for  it  is  from  eternity.  But  as  far  as  we  can 
rise,  Christ  is  seen  to  be  its  fountain-head,  and  with  His  purpose  of  devoteroent  it  is 
bound  up.  "  Lo,  I  come !  In  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  Me  ;  I  delight 
to  do  Thy  will,  O  My  God ;  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  This  is  a  starting-point, 
where  Christ  comes  forth  as  the  Alpha  in  His  Divine  purpose.  He  was  the  author 
of  the  patriarchal  dispensation.  Its  scattered  promises,  then  few  and  far  between, 
were  presented  like  early  stars  by  His  hand.  Its  humble  altars  and  simple  sacrifices 
rose  at  His  word,  and  He  appeared  in  person  to  Enoch  and  to  Noah,  to  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  The  Mosaic  dispensation  was  also  full  of  Him.  Moses  and  all 
the  prophets  spoke  as  they  were  moved  by  His  Spirit  dwelling  in  them.  All  the 
types  and  shadows  that  foretold  His  saving  work  had  Himself  for  their  author. 
And  as  He  was  thus  the  Alpha  of  this  Old  Testament  dispensation  that  stretched  in 
successive  forms  through  thousands  of  years,  so  was  He  bound  to  be  its  Omega. 
What  would  it  all  have  signified  without  Him  ?  Its  prophecies  would  have  remained 
fruitless  divinations ;  its  types  a  heap  of  riddles.  But  it  became  Him  to  fulfil  it ; 
and  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  He  appeared  as  the  Omega  of  the  Old 
Testament  economy  ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  Alpha  of  the  New.  "  Let  us  look 
unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith."  Let  us  rejoice  with  joy 
unspeakable,  that  He  who  was  the  Alpha  of  our  redemption  became  the  Omega  too. 
Now  He  is  beyond,  and  we  are  beyond,  that  awful  darkness.  "  It  is  finished ! " 
Let  us  not  lower  His  work  and  misunderstand  it,  while  at  the  same  time  we  unduly 
exalt  our  own  by  speaking  as  if  Christ's  sacrifice  belonged  to  the  same  category 
with  ours.  Then  had  He  died  not  to  end  sacrifice,  but  to  begin  it,  and  stand  at  the 
head  of  a  long  line  of  sufferers  taking  away  sin  out  of  the  world  by  essentially  the 
same  endurance  with  His.  But  He  is  alone !  "  His  blood  shed,"  as  ours  never 
can  be,  "  for  remission  of  sins  unto  many."  2.  I  remark  that  Christ  is  the  Alpha 
and  Omega  of  Redemption  as  a  personal  Christian  experience.  When  is  it  that 
any  one  of  us  becomes  a  Christian  ?  Is  it  not  when  Christ  Himself  draws  near, 
and  talks  with  us,  as  with  the  disciples  on  the  way  ?  We  have  no  experimental 
Christianity  apart  from  Him.  He  is  the  Alpha  of  our  personal  religious  history. 
We  may  seem  to  ourselves  to  have  begun  this  work ;  but  Christ  has  begun  it  before 
us.  For  this  opening  of  hearts,  what  is  it  but  the  result  of  His  unlocking  of  them  ? 
But  with  Christ  all  originates.  If  we  are  pardoned,  it  is  because  we  have  redemption 
through  His  blood — even  the  forgiveness  of  sins;  if  we  are  restored  to  God's 
family,  it  is  because  that  to  as  many  as  receive  Him  He  gives  the  privilege  of 
becoming  the  sons  of  God.  If  we  are  washed  and  sanctified  as  well  as  justified,  it 
is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.     We  can  trace  no 


742  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

part  of  it  back  to  ourselves,  or  to  any  other  benefactor ;  for  we  see  and  feel  that, 
like  bread  of  life,  it  comes  from  heaven.  This  is  the  deepest  spirit  of  all  Christian 
experience.  Our  theologies  may  be  somewhat  different,  but  our  doxologies  are  one. 
Thus  is  it  with  the  first  grand  experience  of  converting  and  saving  grace  ;  but  not 
less  does  Christ  blend  and  mingle  with  all  the  succeeding  experiences  of  the 
Christian's  history.  He  gently  smooths  the  steps  of  every  pilgrim  in  the  ways  of 
holiness.  He  suffers  not  the  smoking  flax  to  be  quenched,  or  the  bruised  reed  to 
be  broken.  In  temptation  Christ  is  a  defence  to  the  Christian,  in  darkness  a  light. 
What  is  Christian  experience  but  this  secret  history  of  the  affections  of  the  soul 
towards  an  ever-present  Saviour  ?  He  outgrows  his  childhood  and  youth,  forgetting 
many  things  as  things  behind.  He  forsakes  the  books  which  once  he  loved,  the 
studies  from  which  he  was  inseparable.  But  time  itself  cannot  antiquate  his 
attachment  to  his  Saviour.  We  liiow  the  Alpha  of  our  earthly  friendships,  but  we 
do  not  know  their  Omega.  We  bless  God  for  our  good  hope  that  they  will  stand 
and  comfort  us  in  the  last  extremity.  But  in  regard  to  Christ  we  have  more  than 
probability ;  we  have  persuasion.  "  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life, 
nor  angels,  nor  principalities,"  &c.  3.  I  remark  that  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and 
Omega  of  Eedemption  as  a  collective  spiritual  history.  Christianity  was  never 
intended  to  be  a  solitary  experience,  or  a  multitude  of  single  experiences.  It  was 
to  be  a  society — a  Church.  Was  it  not  a  great  thing  in  Christ  to  be  the  Alpha  of 
such  a  society ;  to  build  it  upon  a  foundation  already  laid,  and  yet  to  make  it  far 
more  spiritual,  energetic,  and  wide-embracing  ;  to  enlarge  its  statute-book  by  adding 
a  New  Testament  to  the  Old.  Christ  stands  forth  as  the  Alpha  of  this  new  creation, 
such  as  had  never  been  seen  in  the  world  before — visible  in  doctrine,  discipUne, 
worship,  and  government,  and  yet  invisible,  because  having  its  deepest  seat  in  the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart,  with  more  of  its  members  in  heaven  than  on  earth,  and 
more  in  the  future  than  now  alive.  He  was  the  seed-corn,  falling  into  the  ground 
and  dying,  which  brought  forth  all  this  fruit.  As  we  read  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
the  sequel  to  the  Gospels  is  evident  to  all — the  same  Christ  in  a  new  sphere.  His 
name  working  signs  and  wonders  on  the  souls,  and  still  also  on  the  bodies,  of  men, 
living  virtue  going  out  of  Him — the  bread  blessed  and  feeding  thousands — the 
"  great  multitude  obedient  to  the  faith."  The  earthly  leaders  visibly  do  not  lead. 
They  point  to  One  above — and  their  dying  charge  renews  the  battle,  "  Remember 
Jesus  Christ."  Thus  will  Christ  be  the  Alpha  of  His  Church  till  He  becomes  the 
Omega.  It  is  a  work  "  never  ending,  still  beginning,"  Christ  has  to  cope  with  the 
multiplication  of  the  human  race,  born  in  sin,  and  needing  fresh  grace.  He  has  to 
cope  with  backsliding  and  apostasy ; — with  superstition,  heresy,  and  infidelity ; — 
with  all  the  devices  and  depths  of  Satan.  4.  I  remark  in  the  last  place,  that  Christ 
is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  Eedemption,  considered  as  an  endless  development. 
When  we  speak  of  eternity  we  feel  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  quantity  which, 
whether  as  applied  to  man's  natural  endowment  or  destiny  in  Christ,  overtasks  all 
our  powers  alike  of  conception  and  description.  He  is  thus  the  Alpha  of  the  ever- 
lasting ages,  the  morning  star  that  leads  in  the  endless  dayl  Specially  to  the 
ransomed  themselves  is  Christ  the  Alpha  of  the  Christian  heaven.  He  has  prepared 
the  place ;  He  has  provided  the  company ;  He  has  measured  out  alike  the  rest  and 
the  activity ;  He  has  diffused  the  love.  A  blessedness  like  this,  inaugurated  by 
Christ,  and  quickened  by  His  presence,  can  only  begin,  but  never  end.  And  thus 
Christ  may  be  said  to  be  the  Omega  of  the  heavenly  world,  as  He  is  its  Alpha.  He 
has  united  its  beginning  and  its  ending  as  in  a  golden  circle.  He  has  so  gloriously 
consummated  the  being  of  the  redeemed,  that  it  can  endure  for  ever  without 
exhaustion  or  decay,  without  change  or  reconstruction.  He  has  so  wondrously 
built  the  celestial  system,  that  it  can  supply  themes  of  endless  interest  and  ever- 
increasing  joy.  And  in  Himself  He  has  so  concentrated  all  that  makes  heaven 
blissful  and  ennobling,  that  its  riches  must  remain  for  ever  riches  that  are 
"  unsearchable,"  and  its  glory,  a  glory  "  to  be  revealed."  Who  is  there  that  would 
resist  the  attraction  of  the  person,  work,  and  saving  grace  of  that  great  Being, 
whose  glories  I  have  feebly  endeavoured  to  shadow  forth?  Before  you  reject  this 
Saviour  think  how  you  will  face  eternity  without  Him  !  Oh,  rather  embrace  His 
favour  while  the  day  of  mercy  lasts !  There  Christ  shall  become  the  Alpha  of 
your  salvation  ;  and  the  depths  of  your  never-ending  existence  shall  not  witness  the 
day  that  He  shall  withdraw  His  love.  {J.  Cairns,  D.D.)  The  place  of  Christ  in 
Christianity : — If  our  religion  is  to  come  from  the  New  Testament,  Christ  must 
have  a  place  in  it  which  no  other  can  share.  God's  forgiveness  does  not  come  to 
us  independent  of  Christ,  past  Him,  over  His  head,  so  that  we  can  count  Him  as 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  743 

one  of  those  who  best  knew  and  most  fully  proclaimed  an  unimaginable  mercy, 
which  would  have  been  all  that  it  is  even  had  He  never  lived ;  it  comes  only  in  Him, 
and  through  His  death  for  our  sins.  That  this  is  the  distinctively  Christian 
position  is  clearly  seen  by  those  who  have  been  brought  up  in  other  religions.  An 
interesting  illustration  of  this  was  given  some  time  ago  in  India.  A  Hindu  Society 
was  formed  which  had  for  its  object  to  appropriate  all  that  was  good  in  Christianity 
without  burdening  itself  with  the  rest.  Among  other  things  which  it  appropriated, 
with  the  omission  of  only  two  words,  was  the  answer  given  in  the  Westminster 
Shorter  Catechism  to  the  question,  "  What  is  repentance  unto  life  ?  "  Here  is  the 
answer :  "  Eepentance  unto  life  is  a  saving  grace,  whereby  a  sinner,  out  of  a  true 
sense  of  his  sin,  and  apprehension  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  doth  with  grief 
and  hatred  of  his  sin,  turn  from  it  unto  God,  with  full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour 
after,  new  obedience."  The  words  the  Hindus  left  out  were  "  in  Christ "  ;  instead 
of  "apprehension  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,"  they  read  simply  "  apprehension 
of  the  mercy  of  God."  But  they  knew  that  this  was  not  compromising.  They 
were  acute  enough  to  see  that  in  the  words  they  left  out  the  whole  Christianity  of 
the  definition  lay ;  they  felt  that  here  was  the  barb  of  the  hook,  and  as  they  had  no 
intention  of  being  caught,  they  broke  it  off.  (J.  Denny,  D.D.)  Christ  the 
Omega : — Christ  is  the  close  and  climax  of  history.  Christ  is,  we  believe,  the  inner- 
most word  that  God  will  speak.  Christianity  must  always  claim  finality  for  the 
revelation    that    comes    through   Him.       (H.    Scott-Holland,   M.A.)  Blessed 

are  they  that  do  His  commandments. — The  blessedness  of  keeping  the  com- 
mandments : — The  commandments  of  God  are  the  laws  of  happiness.  They  are 
the  rules  of  health  both  for  soul  and  body.  There  can  be  no  well-being  on  earth, 
and  no  heaven  without  them.  We  have  too  long  been  in  the  habit  of  thinking  that 
goodness  is  only  good  because  God  has  commanded  it,  and  evil  would  be  good,  or  at 
least  very  pleasant,  if  it  had  not  been  forbidden.  We  have  not  regarded  goodness 
as  the  indispensable  means  of  happiness,  just  as  much  as  breath  is  to  life,  labour  to 
success,  or  water  to  steam.  The  commandments  are  the  laws  of  goodness.  They 
are  summed  up  by  our  Lord  into  two  (Matt.  xxii.  36-40).  Here  are  the  essential 
laws  of  happiness.  Society  constituted  upon  them  must  be  happy.  Let  love  to 
God  fill  the  heart,  inspire  the  intellect,  and  pervade  every  thought,  and  we  walk  as 
the  friends  of  the  Lord.  We  exult  in  our  heavenly  Father's  goodness  (Isa.  xlviii.  18). 
The  Lord  is  to  the  soul  like  the  sun  to  the  solar  system.  From  Him  come  the 
warmth,  the  brightness,  and  the  fertility  which  beautify  and  bless  the  soul.  It  is 
as  vain  to  expect  a  bright  or  a  happy  mind  where  love  to  God  is  not,  as  to  expect  a 
bright  or  a  cheerful  world  without  the  sun.  And  hence,  the  Divine  command  is  not 
an  arbitrary  decree.  It  is  the  condition  of  our  well-being.  Nothing  can  dispense 
with  it  (Deut.  xxxii.  46,  47).  Let  us  consider  a  little  in  detail  the  commandments 
in  relation  to  God.  But  first  let  us  notice  that  they  are  addressed  to  those  who 
have  come  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  When  the  soul, 
wearied  with  the  tyranny  of  sin,  receives  the  help  offered  by  its  Saviour,  He  pro- 
claims liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison-house  to  them  that 
were  bound.  He  strikes  the  fetters  from  the  slave  of  his  sins,  and  gives  to  His 
delivered  servant  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  light.  None  but  these  can 
keep  the  commandments,  or  desire  to  do  so.  Hence,  they  are  addressed  to  such. 
He  is  the  First  and  the  Last.  He  who  comes  to  Him  will  find  rest  unto  his  soul. 
Ambition  is  a  fearful  idol.  We  watch  its  worshipper  giving  himself  to  its  absorbing 
anxieties,  to  engross  all  his  faculties,  that  he  may  achieve  success.  The  merchant 
has  become  a  millionaire,  and  is  insane.  Such  is  the  result  of  worshipping  the 
likeness  of  things  on  the  earth.  It  is  the  same  when  we  bow  down  to  and  serve  an 
image  or  likeness  of  anything  in  the  waters  under  the  earth.  Spiritual  fish  are 
those  appetites  for  science  which  delight  in  the  waters  of  knowledge.  The  world  of 
thought  is  a  wide  sea.  The  thoughts  of  the  worldly  are  as  a  vast  troubled  sea 
(Isa.  Ivii.  20).  Only  where  the  glorious  river  and  streams  of  Divine  truth  flow  can 
the  sanctified  sciences,  the  true  fish  of  the  soul,  really  live.  Not  a  small  history 
would  that  be  which  detailed  the  sorrows  of  scientific  men  when  their  science  has 
not  been  made  sober  and  sacred  by  being  subordinated  to  heavenly  wisdom.  One 
eminent  man,  after  waiting  in  vain  for  a  king's  smile,  in  France,  went  and  died  of 
chagrin.  Another  committed  suicide  because  the  British  Association  had  not 
awarded  him  sufl&cient  honour  for  his  chemical  discoveries.  And  what  a  world  of 
suffering  does  such  a  termination  disclose!  To  make  life  a  circle  of  blessing  it 
must  begin  and  end  with  God.  '*  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."    To  form  this  first  indispensable  element  for  happiness,  the 


744  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

Lord,  from  His  infinite  love  to  us,  is  a  jealous  God.    He  requires  our  worship  not 
for  His  sake,  but  ours.     He  needs  nothing  of  ours,  but  we  need  Him.     He  watches, 
with  unutterable  tenderness,  to  preserve  us  from  the  hell  of  existence  in  the  wild 
chaos  of  being  in  which  He  is  not  the  supreme  centre  and  the  supreme  law.     He  is 
jealous  with  an  infinite  and  holy  jealousy,  to  preserve  each  child  from  danger  and 
from  ruin.     But  He  warns  us,  also,  that  ruin  to  one  generation  involves  danger  to 
the  next.     In  His  wisdom  He  has  connected  the  race  together  like  the  links  of  a 
chain,  so  that  the  progress  of   one   generation  may  transmit  better  qualities  to 
another,  and  thus  the  race  be  ever  advancing  to  a  higher  degree  of  talent,  of  order, 
and  happiness.     The  wealth,  mental  as  well  as  physical,  is  thus  transmitted  to  the 
future  generations  of  mankind.     This  law,  however,  when  perverted,  works  in  the 
opposite  direction.     The  iniquity  of  the  father  is  visited  upon  the  son.    It  must  be 
so.     The  order  of  nature  is  not  suspended.    It  works  inversely,  because  man  will 
have  it  so,  but  it  exists.    He,  therefore,  who  would  know  the  extent  of  the  wrong  he 
does  when  he  sins,  should  reflect,  not  only  on  its  consequences  to  himself,  but  on 
the  hereditary  evil  he  transmits  to  his  children.     They  are,  it  is  true,  not  punished 
for  it,  but  it  gives  them  a  proneness  to  actual  evils  for  which  they  will  be  punished. 
The  first  three  commandments  are  the  head  and  essence  of  the  whole.     They  fill 
the  rest  with  spiritual  life.     Without  them  the  rest  are  dead  and  unavailing.     The 
first  three  relate  to  spiritual  life,  the  next  five  to  the  conduct  of  man  in  civil  society, 
and  the  remaining  two  to  his  moral  life  and  motives.    Here  permit  me  to  draw  your 
attention  to  the  interesting  circumstances  recorded  in  the  Gospel,  respecting  the 
young  man  who  came  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  what  he  must  do  to  inherit  eternal  life. 
The  Saviour  supplied  what  the  young  man  was  lacking — the  essence  of  the  first 
three  commandments,  which  he  had  in  reality  not  done.    Here,  again,  we  see  the 
blessedness  of  keeping  the  Divine  laws.     The  young  man,  though  rich,  and  in  many 
respects  estimable  ;  though  in  the  sight  of  the  world  worthy  of  admiration,  and  to 
some  an  object  of  envy,  was  unhappy.    He  felt  there  was  a  void  within,  which  no 
outward  possessions,  or  even  the  moral  law  alone,  could  fill.    God  must  be  enthroned 
there :  He  must  be  the  tree  of  life  in  the  centre  of  the  garden,  or  there  will  be  no 
paradise.     No  one  can  have  that  confidence  which  is  essential  to  happiness  who  is 
not  resting  on  the  Eock  of  Ages ;  no  one  has  a  right  to  have  it ;  no  one  has  a  right 
to  enjoy  himself  in  the  universe  who  does  not  render  homage  to  its  Great  Proprietor. 
But  when  a  man  devotes  himself  to  the  Lord,  a  peace  inexpressible  takes  possession 
of  his  soul — a  bright  dawn,  like  that  of  a  morning  in  spring,  breaks  in  upon  him, 
and  all  things  laugh  and  sing.    It  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  come  nigh  unto  him  ; 
it  is  heaven  begun.     We  will  now  notice  the  commandments  which  relate  to  civil 
life,  that  is,  in  the  letter,  for  in  the  spiritual  sense  we  must  ever  bear  in  mind  they 
all  relate  to  operations  in  the  soul,  and  to  our  supreme  obedience  to  the  Lord,  and 
the  rejection  of  internal  evils  as  sins  against  Him  ;  in  this  sense  the  commandments 
are  exceedingly  broad  (Psa.  cxix.  96).     We  need  scarcely  remark  how  miserable  are 
the  homes  where  the  parents  are  not  respected ;  what  insolences,  what  contempt, 
what  slightings  of  parental  counsel,  what  jealousies  of  the  rest  of  the  family,  take 
away  satisfaction  from  the  children,  and  make  a  perpetual  source  of  discomfort  to 
the  parents.  But,  on  the  contrary,  how  blessed  is  the  home  where  father  and  mother 
are  honoured  !     Confidence  in  their  loving  hearts  is  felt.     Mutual  kindness  weaves 
continually  garlands   of    spiritual   roses.      Let   us  take  another   commandment: 
"Thou  shalt  not  commit  murder."     Who  could  possibly  be  happy  while  violating 
this?     Even  in  the  lighter  form,  in  which  the  act  is  not  committed,  but,  as  the 
Lord  teaches  in  the  gospel,  a  person  hates  another,  there  is  no  possibility  of  happi- 
ness.    Hate  takes  away  peace  from  the  heart  where  it  dwells ;  it  forms  a  brood  of 
viperous  tempers,  which  not  only  strive  to  injure  the  person  hated,  but  also  prey 
upon  one  another.     The  same  result  will  follow  the  consideration  of  every  other 
commandment.     No  happiness  can  exist  except  in  proportion  as  it  is  from  the  heart 
obeyed.    Again  and  again  we  say.  How  could  a  heaven  exist  where  these  perfect 
laws  do  not  exist,  or  how  can  a  breach  of  them  result  in  anything  but  sorrow  ?    It 
is  the  same  with  bearing  false  witness  against  the  neighbour.     An  atmosphere  of 
lies  must  be  fraught  with  curses.     Even  the  last  two  commandments,  though  exter- 
nally not  appearing  to  relate  to  evils  so  formidable  to  society,  in  reality  do  so  most 
completely.     Where  all  are  covetous  must  be  misery  indeed  ;  to  feel  that  you  were 
surrounded   by  those  who  envied   you  every  comfort,  who  greedily  watched  and 
waited  for  every  opportunity  to  despoil  you.  The  hell  of  the  covetous  must  be  a  real 
chamber  of  horrors,  overflowing  with  envy  and  gall.    On  the  contrary,  as  this  spirit 
is  shunned  or  subdued,  a  delight  in  imparting  takes  its  place,  a  rejoicing  over 


CHAP,  xin.]  REVELATION.  745 

another's  joy.  A  cheerful  generous  outpouring  of  blessed  influences,  an  intense 
satisfaction  in  the  well-being  of  others  ;  a  watchfulness  in  seizing  every  opportunity 
to  promote  the  general  joy  ;  these  principles  and  states  unlock  the  very  portals  of 
bliss,  and  give  us  the  reason  for  the  Divine  words  (Isa.  zlviii.  18).  Let  it  not  be 
said,  that  in  the  New  Testament  these  Divine  laws  are  repealed,  for  the  very  reverse 
is  the  case.  The  Lord  came  to  give  us  new  power  to  keep  the  essential  laws  of  our 
happiness  (Matt.  v.  17,  19,  20).  Did  the  Lord's  coming,  death,  glorification,  and 
resurrection,  give  no  power  to  follow  Him  in  the  regeneration,  and  to  keep  His 
commandments?  Is  keeping  the  commandments  such  a  difficult  thing  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  cannot  enable  us  to  do  it  ?  The  apostle  said,  "  I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me,"  and  why  cannot  you  ?  It  is  not  the  power 
you  want,  it  is  the  will.  Keeping  the  commandnaents  does  not  make  difficulties  ;  it 
is  not  keeping  them.  Awake  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not.  Kouse  yourself  to  the 
determination  to  vanquish  evil,  and  with  the  Lord  and  His  angels  assisting  you,  the 
victory  will  be  sure.     {J.  Bailey,  Ph.D.)         Evangelical  obedience  : — I.  Obedience 

MUST  BE  SINCERE,  FLOWING  FROM  A  RENEWED  HEART,  SPRINKLED  FROM  AN  EVIL  CONSCIENCE. 

1.  This  obedience  proceeds  from  faith :  this  is  the  main  principle  of  the  Christian 
life.  2.  This  obedience  to  the  commands  of  God,  flows  also  from  love  to  Him 
(1  John  V.  3).     n.  Eight  obedience  to  the  commandments  of  God  is  impartial  and 

WITHOUT  RESERVE.  III.  ThE  EVANGELICAL  KEEPING  THE  COMMANDMENTS  OF  GoD,  IS 
HABITUAL,  CONSTANT,  PERSEVERING.     IV.  DoiNG  THE  COMMANDMENTS  OF  GOD  ACCORDING 

TO  THE  COVENANT  OF  GRACE,  IS  DIRECTED  TO  His  GLORY.  {Sketches  of  FouT  Hundred 
Sermons.)  The  reward  of  debt  and  the  reward  of  grace  : — I.  The  work  :  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  do  His  commandments."  The  obedience  intended  is  that  which  is 
the  fruit  and  offspring  of  a  renewed  nature,  the  obedience  of  the  penitent  believer. 
Every  man  truly  turned  to  God  echoes  the  sentiment,  '*  Oh,  how  love  I  Thy  law  1  " 
"I  delight  in  the  law  of  God,  after  the  inward  man."  He  aspires  to  and  labours 
after  entire  conformity  to  that  law,  as  being  that  which  constitutes  the  perfection  of 
His  being.  H.  The  reward:  "  Blessed  are  they  that  do  His  commandments,  that 
they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life."  (Z).  Kelly,  M.A.)  The  blessedness  of 
the  obedient : — I.  The  character  of  the  persons  here  declared  to  be  blessed. 
They  do  the  commandments  of  Christ.  The  commandments  of  Christ  are  the  reve- 
lation of  the  will  of  God.  This  revelation  consists  partly  of  doctrines  or  truths  to  be 
believed,  and  partly  of  duties  to  be  performed.    H.  The  connection  between  doing 

THE   commandments   OF   ChRIST    AND   HAVING   A   BIGHT    TO   EAT   OF   THE    TREE    OF   LIEE. 

And  here,  at  the  very  first,  it  is  necessary  to  state  that  we  must  beware  of  imagining 
that  by  doing  the  commandments  we  procure  for  ourselves  a  title  to  eternal  life. 
The  work  of  our  salvation  is,  in  the  Word  of  God,  ascribed  to  Christ,  from  its  com- 
mencement to  its  close.  As  He  suffered  in  our  stead,  so  He  fulfilled  for  us  all 
righteousness,  and  left  us  nothing  to  perform — nothing,  I  say,  to  perform  in  the  way 
of  recommending  ourselves  to  the  favour  of  God ;  although  we  have  unquestionably 
much  to  perform  on  other  grounds.  The  persons  in  the  text  have  the  right,  because 
God  has  declared  and  promised  in  His  Word,  which  can  never  be  broken,  that  they 
who  possess  that  character  which  manifests  itself  in  aiming  at  a  holy  and  constant 
obedience  to  His  law,  shall  have  the  right,  or  more  properly  the  privilege  of  eating 
of  the  tree  of  life,  and  of  entering  in  hereafter  through  the  gates  into  the  city.  To 
the  fulfilment  of  this  promise  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  that  obedience  and  right 
should  be  connected  together  as  cause  and  effect.  It  is  at  the  same  time  perfectly 
true,  for  it  is  asserted  repeatedly  in  the  Bible,  that  the  good  works  of  the  saints  are 
rewarded  by  God,  but  then  this  is  entirely  owing  to  their  union  with  Christ  by  faith. 
God  may  also  be  said  to  confer  rewards  upon  us  for  our  holy  and  benevolent  actions, 
inasmuch  as  these  actions  are  signs  and  evidences  of  our  union  with  Christ,  and  in 
so  doing  we  may  consider  Him  as  promising  the  reward,  not  on  account  of 
signs  or  evidences  themselves,  but  solely  on  account  of  the  thing  which  they  signify. 
III.  Wherein  consists  the  happiness  of  those  who,  by  doing  the  commandments 
OF  Christ,  ascertain  their  right  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  to  enter  in 
through  the  gates  into  the  city.  The  expression,  "  tree  of  life,"  is  most  probably 
figurative ;  but  figurative  though  it  be,  it  unquestionably  intimates  that  the  heavenly 
happiness  shall  be  of  perpetual  duration,  and  it  conveys  to  us  this  truth  in  a  most 
significant  and  forcible  manner.  We  shall  eat  of  the  tree  of  life.  Think  only  of 
how  much  alarm  and  misery  death  is  the  cause  in  this  world,  and  then  you  will  be 
enabled,  in  souie  measure,  to  conceive  the  felicity  of  that  other  and  better  world  in 
which  there  shall  be  no  more  death.  But  further,  they  who  do  the  commandments 
of  Christ  shall  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city,  they  shaU  be  openly  received 


746  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

and  welcomed  into  the  city  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  through  the  regular  and 
lawful  entrance,  as  citizens  of  a  place  have  the  right  and  privilege  of  admission.  A 
city  conveys  the  idea  of  security,  and  comfort,  and  society.  By  its  walls  it  protects 
from  the  assaults  of  enemies ;  by  its  gates  it  excludes  whatever  might  hurt,  or 
offend,  or  incommode ;  and  by  the  number  of  those  who  live  within  it,  united 
together  by  sameness  of  interests,  laws,  language,  religion,  and  manners,  it  puts  us 
in  possession  of  all  the  gratifications  which  flow  from  society  and  friendly  inter- 
course. As  the  happiness  of  the  redeemed  shall  be  endless  in  duration,  so  also  shall 
it  be  uninterrupted  and  without  diminution.  {A.  Bullock,  M.A.)  That  they 
may  have  rigrht  to  the  tree  of  me.— The  tree  of  life  (with  Gen.  iii.  24) :— I.  The 

TREE    OF    LIFE    IN    THE   GARDEN    OF   INNOCENCE.      This   picture   SUpplicS    US    with    tWO 

important  facts.      One  is  that  primitive  man  was  not  at  all  handicapped  in  his  first 
moral  struggle  by  any  circumstances  arising  out  of  the  manner  of  his  creation.  There 
does  not  seem  to  be  any  reason  in  the  nature  of  things,  or  in  the  nature  of  man  as 
he  was  originally  constituted,  why  he  should  of  necessity  have  disaster  and  defeat 
as  pre-conditions  of  ultimate  victory.     The  tree  of  life  was  there  in  the  garden 
within  possible  reach,  and  if  man  had  conquered  instead  of  being  conquered,  no 
cherubim  could  have  prevented  his  tasting  of  this  ambrosial  fruit  and  so  entering 
into  life.     It  is  true  that  conflict  is  necessary  in  passing  from  innocence  to  virtue, 
but  conflict  is  not  necessarily  defeat.     There  is  the  nobler  alternative  of  victory, 
which  was  exemplified  by  the  second  Adam,  the  Son  of  Man,  who  fought  over  again 
the  battle  of  humanity,  and  won  it  from  first  to  last.     So  we  are  led  to  another 
fact  that  man's  first  moral  action  constituted  a  real  failure,  that  there  occurred  in 
the  beginning  of  human  history  a  veritable  moral  "  fall."     The  tree  of  life  in  the 
garden  of  innocence  is  no  meaningless  figure.    It  reveals  what  might  have  been  if 
man  had  been  victorious  in  Eden.    The  splendid  prize  here  forfeited  serves  already 
to  show  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.    II.  The'  tree  of  life  in  the  garden  op 
GUILT.     How,  then,  are  we  to  translate  the  symbolic  picture  of  the  cherubim  guard- 
ing with  the  sword  of  flame  the  tree  of  life  from  the  approach  of  guilty  man  into 
every-day  prose  ?     It  is  simply  the  symbolic  representation  of  the  fulfilment  of  the 
law—"  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."    The  fact  of  guilt  has  shut  man  off 
from  the  life  that  had  lain  before  him  in  his  state  of  innocence  as  a  glorious  possi- 
bility.    This  once  more  emphasises  the  fact  that  sin  was  a  real,  and  in  itself  an 
unmitigated  disaster.     The  symbolic   picture  of  the  Iree  surrounded  by  strong 
cherubim  reveals  man's  impotence  to  regain  unaided  what  he  had  lost.    No  sin- 
defiled  soul  can  challenge  the  dread  cherubim,  or  tempt  the  blazing  stroke  of  the 
awful  sword,  and  live.     Yet  already  the  promise  was  given  of  One  who,  on  behalf 
of  poor  humanity,  should  cleave  His  way  through  the  fiery  guard  of  righteousness 
to  the  tree  of  life,  and  lead  thither  many  of  earth's  baffled  children,  who  should  be 
victors  in  His  victory,  and  strong  in  His  strength.    IH.  The  tree  of  life  in  the 
ciTT  OF  REDEMPTION :  "  Blcssed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes."    The  kingdom  of 
Life  revealed  in  John's  Eevelation  is  a  kingdom  of  Eedemption,  of  which  a  Lamb 
as  it  had  been  slain,  that  is,  the  fact  and  power  of  a  great  all-availing  sacrifice,  is 
the  centre.     So  we  find  that  the  new  way  to  the  tree  of  life  is  through  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  it  is  trodden  by  those  that  have  washed  their  robes  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb.     The  operation  here  indicated  is  twofold.    The  '•  washing  of  the  robes  " 
indicates  on  the  one  hand,  the  forgiveness  of  sins  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
Here  is  one  side  of  the  curse  removed ;  the  guilty  are  forgiven  for  the  sake  of  the 
Beloved.    But  there  is  also  another  side.   The  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  also  a  victory. 
This  supreme  sacrifice  for  sin  involved  the  destruction  of  sin.     He  that  died  all 
the  more  gloriously  lived,  and  became  the  fount  of  eternal  life  to  those  that  trust 
in  Him.    Hence  in  this  book  we  are  told  that  the  saints  overcome  the  evil  one  by 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.     So  their  robes  are  made  white,  not  only  by  the  forgiving 
love  of  God  which  is  made  possible  by  the  great  Sacrifice,  but  also  by  the  spiritual 
power  that  comes  through  the  crucified  Christ.     So  in  very  deed  their  sins  are 
washed  away,  and  at  length  they  are  able  to  *'  stand  in  the  eternal  Light  through 
the  eternal  Love."     The  tree  of  life  meets  us  first  in  a  "  garden,"  but  at  last  in  a 
glorious  "  city."     So  God  moves  on  in  spite  of  sin,  and  leads  the  world  through 
Christ  to  greater  glory.     It  is  not  Eden  regained  that  God  gives  us.     Eden  was 
but  a  garden,  primitive,  narrow,  and  circumscribed,  suited  for  a  life  of  simple 
innocence  with  little   expansion   or  development   of   capacity   and   power.      But 
redemption   introduces  us  to  a  noble  city  with  its  complicated   claims,   its   vast 
possibilities,  and  its  myriad  grandeurs.     Leaving  metaphor  aside,  God  in  Christ 
is  calling  us  to  a  life  full  of  large  and  noble  and  varied  activity.      Christian 


GHAP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  747 

life  should  fill  every  sphere,  be  foremost  in  all  true  service  for  God  and  man, 
and  reveal  all  the  activities  of  life  at  their  best,  {John  Thomas,  M.A.) 
Right  to  the  tree  of  life  :— I.  Now,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  study  the  Scriptural 
accounts  without  leaning  to  the  opinion  that  "the  tree  of  life,"  and  "the  tree  of 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  were  strictly  sacramental — in  other  words,  that  as 
symbolical  trees  they  did  what  tKey  could  never  do  as  material.  "  The  tree  of 
life,"  whatever  were  its  foliage  and  fruit,  was  clearly  not  one  of  those  trees  which 
the  earth  had  been  appointed  naturally  to  produce.  Placed  in  the  centre  of  the 
brilliant  scenery  of  Eden,  it  answered  purposes  peculiar  to  itself.  It  is  not  classed 
among  the  trees  good  for  food|;  and  if  therefore  all  those  trees,  as  affording  nourish- 
ment by  their  fruit,  were  trees'  of  life,  it  must  have  been  in  some  far  different  sense 
that  this  single  tree  was  emphatically  styled  "  the  tree  of  life."  Besides,  it  should 
be  remembered  that  when  man  had  sinned  by  eating  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of 
knowledge,  God  gave  as  a  reason  for  expelling  him  from  Eden — "Lest  he  put 
forth  his  hand  and  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat  and  live  for  ever."  So  that, 
in  some  way  or  other,  immortality  was  to  have  been  consequent  on  the  eating  of 
this  tree.  Indeed,  there  are  various  passages  in  which,  as  well  as  in  our  text, 
mention  is  made  of  "  the  tree  of  life  "  ;  and  we  suppose  that  what  is  intended  by 
the  figure  in  these  later  instances  must  have  been  typified  by  "  the  tree  in  the 
midst  of  the  garden."  But  when  Solomon  speaks  of  the  eternal  wisdom  as  "  a  tree 
of  life  " — when  Christ  declares  to  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  "  To  him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  Paradise  of 
God  " — or  when,  as  in  our  text,  a  blessing  is  pronounced  on  those  who  do  God's 
commandments,  as  having  "  right  to  the  tree  of  life,"  there  can  be  nothing  clearer 
than  that  by  taking  of  "  the  tree  of  life  "  is  meant  a  participation  of  that  eternal 
life  with  God  in  heaven  which  Christ  Jesus  has  merited  for  His  followers.  There- 
fore we  seem  justified  in  concluding  that"  the  tree  of  life  "  in  Paradise  was  nothing 
less  than  an  instructive  symbol  of  that  Second  Person  in  the  Trinity,  who  in  every 
age  has  been  the  life  of  the  world.  II.  And  now,  assuming,  as  we  think  we  may, 
that  Christ,  as  represented  to  us  in  Scripture,  is  "  the  tree  of  life,"  we  pass  on  to 
consider  the  blessing  pronounced  on  those  who  do  God's  commandments — "  that 
they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the 
city."  Now,  the  persons  whom  the  text  pronounces  blessed  are  those  that  do  God's 
commandments.  The  terms  on  which  they  partake  of  the  tree  of  life  are  those  of 
absolute  right :  "  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life."  Eight  presupposes 
debt,  and  a  debt  can  never  coexist  with  gift.  We  think,  then,  that  we  must  carry 
with  us  your  ready  assent  when  we  argue  that  forasmuch  as  the  doing  of  God's 
commandments  which  is  mentioned  in  the  text  puts  man  into  the  position  of  having 
"  right  to  the  tree  of  life,"  the  supposed  obedience  must  be  something  more  than 
a  mere  creature  obedience,  even  though  that  obedience  were  wrought  up  to  an 
unspotted  perfection.  We  are  required,  then,  to  search  for  a  doing  of  the  command- 
ments which  shall  be  productive  of  right ;  for  if  none  such  be  discovered  the 
pronounced  blessing  wiU  have  none  on  whom  to  descend.  The  moral  law  exists  no 
longer  as  a  covenant.  It  can  hardly,  therefore,  be  to  obedience  to  the  command- 
ments of  this  law  that  the  blessings  are  annexed.  But  there  is  a  commandment 
peculiar  to  the  gospel  which  we  may  obey,  and  obedience  to  which  shall  procure  for 
us  right.  "  This  is  His  commandment,"  saith  St.  John,  "  that  we  believe  on  the 
name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ "  ;  and  there  is  the  most  exact  agreement  between 
this  statement  and  the  answer  of  Jesus  to  the  Jews.  When  they  asked  Him, 
"  What  shall  we  do  to  work  the  works  of  God  ?  "  Jesus  said,  "  This  is  the  work  of 
God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent."  So  that  the  great  command- 
ment under  the  gospel  dispensation — a  commandment  which  distinguishes  the 
dispensation  from  the  legal — is  simply  the  commandment  to  believe  on  the  Saviour. 
This  commandment,  we,  though  weak  and  insufficient,  may  thoroughly  do — not 
indeed  in  our  own  strength,  for  "this  is  the  work  of  God,"  but  through  the  power 
of  the  quickening  Spirit  which  stirs  us  from  the  lethargy  of  our  nature,  and 
enables  us  to  put  faith  in  the  sacrifice  and  righteousness  of  Christ.  But  if  a  man 
thus  strengthened  by  supernatural  assistance  do  the  commandment  which  belongs 
especially  to  the  gospel,  he  will  certainly  "  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life."  Yes, 
"  have  right" — for  the  commandment  requires  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
what  is  it  which  faith  effects  for  him  who  is  enabled  to  exercise  it,  if  it  be  not  that 
it  incorporates  him  into  the  mystical  body  of  the  Saviour,  and  so  causes  him  to 
appear  in  the  sight  of  God  as  having  suffered  and  obeyed  in  Christ  ?  And  thus  we 
vindicate,  as  we  hope,  the  truth  that  a  believer,  though  in  himself  he  can  deserve 


748  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

nothing  but  utter  condemnation,  yet  in  Christ  may  have  right  to  all  that  is 
magnificent  and  glorious.  He  passes  into  the  saint's  rest,  ♦'  a  conqueror,  yea,  more 
than  a  conqueror,  through  Him  that  loved  him,"  angels  chanting  his  welcome,  and 
God  Himself  approving  his  credentials  of  victory.  He  enters,  as  you  observe  it 
stated  in  the  last  clause  of  our  text,  "  through  the  gates  into  the  city."  He  is  not 
admitted,  as  it  were,  by  stealth,  whilst  the  sentinels  sleep  ;  he  is  not  admitted  by 
bribery,  the  keepers  consenting  to  overlook  the  deficiencies  of  his  passport ;  he  is 
not  admitted  surreptitiously,  through  some  neglected  breach,  or  by  a  secret  sub- 
terranean passage ;  but  amid  the  blazings  of  Deity,  and  with  thousand  times  ten 
thousand  spirits  gazing  on  his  march  as  a  mighty  one,  going  forward  to  his  right, 
he  "  enters  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city."  Who  will  not  confess  that  Christ 
hath  done  marvellously  in  thus  entailing  a  "  right  "  on  His  followers?  And  who 
will  not  long  to  possess  that  faith  through  which  the  right  becomes  personally  his 
own  ?  Admire,  then,  and  adore  the  Saviour,  who  undertook  and  accomplished  so 
much.  Oh,  for  a  faith  in  Christ,  that  we  may  obtain  the  blessedness  of  those  who 
do  God's  commandments.  This  is  the  thing  wanted,  the  thing  to  be  prayed  for 
with  earnestness  and  sincerity.  Then,  when  we  feel  that  we  have  right,  how 
glorious  will  the  Saviour  appear  1  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Right  to  the  tree  of  life : — 
I,  MoRAii  OBEDIENCE.  Obedience  is  the  moral  perfection  of  an  intelligent  and 
responsible  agent.  Obedience  to  law  was  the  condition  of  continuance  in  Paradise, 
and  it  is  the  condition  of  its  being  regained.  But  there  are  important  differences 
in  the  cases.  A  redemptive  law  is  essential.  A  redemptive  provision  has  been 
made  and  introduced,  and  a  propitiation  made.  God  shows  mercy  in  a  way  of 
righteousness ;  and  the  law  of  faith  is  related  directly  to  that  scheme  and  the 
Being  who  embodies  it.  Spiritually  blessed  are  they  who  obey  the  law  of  Faith, 
n.  The  bights  of  man.  There  are  political,  social,  and  legal  rights.  These  are 
not  in  question  here.  The  text  refers  to  spiritual  rights  arising  out  of  the  Divine 
redemptive  bestowments,  or  what  is  called  grace.  There  are  two  great  desires 
throbbing  in  the  human  breast — the  desire  for  immortality,  and  that  for  a  redeem- 
ing and  renewing  grace  and  love.  The  gospel  meets  both — it  confers  a  "  right  to 
the  tree  of  life."  III.  The  celestial  home  of  the  obedient  believeb.  The 
home-coming  of  the  pilgrims,  and  the  developed,  matured,  perfected  society  to 
which  they  are  introduced ;  their  stores  of  knowledge,  modes  of  intercourse,  and 
methods  of  beneficent  and  blessed  combination.  The  perfect  worship  of  the  city 
whose  temple  is  the  Lord  God  and  the  Lamb.  {John  Stoughton,  D.D.)  The 
tree  of  life  and  the  entering  into  the  city : — The  Christian  life  has  many  features 
and  many  characteristics.  This  is  one  of  them — it  is  a  perpetual  washing  of  the 
robes.  No  spot  or  stain  must  be  suffered  to  remain  upon  them.  It  is  a  most 
dangerous  thing  to  fall  into  the  habit  of  letting  any  committed  sin  pass  sub  silentio, 
as  it  were,  between  man  and  his  soul.  Scripture,  indeed,  counsels  no  morbid  self- 
scrutiny.  The  man  does  not  wash  perhaps  each  separate  spot  and  stain,  but  it  is 
because  he  washes  the  whole  robe  and  them  with  it.  In  one  way  the  tablets  of 
memory,  and  the  tablets  of  conscience,  and  the  tablets  of  the  life,  must  be  sponged 
clean  every  evening ;  and  in  only  one  way :  by  what  Scripture  calls  the  Blood  of 
the  Lamb,  that  is,  the  atonement  made  once  for  all,  for  all  sin,  and  applied,  in 
earnest  faith,  to  the  individual  man's  heart  and  soul  in  the  sight  of  God.  Careless- 
ness about  washing  the  robes  for  pardon  runs  on  into  carelessness  about  washing 
the  robes  for  purity.  It  is  easy  to  see,  for  every  man's  experience  shows  it,  the 
connection  between  the  washing  of  the  robes  and  the  access  to  the  tree  of  life.  Let 
a  man  recall  a  day  on  which  he  let  his  sins  alone  in  the  way  of  notice,  and  in  the 
way  of  sorrow,  and  in  the  way  of  confession,  and  in  the  way  of  prayer  for  pardon, 
and  in  the  way  of  supplication  for  grace — he  will  recall,  also,  a  day  on  which  he 
was  a  stranger  to  God  as  to  all  peaceful  communion  and  as  to  all  comforting  hope. 
This  explains  for  all  practical  purposes  why  it  should  be  true  also,  as  the  net  result 
of  the  life,  that  it  is  they  who  have  habitually,  in  this  world,  washed  their  robes, 
who  shall  have  the  right,  in  that  world,  of  access  to  the  tree  of  life.  There  remains 
yet  one  clause  of  the  text,  and  one  remarkable  feature  of  the  saints'  rest  and  glory 
— "  And  that  they  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city."  AH  are  struck,  I 
suppose,  by  this  thought.  '•  Paradise  Lost  "  was  a  garden,  '•  Paradise  Kegained  " 
is  a  city.  Paradise  lost  was  symbolised  by  a  garden,  destitute  of  aU  the  disciplinary 
influences  of  the  life  of  contradicting  wills  and  conflicting  interests.  God  was 
there ;  but  it  was  as  the  God  of  Nature  and  Providence,  not  as  the  God  of  Com- 
passion, the  God  of  Revelation,  or  the  God  of  Grace.  Paradise  regained  is  a  city, 
even  though  it  still  has  its  river  and  its  foliage,  its  spacious  expanse,  and  its 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  749 

beautiful  scenery;  it  is  the  Great  City,  the  Holy  City.  This  last  book  of  the  Bible, 
and  one  other  book — the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews — have  the  privilege  of  so  designa- 
ting it ;  but  the  idea  is  in  all  the  Epistles  and  in  all  the  Gospels.  Heaven  is  no 
place  of  luxurious  repose — no  state  of  delicious  communing  with  a  God  who  knows 
only  the  self-man,  and  the  spirit  that  is  within  him.  Heaven  is  a  society,  a 
community,  and  a  polity.  Its  life  is  two-sided — it  is  a  life  Godward,  and  it  is  a 
life  manward  ;  it  is  a  life  of  direct  access,  and  it  is  a  life  of  boundless  love.  Into 
that  city  they  who  have  here  constantly,  and  at  last  perfectly,  washed  their  robes 
shall  find  themselves,  entering  by  no  narrow  or  secret  postern,  but,  as  it  is  here 
written,  by  the  gates,  through  those  wide  and  splendid  portals,  as  the  Greek 
expression  has  it,  opening  of  their  own  accord  to  receive  them,  of  which  it  is 
written  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  record  that  at  each  one  stands  a  ministering 
angel ;  and  again,  that  the  gates  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day,  and  day  only 
need  be  spoken  of,  for  "  There  shall  be  no  night  there."  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The 
last  beatitude  of  the  ascended  Christ: — The  Revised  Version  reads:  "Blessed  are 
they  that  wash  their  robes,  that  they  may  have  the  right  to  come  to  the  tree  of 
life."  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  this  reading  is  the  correct  one. 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  do  His  commandments,  that  they  might  have  right  to  the 
tree  of  life,"  carries  us  back  to  the  old  law,  and  has  no  more  hopeful  a  sound  in  it 
than  the  thunders  of  Sinai.  *'  Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes,  that  they 
may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,"  has  the  clear  ring  of  the  New  Testament  music 
about  it,  and  is  in  full  accord  with  the  whole  type  of  doctrine  that  runs  through 
this  book ;  and  is  not  unworthy  to  be  almost  the  last  word  that  the  lips  of  the 
Incarnate  Wisdom  spoke  to  men  from  heaven.  I.  If  we  abb  clean  it  is  bkcadse 
WE  HAVE  BEEN  MADE  SO.  The  first  bcuediction  that  Jesus  Christ  spoke  from  the 
mountain  was,  "Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit."  The  last  benediction  that  He 
speaks  from  heaven  is,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes."  And  the  act 
commended  in  the  last  is  but  the  outcome  of  the  spirit  extolled  in  the  first.  For 
they  who  are  poor  in  spirit  are  such  as  know  themselves  to  be  sinful  men ;  and 
those  who  know  themselves  to  be  sinful  men  are  they  who  will  cleanse  their  robes 
in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  II.  These  cleansed  ones,  and  by  implication  these 
ONLY,  HAVE  unbestrained  ACCESS  TO  THE  SOURCE  OF  LIFE.  The  tree  of  life  stands 
as  the  symbol  here  of  an  external  source.  I  take  "  life  "  to  be  used  here  in  what 
I  believe  to  be  its  predominant  New  Testament  meaning,  not  bare  continuance  in 
existence,  but  a  full  ideal  perfection  and  activity  of  all  the  faculties  and  possibilities 
of  the  man,  which  this  very  apostle  himself  identifies  with  the  knowledge  of  God 
and  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  that  life,  says  John,  has  an  external  source  in  heaven 
as  on  earth.  And  the  source  is  "  the  tree  of  life."  They  that  wash  their  robes 
have  the  right  of  unrestrained  access  to  Him  in  whose  presence,  in  that  loftier 
state,  no  impurity  can  live.  The  tree  of  life,  according  to  some  of  the  old  Babbinical 
legends,  the  tree  of  life  lifted  its  branches,  by  an  indwelling  motion,  high  above 
impure  hands  that  were  stretched  to  touch  them,  and  until  our  hands  are  cleansed 
through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  its  richest  fruit  hangs  unreachable,  golden,  above 
our  heads.  Oh,  the  fulness  of  the  life  of  heaven  is  only  granted  to  them  who, 
drawing  near  Jesus  Christ  by  faith  on  earth,  have  thereby  cleansed  themselves 
from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit.  III.  Those  who  abe  cleansed,  and  they 
ONLY,  HAVE  THE  ENTBANCE  INTO  THE  SOCIETY  OP  THE  CITY.  The  city  is  the  emblem 
of  security  and  of  permanence.  No  more  shall  life  be  as  a  desert  march,  with 
changes  which  only  bring  sorrow,  and  yet  a  dreary  monotony  amidst  them  all. 
We  shall  dwell  amid  abiding  realities,  ourselves  fixed  in  unchanging  but  ever- 
growing completeness  and  peace.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  And  may  enter  in 
through  the  gates  into  the  city. — Heaven-gate ;  or,  the  passage  to  Paradise  : — I. 
The  MOTION.  "  Enter  in."  They  are  blessed  that  enter  in.  Perseverance  only 
makes  happy.  Some  came  into  the  vineyard  in  the  morning,  some  at  noon,  others 
later  ;  none  received  the  penny  but  they  that  stayed  till  night.  Indeed,  this  grace 
perfects  all  graces.  We  believe  in  vain  if  our  faith  hold  not  out  to  the  end.  We 
love  in  vain  if  our  charity  grow  cold  at  last.  We  pray  in  vain  if  our  zeal  grows 
faint.  We  strive  in  vain  at  the  strait  gate  if  not  till  we  enter.  Man  is  naturally 
like  a  horse  that  loveth  short  journeys  ;  and  there  are  few  that  hold  out.  Whence 
it  comes  that  the  last  are  often  first,  and  the  first  last.  But  he  that  at  every  step 
looks  at  every  stop,  and  numbers  his  perils  with  his  paces,  either  turns  aside 
faintly,  or  turns  back  cowardly.  Thou  walkest  every  day  little  or  much.  Con- 
tinue this  walk  forward  thy  way,  and  a  few  days  shall  bring  thee  to  Olympus. 
Every  day  every  man  takes  some  pains  ;  let  him  bestow  that  measure  of  pains  in 


750  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

travelling  to  heaven  ;  and  the  further  he  goes  the  more  heart  he  gets,  till  at  last  he 
•' enter  through  the  gates  into  the  city."  II.  The  manner.  "Through  the  gates." 
Not  singularly  a  gate,  but  gates.  For  chap.  xxi.  12  the  city  is  said  to  have  twelve 
jgates.  "  On  the  east  three  gates,"  &c.  To  declare  that  men  shall  come  from  all 
Ihe  corners  of  the  world  :  "from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  from  the  north  and 
from  the  south,  and  shall  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  These  gates  are  not 
literally  to  be  understood,  but  mystically,  for  the  manner  of  entrance.  The  gates 
are  those  passages  whereby  we  must  enter  this  city.  Heaven  is  often  said  to  have 
a  gate  (Matt.  vii.  13 ;  Psa.  xxiv.  7 ;  Gen.  xxviii.  17).  There  must  be  gates  to  a 
city.  Doing  the  commandments  is  the  way  to  have  right  in  the  tree  of  life. 
Obedience  and  sanctification  is  the  gate  to  this  city  of  salutation.  The  temple 
had  a  gate  called  Beautiful  (Acts  iii.).  But  of  poor  beauty  in  regard  of  this  gate. 
Of  the  gates  of  the  sanctuary  spake  David  in  diverse  Psalms,  with  love  and  joy. 
*'  Enter  into  His  gates  with  thanksgiving  and  into  His  courts  with  praise."  These 
are  holy  gates  ;  let  every  one  pray  with  that  royal  prophet,  "  Open  to  me  the  gates 
of  righteousness ;  I  will  go  into  them,  and  I  will  praise  the  Lord.  This  is  the 
gate  of  the  Lord,  into  which  the  righteous  shall  enter."  In  brief,  we  may  distinguish 
Sie  gates  leading  to  this  city  into  two — Adoption  and  Sanctification.  Both  these 
meet  in  Christ,  who  is  the  only  Gate  or  Door  whereby  we  enter  heaven.  IH.  Thb 
CITY.  1.  The  situation.  "  It  is  placed  above  "  (Gal.  iv.  26).  "  Heaven  is  in 
excelsii  "  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  1).  2.  The  society.  The  King  that  rules  there  is  one 
Almighty  God  in  three  distinct  persons.  He  made  this  city  for  Himself  (Psa.  xvi. 
11).  And  we  have  three  happy  privileges  of  citizens.  (1)  Freedom  from  the  law. 
Not  from  obedience  to  it,  but  from  the  curse  of  it.  (2)  The  King's  protection 
(Psa.  xci.  4,  11).  Our  dangers  are  many  in  some  places,  and  some  in  all  places. 
We  have  God's  own  guard  royal  to  keep  us  (Heb.  i.  14).  (3)  The  defensive  pro- 
tection of  the  Law.  Christ  is  our  Advocate.  3.  The  glory.  Heaven  shall  make 
them  that  enter  it  like  itself — glorious.  As  the  air  by  the  sun's  brightness  is 
transformed  bright.  How  great  is  that  blessedness,  where  shall  be  no  evil  present, 
no  good  absent !  This  is  a  blessed  city.  (T.  Adams.)  The  way  to  the  city  of 
Qod  : — What  is  the  deepest  thought  in  every  bosom  ?  Money  ?  No.  Rising  in 
the  world?  No.  Pleasure?  No.  Ease  and  comfort?  No.  Health?  No.  Long 
life  ?  No.  It  is  that  they  may  at  last  "  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city." 
I.  The  condition  of  enterino  the  heavenly  city.  The  doing  His — Christ's — 
commandments.  Is  salvation  earned,  then,  by  our  works?  Thank  God,  no. 
"  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,"  &c.  Yet  it  is  expressly  said 
here  that  those  who  "  do  His  commandments  have  a  right,"  &c.  The  key  to  this 
is  iound  in  St.  James.  A  man  is  justified  "by  works  and  not  by  faith  only." 
Faith  is  another  word  for  love.  It  means  in  Scripture  as  in  common  life — trust, 
confidence — and  this  trust  and  confidence  are,  in  religion,  the  outcome  of  love. 
But  what  will  not  love  do  for  its  loved  one  ?  Love  is  tiie  surrender  of  the  whole 
man  to  its  object — the  will,  heart,  life.  Works  are  the  evidences  of  it ;  its 
necessary  results.  Works  do  not  save  us,  but  we  cannot  be  saved  without  them. 
n.  The  security  of  those  who  fulfil  that  condition.  They  have  a  right.  1. 
By  the  merit  of  their  works  ?  Nay,  verily.  Best  men  most  conscious  of  short- 
coming. As  the  morning  star  is  black  when  it  passes  over  the  disk  of  the  sun,  so 
the  holiness  of  the  best  of  men  is  only  darkness  when  seen  in  the  splendour  of  the 
holiness  of  God.  2.  But  as  a  proof  of  their  sincerity.  That  shown,  the  perfect 
merits  of  Christ  are  theirs.  The  right  is  that  of  Christ,  transferred  to  them,  as 
His.  "  We  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  III.  Some  reflections 
AND  cautions.  1.  Twclve  gates,  facing  all  sides.  Christianity  is  a  religion  for  all 
mankind.  The  gates  of  heaven  face  us  wherever  we  may  be.  2.  I  must  enter 
through  the  gate.  No  other  name  but  the  name  of  Christ.  3.  Those  who  do  so 
are  "blessed."  (1)  They  are  blessed.  In  the  formation  of  a  heavenly  character. 
The  perfect  peace  of  a  heart  raised  above  passing  disturbance.  (2)  They  will  be 
blessed  in  their  destiny.  "  Beloved,  now  are  ye  sons,"  <fec.  Heaven  entering  us, 
before  we,  it.  4.  To  enter,  we  must  hold  out  to  the  end.  (1)  Only  safe  when  we 
have  finished  our  course.  The  Eurydice  sank  virithin  a  few  yards  of  shore.  (2) 
No  reward  till  the  work  is  done.  Bunyan  has  a  trap-door  close  to  the  gate  of  heaven. 
{J.  Cunningham  Geikie,  D.D.)  The  rightful  entrance  into  the  city  of  God : — 
1.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  read  this  emphatic  description  of  the  passage 
of  the  saints  through  the  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem  without  going  back 
to  the  same  imagery  as  employed  by  Christ  with  regard  to  Himself  (John 
X.    1,    2).      In    both   places   the   general   idea  is   the   same — that  of    an    open 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  751 

and  free  entrance,  as  opposed  to  a  stealing  in  unlawfully,  unobserved,  and 
unwarranted.  In  both  cases  there  may  be  a  reference  to  Christ  as  the  Door,  it 
being  through  Him  that  admission  is  gained  into  the  ministry  of  God  here,  and 
through  Him  alone  entrance  is  won  into  the  city  of  God  hereafter ;  the  leading 
impression,  however,  conveyed  by  the  words  is  that  of  an  unopposed  entrance,  like 
that  of  citi2sens  possessed  of  undoubted  rights,  into  the  high  places  of  the  town. 
False  religions  make  man  the  anxious  suppliant  of  a  Supreme  Being  with  whom  he 
has  no  aflBnity ;  Christianity  represents  him  as  in  covenant  with  and  allied  to  the 
Hearer  of  his  prayers,  the  Object  of  his  worship.  *'  Through  the  gates  into  the 
city."  There  may  be  and  will  be  the  constant  sense  of  duties  left  undone,  of  sins 
committed  unworthy  of  a  son  of  God,  of  feeble  essays  after  holiness,  falling  short — 
ah,  how  short ! — of  what  might  be ;  but  if  only  the  conscience  witness  to  an  earnest 
desire  to  do  God's  will,  there  will  still  be  the  high  heart  of  one  who,  in  covenant 
with  God,  sees  already  his  own  nature  on  God's  throne,  and  his  own  passage  open, 
when  his  work  is  done,  through  the  opened  gates  into  the  very  citadel  of  the  eternal 
city.  n.  He  who  would  enter  heaven  must  enter  in  through  the  door.  There  is  a 
certain  fixed  and  definite  means  of  access.  By  this  and  no  other  we  look  for 
admission.  Now,  here  again  we  arrive  at  a  special  characteristic  of  Christianity. 
From  the  very  beginning  it  manifested  itself  a  thing  of  order,  rule,  system.  Now 
there  is  in  this  both  an  argument  and  a  lesson.  In  the  quiet,  unperturbed,  self- 
restraining  order  in  which  it  commenced,  the  gospel  vindicates  to  itself  a  Divine 
origin.  Herein  it  shows  itself  to  be,  not  the  offspring  of  man's  enthusiasm,  but  of 
that  same  Divine  mind  which,  in  the  silence  of  eternity,  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
round  world,  and  set  the  waters  their  bound  which  they  should  not  pass.  The 
visible  universe  and  the  faith  of  Christ  are  equal  exemplifications  of  order  and  law. 
And  there  is  a  lesson  also  here.  If  we  would  be  Christians  indeed,  if  we  would 
attain  the  holiness  here  and  happiness  hereafter  which  are  the  heritage  of  Christ's 
followers,  then  must  we  be  content  to  go  on  patiently,  as  they  went  of  old,  through 
the  round  of  religious  discipline  and  religious  ordinances.  {Bp.  Woodford.) 
Without  axe  dogs, — Dogs : — There  are  four  kinds  of  dogs.  There  is  first  the  cynic. 
The  cynic,  whose  very  name  means  "  dog,"  snarls  out  his  sneer  at  the  brave  man 
who  risks  his  hfe  for  another,  and  says  he  only  wanted  to  be  praised  in  the  news- 
papers or  get  the  Humane  Society's  medal.  For  he  has  no  beUef  in  generosity,  or 
enthusiasm,  or  unselfishness,  or  truth,  or  honour,  and  only  scoffs  at  the  earnest 
souls  that  have.  The  second  dog  is  the  puppy.  This  is  the  dog  that  can  neither 
talk  nor  think  of  anybody  or  anything  but  himself,  who  dresses  flashily  and  curls 
his  hair.  He  is  called  a  puppy  because  he  is  blind,  and  because  he  pushes  himself 
into  places  where  he  has  no  right  to  be.  The  puppy  is  more  dangerous  than  you 
would  expect,  for  he  can  snarl  when  he  has  a  smaller  dog  to  deal  with,  and  even 
bite  when  no  one  is  looking.  The  third  is  the  jolly  dog.  The  joUy  dog  is  good- 
natured,  with  a  loud,  cheery  voice,  and  offhand,  pleasant  manner.  He  is  called 
"  good  company,"  but  he  is  somewhat  low  company.  He  is  seen  sometimes  coming 
out  of  the  pubUc-house,  and  that  grows  more  frequent.  Then  he  loses  his  respec- 
tability and  his  good-nature  together,  and  the  true  heart  of  him,  which  is  hoUow 
and  hard,  begins  to  appear.  Beware  of  the  jolly  dog.  The  last  dog  is  the  sly  dog. 
The  jolly  dog  likes  to  be  called  a  sly  dog,  now  and  then,  but  he  is  not  the  genuine 
article.  He  is  too  easy  for  that.  The  sly  dog  will  put  himself  to  any  amount  of 
inconvenience,  and  bide  his  time  with  the  greatest  patience,  that  he  may  overreach 
you  and  gain  his  end  at  the  last.  He  is  always  plotting.  He  has  his  own  ends  to 
serve  always.  Untrustworthy  himself,  he  is  always  mistrustful  of  others.  He  is  a 
cynic  without  showing  it,  as  heartless  and  much  more  clever  and  cruel.  What  do 
people  mean  when  they  say  of  a  lad,  that  he  "  has  gone  to  the  dogs  "  ?  They  mean 
that  he  has  become  the  lawful  prey  of  one  or  more  of  these.  {Prof.  Shuttleworth.) 
Whosoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie. — Truthfulness  : — '•  There  is  no  vice,"  writes 
Lord  Bacon  in  his  celebrated  essay,  "  Of  Truth,"  "  that  doth  so  cover  a  man  with 
shame,  as  to  be  found  false,  and  perfidious.  And  therefore  Mountaigny  saith  prettily, 
when  he  inquired  the  reason,  why  the  word  of  the  lie  should  be  such  a  disgrace  and 
such  an  odious  charge  ?  Saith  he,  If  it  be  well  weighed,  to  say  that  a  man  lieth,  is 
as  much  as  to  say,  that  he  is  brave  towards  God,  and  a  coward  towards  men.  For 
a  he  faces  God,  and  shrinks  from  man."  Lying  is  thus  a  kind  of  atheistical 
bravery ;  the  practical  acting  up  to  the  disbelief  that  God  either  hears,  or  will 
punish,  the  falsities  of  men  on  the  earth.  But  there  are  other  causes  of  lying 
besides  spiritual  cowardice  and  practical  disbelief  in  God.  There  is,  as  Lord  Bacon 
also  says,  "  the  natural  love  of  lies."    These  abandoned  liars,  who  make  lies  because 


752  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

thej  love  them,  are  the  basest  and  most  corrupt  of  their  species.  But  there  are 
many  other  species  of  liars,  base  enough  indeed,  yet  not  so  base  and  lost  as  these. 
The  liar  who  makes  a  lie  because  he  loves  it  will  lie  without  the  incentive  of  temp- 
tation, whereas  temptation  is  necessary  to  induce  less  corrupt  persons  to  lie.  Such 
temptations  come,  I  imagine,  at  one  time  or  another,  in  the  course  of  every  human 
life.  Probably  every  human  life  when  it  reaches  the  stage  of  moral  consciousness 
is,  sooner  or  later,  tempted  to  be  false  ;  false  either  in  word  or  action.  1.  Dread  is 
a  very  common  cause  of  untruthfulness.  When  children,  &.g.,  tell  a  lie,  either 
surprise  or  fear  is  frequently  the  cause.  Parents  are  often  responsible  for  the 
falsehoods  of  their  children.  Terror  and  subjugation  are  essentially  hostile  to 
I  truth.  Slaves  are  nearly  always  liars ;  and  children  nursed  in  terror  are  like  slaves 
in  this  respect — their  minds  grow  shrewd,  but  they  grow  shifty  also ;  and  shiftiness 
!  is  destructive  of  veracity.  Terror  of  wrong-doing  is  healthy ;  but  personal  terror  is 
poisonous.  The  dre^d,  however,  which  is  prolific  of  falsehood  is  not  always  a 
personal  dread ;  it  is  equally  often  a  dread  of  consequences.  A  lie  rarely  stands 
alone,  singly,  by  itself.  The  first  lie  engenders  fear,  and  as  a  result  of  fear,  other 
lies  are  told  ;  and  as  the  process  is  repeated,  the  conscience  grows  accustomed  to  a 
deadening  familiarity  with  falsehood  ;  the  power  to  resist  temptation  is  enfeebled  ; 
dread  is  added  to  dread ;  and  under  the  accumulations  of  dread  the  sense  of  truth 
at  length  entirely  disappears.  Dread,  too,  sometimes  arises  not  from  the  commission 
of  our  own  past  transgressions,  but  from  the  danger  of  compromising  others,  or  of 
incurring  serious  loss.  You  are  (let  us  say)  suddenly  asked  some  question  about 
another.  If  you  answer  truthfully  it  will  be  to  the  damage  of  the  other.  If  you  do 
not  answer  at  all  you  know  that  suspicion  (suspicion  worse,  perhaps,  than  the 
actual  truth)  will  be  inflamed  in  the  mind  of  the  inquirer.  What  are  you  to  do  ? 
The  case  is  a  hard  one.  You  have  to  make  choice  between  evils.  In  this  way,  I 
believe,  inquisitiveness  is  indirectly  responsible  for,  and  guilty  of,  a  great  deal  of 
lying.  The  case  is  otherwise  when  the  dread  is,  not  of  injuring  others,  but  of 
incurring  loss  oneself.  Falsehood  in  protecting  others  is  at  least  generous  falsehood ; 
but  falsehood  in  protecting  ourselves  is  cowardly.  Whatever,  therefore,  be  the 
inconvenience,  or  even  the  loss,  arising  from  the  habit  of  severe  and  precise  truth- 
fulness ;  yet  out  of  regard  for  the  god-like  inviolability  of  truth,  and  through  a 
righteous  shrinking  from  the  very  appearance  of  falsehood,  we  ought  to  guard 
against  any  deviation,  however  slight,  from  the  strictness  of  truth  ourselves ;  and 
much  more  against  imposing  upon  others  any  such  deviations  in  our  behalf.  2. 
We  now  pass  to  a  second  common  cause  of  untruthfulness,  viz.,  the  vanity  or  the 
desire  to  appear  well  in  the  eyes  of  others.  This  desire  often  springs  from  a  very 
pure  and  noble  source.  For  that  man  is  either  callous  or  degraded  who  is  indifferent 
to  the  opinions  of  his  fellow-men.  The  desire  to  stand  well  in  the  sight  of  others  is 
one  of  the  strongest  and  highest  incentives  to  do  well  ourselves ;  and  on  the  other 
hand,  the  dread  of  the  loss  of  the  esteem  of  our  fellow-men  is  a  noble  dread,  which 
often  keeps  us  from  doing  wrong ;  and  when  we  have  done  wrong  the  penalty  of 
the  loss  of  human  esteem  is  one  among  the  keenest  penalties  which  sensitive  souls 
are  called  upon  to  endure.  When,  therefore,  we  speak  of  the  desire  to  appear  well 
in  the  eyes  of  others  as  a  common  cause  of  untruthfulness,  we  speak  of  the  corrup- 
tion of  a  desire  which,  in  its  original  essence,  is  noble  and  inspiring.  Yet  how 
general  and  widespread  this  corruption  is  I  So  widespread  and  general,  indeed, 
that  it  is  very  rare  to  hear  any  one  give  an  account  of  a  transaction  in  which  them- 
selves have  been  engaged  with  perfect  fidelity  to  truth.  If  the  transaction  is 
unworthy,  or  has  not  succeeded,  they  minish,  or  pass  lightly  over,  their  own  share 
in  it.  If  the  transaction  has  been  successful,  or  merits  praise,  immediately  their 
own  share  in  it  grows  eminently  conspicuous.  3.  There  remains  a  third  common 
cause  of  untruthfulness,  viz.,  the  desire  for  advantage  or  gain.  Of  this  sordid  class 
are  all  trading  and  commercial  untruths ;  all  concealing  of  defects,  all  misrepre- 
sentations and  misleadings,  all  false  measures  and  false  weights,  all  unjust  prices 
and  balances.  Of  this  sordid  class  also  are  all  political  untruths ;  untruths  told  to 
injure  a  political  antagonist  or  to  advance  a  political  cause.  It  is  sometimes 
contended  that  tricks  are  necessary  in  trade  ;  and  that  politics  have  no  indissoluble 
connection  with  morals.  Such  a  contention  is  the  abnegation  of  all  Christian 
ideals ;  of  all  practical  belief  in  a  God  of  superintending  righteousness  and  truth. 
And  every  untruth,  whether  in  word  or  act,  is  a  nail  in  the  cofi&n  of  life,  eternal 
life.  Let  us  now  pass  to  the  consideration  of  the  remarkable  circumstance  that 
persons  greatly  differ  in  regard  to  truthfulness ;  some  being  very  strong  and  others 
very  weak  in  this  respect.     This  difference  appears  to  be  mainly  attributable  to  two 


CHAP.  XXII.  REVELATION.  753 

principal  causes :  (1)  the  moral  nature  of  the  person,  (2)  the  moral  character  of  the 
person's  environment.  In  the  interests  of  veracity,  nothing  can  be  more  important 
than  to  make  hard  the  way  of  the  liar,  and  to  make  easy  the  way  of  the  truth-teller. 
If  you,  e.g.,  have  children,  pass  lightly  over  misfortunes  and  accidents,  such  as  the 
breaking  of  cups  and  the  tearing  of  clothes  ;  but  spare  not  the  rod  when  a  lie  has 
been  told  ;  only  make  the  punishment  easier  in  proportion  to  the  readiness  with 
which  the  lie  is  confessed.  For  next  to  truthfulness,  in  the  order  of  virtue,  comes 
the  confession  of  untruthfulness.  The  brave  confession  of  a  fault  is  the  best  of  all 
safeguards  against  the  repetition  of  the  fault.     (Canon  Diggle.) 

Vers.  16-21. 1,  Jesus,  have  sent  Mine  ang-el. — Our  Lord's  angel : — Would  our  Lord 
say  this  of  any  angel  of  the  Lord,  because  "  all  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  His  "  ? 
Or  has  our  Lord,  as  man,  an  angel  of  His  own  in  the  same  way  that  His  saints 
have  ?  St.  Luke  xxii.  43  seems  as  if  He  needed  and  had,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh, 
such  angelic  guardianship  as  is  implied  in  St.  Matt,  xviii.  10 ;  and  this  passage  is 
at  least  consistent  with  the  view  that  His  angel  appears  in  His  form,  as  St.  Peter's 
was  supposed  to  do  (Acts  xii.  15).  It  is  very  ably  argued  by  St.  Augustine  [de  Curapro 
Mortuis)  that  if  any  apparitions  after  death  or  at  the  moment  of  death  are  really 
objective  and  supernatural  they  must  be  ascribed  to  angels,  not  to  the  spirits  of 
the  dead.  But  we  must  remember  that  our  Lord's  state  is  not  the  same  as 
that  of  His  departed  servants.  He  is  already  in  the  body  of  the  resurrec- 
tion, and  so  conceivably  visible.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  He  appeared 
in  His  own  risen  body  to  St.  Paul,  and  probably  to  St.  Stephen.  It  may  be, 
therefore,  that  He  now  appears  personally  to  St.  John,  at  once  superseding 
and  authenticating  the  previous  ministry  of  the  angel.  [W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.) 
I  am  the  root  and  the  offspring  of  David,  and  the  bright  and  morning  star. — 
The  Root  and  Offspring  of  David : — I.  This  title  implies  the  entire  identifica- 
tion OF  Christ  with  humanity.  The  certainty  of  final  triumph  for  humanity  rests 
on  the  fact  of  its  vital  union  with  Christ.  II.  The  title  connects  Him  with  the 
STREAM  OF  HUMAN  HISTORY.  A  mysterious  consciousness  belonged  to  many  of  the 
members  of  His  house  and  line.  Some  of  them  were  prophets,  and  from  them 
sounded  out  on  the  youth  of  the  world  sayings  pregnant  with  distant  meaning. 
They  themselves  were  types,  signs,  representatives  of  Christ,  until  He  Himself 
should  appear.  III.  The  title  establishes  a  unity  in  the  history  of  the  jewish 
NATION.  Since,  in  the  Divine  counsels,  it  had  been  determined  that  the  Eedeemer 
should  arise  out  of  the  bosom  of  humanity,  some  line  must  be  necessarily  selected 
as  that  of  His  descent.  The  line  is  that  of  the  royal  David,  and  this  is  the  clue  by 
which  to  traverse  the  maze  of  the  world's  history  until  the  incarnation.     IV.  The 

TITLE    embodies    A    REFERENCE     TO    THE    KINGLY    OFFICE    OF    ChRIST.       The    faVOUritC 

representation  of  the  prophets  is  that  of  the  King,  whose  reign  shall  be  in  peace, 
in  truth,  in  equity,  in  righteousness  for  ever  and  ever  (Psa.  Ixxii ;  Isa.  ii.  4, 
xlii.  1-4 ,  lii.  13-15,    Ix ;  Dan.  ii.  44,   vii.  13,  14 ;  Micah  v.  1-4).     V.  The  title 

ALLUDES  TO  THE  VIGOROUS  GROWTH  AND  SURPASSING  GREATNESS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF 

Christ.  The  word  "  root "  evidently  refers  to  the  prophecy  in  Isa.  i.  1-10  (see 
also  Isa.  iv.  2  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  Zech.  iii.  8  ;  vi.  12).  Not  the  actual  root  of  the  tree  is 
meant,  but  the  scion  or  sucker,  which  sprouts  from  the  decaying  root.  At  the  advent 
of  the  Saviour  the  kingdom  of  David  was  indeed  like  the  fallen  trunk  of  a  noble 
tree.  A  foreign  people  treads  on  Judea's  soil,  and  bows  a  once  powerful  nation  beneath 
its  yoke.  Yet  behold  the  vigorous  sprout  which  comes  forth  out  of  this  decayed  root ! 
(E.  Johnson,  B.A .)  The  bright  and  morning  star. — The  bright  and  morning  star : — 
Stars  shine  in  the  darkness.  When  there  is  no  other  light  their  brightness  and 
beauty  cheer  us.  The  stars  have  always  been  recognised  to  be  among  the  loveliest 
of  nature's  beauties.  When  men  have  sought  for  the  fairest  ornaments  to  adorn 
the  brows  of  queens  and  stately  ladies,  they  have  tried  to  make  for  them  stars 
of  gold  or  gleaming  diamonds.  And  by  their  steady  laws,  their  regulated  move- 
ments, the  stars  act  as  our  guides.  Have  you  ever  thought,  moreover,  how  wonder- 
ful is  the  revelation  given  to  us  by  the  stars  ?  If  the  cloud  had  never  cleared,  if 
men  had  never  seen  those  lights  shining  in  the  far-away  distance,  how  narrow 
would  our  ideas  have  remained !  So  as  we  watch  the  morning  star  in  the  pale 
eastern  sky  there  comes  over  us  a  sense  of  gladness  in  its  beauty,  of  wonder  and 
awe  at  the  magnificent  stellar  system  to  which  it  belongs,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
sense  of  joyful  hope  in  its  prophecy  that  the  darkness  is  passing  and  the  day  about 
to  dawn.  And  "  I  am,"  says  the  Saviour  of  the  world—"  I  am  the  Bright  and 
Morning  Star."     I.  We  might  think  of  the  precious  knowledge  diffused  by  Chiisv's 

48 


754  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

gospel  through  the  world ;  we  might  think  of  the  ideal  of  life  presented  by  the  life 
of  Christ — the  ideal  of  a  life  meek  and  lowly,  loving  and  tender,  gentle  and  self- 
sacrificing,  and  yet  brave  with  unflinching  courage,  generous  with  noble  self- 
sacrifice.  But  as  our  thoughts  at  Christmas  rather  turn  to  our  homes,  we  may  try 
to  see  how  Christ  is  there  "  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star."  The  Christ-light  in  the 
home  alone  can  make  it  happy.  The  Christ-light,  the  Lord  Himself  honoured,  the 
influence  of  His  wishes  felt,  the  restraining  power  of  His  teaching  moulding  the 
character ;  tempers  subdued  for  His  sake,  self-will  controlled,  self-conceit  kept 
down  with  a  strong  hand,  angry  and  harsh-judging  words  silenced,  mutual  bearing 
and  forbearing,  kindness,  courtesy,  consideration  for  others,  proceeding  from 
thought  of  Christ  and  wish  to  do  His  wiU ;  these  are  the  things  that  make  the 
home  bright.  Even  one  person  in  a  household,  thoroughly  influenced  by  the 
love  of  Christ,  and  walking  in  the  light  of  His  presence,  will  bring  wonderful 
brightness  to  a  whole  family.  They  hardly  know  what  makes  home  so  pleasant. 
What  is  it  ?  It  is  the  light  from  "  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star."  It  glistens  in 
the  kind  eyes  and  pleasant  countenance  of  a  humble  follower  of  Jesus;  and 
suUenness,  gloom,  and  ill-humour  flee  before  it  like  shadows  before  the  breaking 
day.  But  homes  are  sometimes  darkened  by  causes  over  which  we  seem  to  have 
less  control — by  poverty,  sickness,  anxiety,  sorrow.  And  the  greeting  of  "  Happy 
Christmas"  sometimes  comes  with  a  bitter  sense  of  unreality  to  those  who  know 
that  food  is  scanty,  or  the  hearth  dark  and  lonely.  Still,  there  is  a  power  that 
brings  cheer  to  the  poor  man's  board,  and  comfort  to  the  mourner's  sorrow.  When 
" the  Morning  Star  "  shines  in  the  heart,  those  words  are  often  thought  of,  "I  was 
hungry,  and  ye  fed  Me ;  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  Me  drink ;  sick  and  in  prison,  and  ye 
visited  Me."  And  so  Christian  charity,  Christian  kindness.  Christian  sympathy, 
passes  on  the  light  of  Christ  from  home  to  home.  H.  And  then  our  second  thought 
of  heavenly  joy  appHes  here.  If  there  is  a  sorrow  too  deep  to  be  reached  by 
human  kindness,  it  is  not  too  deep  to  be  reached  by  the  Ught  of  the  "  Morning  Star." 
The  revelation  of  the  great  unseen  realities — is  not  this  the  true  Light  for  a 
shadowed  home  ?  A  Father  in  heaven  who  cares  and  loves,  a  Saviour  acquainted 
with  grief,  a  kind  Providence  which  will  make  all  work  together  for  good — is  not 
this  revelation  like  the  opening  of  the  shutters  of  a  darkened  chamber,  so  that 
there  streams  in  the  light  of  the  Morning  Star — the  harbinger  of  day  ?  HI.  And 
this  brings  us  to  our  last  thought,  the  "  Morning  Star"  is  a  star  of  heavenly  hope. 
There  are  many  young  and  happy  hearts  at  Christmastide.  But  among  them  all 
there  are  few  that  have  not  felt  the  chill  of  disappointment,  the  shadow  of  doubt 
and  uncertainty  from  the  mystery  of  life,  the  solemn  darkness  of  self-reproach  and 
an  accusing  conscience.  The  soul  is  getting  farther  away  from  God.  Ideas  have 
been  entertained,  habits  have  been  allowed  to  grow  that  have  made  the  gap  wider 
and  wider  between  daUy  life  and  the  aspirations  after  goodness  that  Were  once  felt. 
The  soul  is  in  darkness.  Yes,  say  what  we  wHl,  the  soul  must  be  dark  if  it  is 
without  God.  Show  me  a  man  who  does  not  know  God,  who  does  not  care  for 
God,  who  does  not  trust  and  honour  the  infinite  Lord,  and  I  can  tell  you  that  what- 
ever be  his  outward  circumstances,  his  spirit  is  in  awful  darkness.  On  Christmas 
Day,  let  any  such  listen  to  the  words  of  Jesus — '*  I  am  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star." 
Let  that  Day  Star  from  on  high  arise  and  shine  in  your  heart.  Christ  loves  you,  and 
came  into  the  world  and  lived  and  died  for  you.  Let  His  glory  enlighten  your  soul. 
(Bp.  Wynne.)  Christ  the  morning  star : — The  Lord  speaks  here  in  a  manner  that 
is  all  His  own.  Nothing  is  more  profoundly  characteristic  in  His  words,  from  first 
to  last,  than  His  witness  to  Himself.  He,  the  sacred  exemplar  of  aU  self-denial, 
yet  always  and  immoveably  presents  Himself  in  terms  of  self-assertion,  and  such 
self-assertion  as  must  mean  either  Deity,  however  in  disguise,  or  a  delusion  moral 
as  well  as  mental,  of  infinite  depth.  "  I  am  the  Truth  ;  I  am  the  Life ;  I  am  the 
Bread  of  Life  ;  I  am  the  True  Vine ;  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd."  We  have  but  this 
same  tone,  perfectly  retained,  when,  here  the  same  Voice  speaks  from  anaidst  the 
reahties  of  the  unseen.  The  imagery,  indeed,  is  lifted  to  the  scenery  of  the  firma- 
ment ;  He  who  is  the  genial  Vine  and  the  laborious  Shepherd,  now  also  reveals 
Himself  as  the  Star  of  Stars  in  a  spiritual  sky.  "I  am  the  Star."  For  the 
■  moment  we  will  take  the  text  in  this  briefest  form,  for  it  will  suggest  to  us,  in 
part  at  least,  the  reason  of  the  use  of  the  starry  metaphor  at  aU.  "  I  am  the 
Star";  why  the  Star?  We  .may  be  perfectly  sure  that  the  word,  with  all  its 
radiant  beauty,  is  no  mere  flight  of  fancy.  Prophecy,  not  poetry,  underlies 
these  last  oracles  of  the  Bible.  Balaam  had  heard,  among  "the  words  of  God,"  of 
a  mysterious  Person,  or  at  least  of  a  mysterious  Power,  strong  to  destroy  and  save ; 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  755 

figured  to  his  soul  in  vision  as  a  star,  destined  in  other  days  to  appear  out  of 
Israel ;  and  the  belief  of  the  Jewish  Church,  in  the  lifetime  of  Jesus,  certainly  was 
that  the  Star  of  that  prediction  was  the  King  Messiah.  The  word  indicated, 
probably,  the  royal  dignity,  touched  and  glorified  with  the  light  of  Deity,  or  of 
Divinity  at  least.  As  such  the  Lord  here  takes  it  up.  He  claims  here  to  be  the 
spiritual  and  immortal  King,  the  Conqueror,  beating  down  His  adversaries  and 
possessing  His  redeemed.  This  is  what  appears  in  special  fulness,  in  other  forms, 
in  earlier  passages  of  the  Apocalypse ;  "  the  Lamb "  is  "in  the  midst  of  the 
throne  " ;  the  throne  is  "  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb."  But  now  look 
further  into  the  text.  The  voice  at  Patmos  not  only  claims  the  primeval  prophecy 
for  Jesus,  as  the  King  of  the  new  Israel.  It  expands  that  prophecy,  and  discloses 
truth  within  truth  treasured  there.  For  the  Lord  does  not  only  assert  Himself  to  be 
the  star,  the  bright  star  ;  as  of  course  His  brightness  must  be  surpassing  if  He  is  in 
any  sense  at  all  a  star.  His  own  presentation  of  the  metaphor  has  something  in  it 
new  and  special — "  I  am  the  Morning  Star."  Why  was  not  the  word  "  Star  "  left 
alone  in  the  utterance  ?  In  pointing  to  Messiah  as  the  Star,  were  not  the  ideas  of 
brilliancy,  and  elevation,  and  all  that  is  ethereal,  sufficient  ?  No  ;  it  was  not  to  be 
80.  Messiah  Himself  so  qualifies  the  word  by  this  one  bright  epithet  as  to  show 
Himself  as  not  the  King  merely,  but  the  King  of  Morning  ;  around  whom  gathered, 
and  should  gather  for  ever,  all  that  is  real  in  tenderest  hope  and  youngest 
vigour,  and  most  cheerful  aspiration,  and  such  beginnings,  as  shall  eternally 
develope  and  never  contract  into  fixity  and  decline.  It  reminds  the  disciple  that 
his  blessed  Lord  is  no  mere  name  of  tender  recollection,  no  dear  relic  of  a  perished 
past,  to  be  drawn  sometimes  in  silence  from  its  casket  and  clasped  with  the  aching 
fondjaess  and  sprinkled  with  the  hot  tears,  of  hopeless  memory.  He  is  not 
Hesperus  that  sets,  but  Phosphorus  that  rises,  springing  into  the  sky  through  the 
earliest  dawn  ;  the  pledge  of  reviving  life,  and  growing  light,  and  all  the  energies 
and  all  the  pleasures  of  the  happy  day.  And  the  word  speaks  of  a  kind  of  joy 
for  which  the  open  day  would  not  be  so  true  a  simile.  It  indicates  the  delights  of 
hope  along  with  those  of  fruition ;  a  happiness  in  which  one  of  the  deep  elements 
is  always  the  thought  of  something  yet  to  be  revealed ;  light  with  more  light  to 
follow,  joy  to  develope  into  further  joy,  as  the  dawn  passes  into  the  morning  and 
then  into  the  day.  1.  First,  then,  we  are  reminded  here  that  as  "  His  command- 
ments are  not  grievous,"  so  the  principles  He  gives  to  animate  His  follower  to 
obedience  are  not  melancholy.  The  life  eternal,  the  annihilation  of  the  second 
death,  is  the  knowledge  of  Himself ;  and  to  know  Him  is  to  live  in  light  indeed. 
It  is  to  touch  a  sympathy  boundless  alike  in  its  tenderness  and  its  power ;  it  is  to 
deal  perpetually  and  everywhere  with  One  who  is  not  poetic  legend  but  the  central 
rock  of  History ;  One  who  has  proved  Himself  in  the  fields  of  fact  to  be  a  reality 
for  ever,  and  who  is  exercising  at  this  hour  in  human  experience  a  multiplicity  of 
personal  influence  too  vast  and  too  peculiar  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  mere  memory 
of  departed  power.  He  being  such,  and  such  being  the  knowledge  of  Him,  what  in 
brief  are  His  sacred  principles  for  the  soul  that  seeks  Him  ?  Simply  these  in  their 
essence : — first  to  trust  Him,  then,  to  follow  Him.  2.  And  again,  this  glorious 
epithet  of  the  Star  of  salvation — this  morning- word — reminds  us  that  not  for  a  part 
only  but  for  the  whole  of  the  earthly  course,  early  as  well  as  late,  and  late  as  well  as 
early,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  Light  to  light  every  man.  Not  for  the  sick-man's 
room  only  and  the  dying  bed  is  His  faith  good.  Let  us  thank  God  often  that  it  is 
good  there.  But  this  same  religion  is  not  only  the  last  light  for  dying  eyes.  It  is 
the  star  of  the  morning  of  even  this  lower  life.  There  is  that  in  it  (or  rather  in 
Him  who  is  His  own  religion),  which  is  of  all  things  fittest  to  enter  with  harmonious 
power  into  all  the  confiding  joy  of  childhood,  and  all  the  strongest  aspirations  of 
youthful  thought  and  will.  One  condition  does  the  Lord  propose  to  the  young  soul, 
as  to  all  others — the  condition  of  submission  to  Himself.  And  where  that  condi- 
tion is,  through  grace,  in  its  true  sense,  accepted,  there  will  there  be  found  to  develop 
within  the  life  an  influence  essentially  of  strength  and  gladness ;  an  assurance  of  a 
companionship  most  tender  because  Divine ;  of  a  sympathy  meeting  every  true  need 
of  grief  or  of  happiness ;  of  a  wisdom  which  concerns  itself  with  every  detail  of 
every  day ;  of  an  affection  to  which  the  best  endearments  of  earth  can  but  point 
as  to  their  glorious  archetype ;  and,  above  all  this  and  with  it  all,  the  power  of  the 
presence  of  an  invisible  but  awful  purity,  and  the  spoken  promise,  in  connection 
with  that  presence,  of  a  final  life  of  endless  joy.  3.  In  a  few  short  years  there  may, 
there  must,  come  over  you  the  sense  of  approaching  maturity  and  fixity  as  to 
earthly  conditions  of  life  and  action.     You  must  find,  soon    or   late,  as  to    this 


756  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

world,  that  your  rate  of  movement  in  vigour  and  enjoyment  is  no  longer,  in 
itself,  what  once  it  was.  But  if  Christ  dwells  in  your  heart  by  faith,  there  will 
be  a  charm  there  which  will  not  only  console  you  under  the  change,  but  will  glorify 
it  to  you.  As  eternity  approaches,  you  will  more  distinctly  see  the  connection 
between  it  and  time.  The  appointed  task,  even  under  the  burthen  of  the  slow 
failure  of  outward  power,  will  be  met  by  you  as  those  only  can  meet  it  who 
know  that  these  things  are  links  in  the  indissoluble  will  of  an  eternal  Friend,  and 
that  the  veil  is  already  parting  which  shuts  out  for  a  season  the  open  view  of 
the  perfection  and  acceptability  of  all  that  will.  4.  May  we  not,  in  conclusion,  move  a 
step  further  in  our  meditation,  and  find  here  a  promise  which  is  concerned  also 
with  the  immortal  world  itself  ?  We  remember,  of  course,  that  He  who  is  here 
called  the  Star  is  elsewhere  called  the  Sun ;  and  we  might  think,  therefore,  that 
He  here  speaks  as,  in  a  certain  sense.  His  own  forerunner ;  the  Firstborn  of  the 
dead,  whose  own  resurrection  is  the  herald  of  His  own  final  triumph.  But  it 
seems  truer  to  the  analogy  of  His  other  metaphoric  titles  to  view  this  title  as 
belonging  to  no  passing  phrase  of  His  majesty,  if  such  could  be,  but  to  its  essence 
for  ever.  "What  elsewhere  he  claims  to  be.  He  is  in  perpetuity.  On  the  throne 
as  truly  as  on  the  Cross,  He  is  the  Lamb.  In  the  fields  of  heaven  He  is  still 
the  Shepherd,  "  leading  His  flock  to  the  living  fountains  of  waters."  And  surely 
in  the  upper  sky  He  will  be  for  ever  the  Star  of  Morning,  so  far  as  He  will  be 
the  eternal  pledge  and  joy  of  a  life  that  will  be  for  ever  young,  of  energies  that  will 
accumulate  without  end,  of  a  service  before  the  throne  that  will  always  deepen 
in  its  ardour  and  its  triumph,  of  discoveries  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Eternal 
which  will  carry  the  experience  of  the  blessed  from  glory  to  glory  in  a  succession 
that  cannot  close.  {H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.)  The  bright  and  morning  star: — I. 
Because,  by  His  coming  in  the  flesh,  He  intboduces  into  our  world  the 
LIGHT  of  gospel  DAT.  What  was  the  state  of  the  world  when  the  Word  was 
made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  men?  In  the  emphatic  language  of  holy  writ, 
"  darkness  covered  the  earth,  and  thick  darkness  the  people."  Survey  the  state  of 
the  heathen  at  this  eventful  crisis  of  the  world's  history.  How  dark  and  how 
confused  were  the  notions  of  Deity  entertained  by  the  shrewdest  of  their  philo- 
sophers !  Their  religious  rites  were  full  of  lust  and  cruelty,  and  were  so  far  from 
having  a  tendency  to  promote  virtue,  that  they  excited  them  to  every  species  of 
crime  and  wickedness.  Truly  they  sat  in  darkness,  and  in  the  shadow  of  death. 
And  what  was  the  state  of  the  Jews  at  this  eventful  period?  Theirs,  doubtless,  was 
a  less  deplorable  condition.  They  had  the  oracles  of  God,  and  some  faint  glimmer- 
ings of  light,  by  means  of  figures,  and  prophecies,  and  sacrifices  ;  still  theirs  was  a 
dispensation  of  types  and  of  shadows.  And  at  the  time  when  God  was  manifested 
in  the  flesh,  the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  had  spread  a  mist  over  the  Mosaic 
observances ;  the  elders,  by  their  vain  traditions  had  rendered  its  shadows  tenfold 
more  obscure,  and  the  whole  Jewish  system  was  enveloped  in  gloom  and  darkness. 
But  the  fulness  of  time  arrived  when  the  bright  and  morning  star  appeared  above 
the  earth's  horizon,  scattering  the  shadows  of  the  Jewish  Economy,  and  pouring  a 
flood  of  light  upon  the  darkness  of  Pagan  delusions.  This  light  of  the  world  came, 
and  gave  to  mankind  a  clear  and  a  full  revelation  of  the  nature  and  perfections  of 
the  Deity,  made  known  the  way  of  reconciliation  with  an  offended  God,  taught  man 
his  duty,  and  unfolded  to  him  the  bliss  and  the  glory  of  heaven.  H.  Because,  by 
His  bisimg  in  the  heart,  He  introduces  the  day  of  salvation  into  the  soul  op 
THE  siNNEB.  The  soul  of  man,  in  its  native  and  unrenewed  state,  is  full  of 
disorder  and  darkness.  He  cannot  see  himself,  or  God,  or  Christ,  or  the  way  to 
heaven,  in  their  true  light.  He  may,  indeed,  give  his  assent  to  statements  which 
he  hears  made  upon  these  subjects,  but  he  cannot  have  an  experimental  or 
abiding  sense,  even  of  the  most  obvious  spiritual  truths,  till  his  mind  is  enlightened 
by  the  grace  of  God's  Son ;  till  then,  even  the  light  that  is  in  him,  is  darkness. 
But  when  the  morning  star  arises  in  the  heart  of  a  sinful  being,  it  produces  a 
change  at  once  great  and  glorious.  Before  its  rays,  the  darkness  of  the  mind  is 
dispelled,  the  understanding  is  illumined,  and  the  whole  soul  is  renewed  in  know- 
ledge, as  well  as  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  How  vast,  for  instance,  was 
the  change  from  darkness  to  light  in  the  case  of  Saul  and  Tarsus.  III.  Because,  by 
His  rising  at  the  time  appointed  in  prophecy,  Hb  will  introduce  into  our  world 

THE  GLORY  of  MILLENNIAL  DAY.  IV.  BECAUSE,  BY  HiS  RISING  AT  THE  END  OF  TIME,  He 
WILL   USHER   IN    THE    BLISS    AND    THE    LIGHT     OF    ETERNAL     DAY.       {John    McGrcgOr.) 

The  bright  and  morning  star: — I.  The  title  declares  the  brilliance  of  His 
LUSTRE.    Amongst  the  Orientals,  the  morning  star  is  the  favourite  emblem  of  a 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  757 

great  ruler,  a  martial  leader,  or  a  wise  teacher.  Christ  claims  this  epithet  on  the 
ground  of  possessing  the  truest  glory ;  that  of  being  the  Witness  for  the  Truth,  of 
being  the  truth  itself,  and  thus  of  bringing  minds  under  His  sway.  Compare  this  title 
which  Christ  gives  of  Himself  in  the  vision  of  St.  John,  with  that  He  gives  of 
Himself  in  the  gospel :  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  World."  In  that  Light  alone  can 
the  solution  of  the  great  world  problems  be  found.  His  lustre  cannot  now  be 
withdrawn,  nor  can  men  refuse  to  open  their  eyes  to  its  presence.  He  is  the 
Morning  Star  of  all  humanity,  the  brightest  light  that  has  ever  dawned  upon 
the  world — that  guides  it  onwards  to  the  eternal  day.  II.  It  implies  the  power 
OF  His  attraction.  Man  can  be  moved  and  drawn  only  by  man.  Hence  the 
wisdom  of  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  HI.  It  implies  the  fixity  of  His  office. 
Amidst  the  progress  and  the  changes  of  human  thought,  the  revolutions  of  opinion, 
the  advances  or  the  retrogressions  of  moral  and  spiritual  life.  He  abides  a  steady, 
ever-shining  light.  All  others  are  flickering  torches,  throwing  a  momentary  and 
misleading  glare,  then  waning  and  dying  out.  IV.  It  is  emblematic  of  the  hope 
OF  HUMANITY.  The  momiug  star  is  the  herald  of  the  dawn.  So  our  hope  of  a 
morning  for  humanity  is  in  Christ.  Our  only  hope  is  in  Him.  He  is  one  with  us ; 
He  has  come  to  His  own,  and  knows  its  wants,  its  weakness,  its  sorrow,  and  its 
sin.  He  shines  down  upon  us  now,  with  powerful  and  influential  brilliance  ;  and 
He  will  be  associated  with  all  our  future  struggles  as  He  has  been  with  all  our  past. 
Therefore,  as  Christians,  we  are  confident  and  hopeful.  {E.  Johnson,  B.A.)  The 
bright  and  morning  star : — I.  The  promise  of  Messiah  was  the  Morning  Stab 
TO  THE  ancient  BELIEVER.  When  first  introduced  to  the  faith  of  the  sinning  pair 
in  the  garden  of  Eden,  it  became  their  "  Morning  Star  " ;  all  besides  was  dark ! 
They  had  lost  the  favour  of  God.  II.  The  advent  of  Jesus  was  the  Morninq 
Star  of  a  more  perfect  economy.     III.  Christ  preached,  is  the  Morning  Stab 

of   any  PEOPLE   TO   WHOM   He   IS   PROCLAIMED.      IV.    ChBIST    IS     THE     MoRNING     StAB 

to  all  who  BELIEVE  ON  HiM.  {H.  WHkes,  D.B.)  Christ  the  morning  star: — 
The  morning  star  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  objects  in  the  sky.  "  Last  in  the 
train  of  night,"  it  yet  sheds  the  brightest  radiance.  Too  faint  by  far  to  penetrate 
the  recesses  of  ocean,  or  the  deep  places  of  the  forest,  it  slumbers  on  the  surface 
of  the  wave,  it  trembles  through  the  cottage  window,  or  "  tips  with  silver 
every  mountain's  head."  It  rivals  not  the  strong  sunlight,  nor  doth  it  vie  with 
even  that  holier  day  which  the  moon  casts  abroad ;  nevertheless,  in  the  heaven, 
doth  it  form  a  beauteous  beacon ;  nor  is  the  eye  satisfied  with  gazing,  when  the 
fierce  monarch  of  the  skies  arises  and  chases  it  away.  1.  Apt  and  beautiful 
emblem  this,  of  the  gentle  but  glorious  light,  which  Jesus  has  darted  upon  the 
souls  of  His  people !  Previous  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  character  of  God  was, 
in  a  great  measure,  unknown.  The  adversary  had  trampled  on  the  shrine  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts  ;  it  was  as  if  that  name  had  ceased  to  be  manifested ;  it  was  as  if 
the  fire  by  which  he  was  wont  to  maintain  it,  had  been  quenched.  But  the  Morning 
Star  at  length  arose :  and  an  uncreated  glory,  streaming  from  the  revealed 
attitude  of  a  God  at  once  just  and  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly,  flowed  with  it.  But 
had  nothing  more  than  the  true  character  of  God  been  included  in  this  revelation, 
it  had  been  made  in  vain.  What  cares  man  for  the  character  of  God  ?  Were 
he,  indeed,  a  being  much  better  than  he  is,  we  could  conceive  him,  in  this  case, 
entertaining  such  a  care  ;  starting  up  perhaps  suddenly,  and  shivering  with  fear,  at 
the  bare  idea  of  his  God  being  charged  with  cruelty  or  injustice.  But  man  as  he  is, 
sensual,  selfish,  unthinking,  diseased,  deluded,  or  despairing,  entertains  not  one 
anxiety  about  the  character  of  his  Maker.  But  for  his  own  destiny  he  must  care  ; 
and  he  will  ask  eagerly,  "What  sort  of  light  has  the  Morning  Star  brought, 
concerning  this  ?  What  am  I  told  about  my  future  state  ?  "  Open  the  volume 
and  see ;  start  not  at  the  apparent  darkness ;  gaze  steadily,  and  you  will  be  richly 
rewarded.  There  are,  indeed,  no  minute  views  of  the  future  state.  The  Bible 
communicates  only  a  few  great  facts,  and  leading  features  of  the  eternal  world. 
But  Christ  has  cast  a  light  also  upon  the  duty  of  man.  This  Moses  had,  in  a  great 
measure,  done  ;  but  he  had  not  taught  man  to  answer  the  question  fully,  "  What 
shall  I  do  to  be  saved?"  Christ  came  at  once  to  prompt  the  question,  and  to 
provide  the  reply.  Here  is  no  list  of  austerities;  no  staggering  invitation  to 
swallow  down  absurdities,  to  believe  what  is  impossible  or  revolting ;  no  require- 
ment of  an  ideal  perfection  from  a  child  of  clay;  all  is  plain  and  easy,  yet 
leadeth  to  heaven.  Oh,  then,  will  ye  not  bless  the  Morning  Star,  which  has  risen  to 
guide  you  along  this  path  to  glory  ?  and  will  you  not  walk  on  in  its  tender  light, 
trusting  that  it  will  shine  on  more  and  more  unto   the  perfect   day?     2.  Christ 


758  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

further  resembles  the  morning  star,  as  He  is  a  giver  of  joy.  The  sun-rising  is,  in 
truth,  a  summons  to  rejoice ;  and  it  is  obeyed  and  echoed  in  a  thousand  voices 
of  gladness.  The  moon-beam  also  communicates  its  own  pensive  pleasures,  and 
quieter  harmonies  to  those  who  can  baptize  their  spirits  in  ita  beauty.  Nor  is  the 
morning  star  destitute  of  joy-giving  influence.  How  does  it  cheer  the  labourer  as 
he  goes  forth  to  his  toU,  amid  the  dews  of  the  dawn  !  How  does  it  soothe  the  soul 
of  the  mariner  who  gazes  at  it,  tUl  quiet  tears  bedim  his  eyelids  1  How  is  it  the 
"  sun  of  the  sleepless,"  especially  of  those  who  are  awake  through  sorrow  1  Count 
up  the  raptures  of  earth,  and  you  will  find  the  rarest  of  them  coming  from  Christ. 
Consult  your  own  bosoms,  and  you  will  find  your  purest  pleasure  coming  from  Him. 
Sum  up  the  ecstasies  of  the  departed  saints,  and  you  wiU  find  all  of  them  coming 
from  Him.  3.  Again,  Christ  resembles  the  morning  star,  as  He  is  the  precursor 
of  a  brighter  revelation.  The  morning  star  is  a  pledge  in  the  sky  that  the  day 
is  dawning,  and  at  length  it  "  melts  away  into  the  light  of  heaven."  So  the 
light  we  have  is  comparatively  dim ;  but  there  is  a  day  behind  it.  4.  This  Morning 
Star  is  a  precursor  of  the  day  of  Millennial  brightness.  There  is  no  change  in  the 
outward  aspect  of  the  world ;  the  same  alternation  of  hill  and  valley,  of  waste 
and  woodland,  is  presented  to  the  view.  But  the  shadow  of  sin  has  passed  away. 
Man  has  become  a  nobler  being ;  he  is  holier  and  happier.  His  land  is  not  heaven ; 
but  it  is  no  longer  accursed  in  the  anger  of  God.  It  is  a  land  redeemed,  though 
not  glorified.  On  all  its  landscapes  is  written,  •'  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  (G. 
Gilfillan.)  The  stellar  beauty  of  Christ : — The  meaning  of  my  text  is  this  :  as  the 
morning  star  precedes  and  promises  the  coming  of  the  day,  so  Christ  heralds  the 
natural  and  spiritual  dawn.  1.  Christ  heralded  the  coming  of  the  creation.  Oh,  it  is 
an  interesting  thought  to  me  to  know  that  Christ  had  something  to  do  with  the 
creation !  I  see  now  why  it  was  so  easy  for  Him  to  change  our  water  into  wine  ;  He 
first  created  the  water.  I  see  now  why  it  was  so  easy  for  Hhn  to  cure  the  maniac  ; 
He  first  created  the  intellect.  I  see  now  why  it  was  so  easy  for  Him  to  hush  the 
tempest ;  He  sank  Genessaret.  I  see  now  why  it  was  so  easy  for  Him  to  give  sight 
to  the  blind  man ;  He  created  the  optic  nerve.  I  see  now  why  it  was  so  easy  for  Him 
to  raise  Lazarus  from  the  dead  ;  He  created  the  body  of  Lazarus,  and  the  rock  that 
shut  him  in.  Hail !  Lord  Jesus,  Morning  Star  of  the  first  creation.  2.  Christ  heralds 
the  dawn  of  comfort  in  a  Christian  soul.  You  are  building  up  some  great  enterprise. 
You  have  built  the  foundation — the  wall — you  are  just  about  to  put  on  the  capstone, 
when  everything  is  demolished.  Lastead  of  the  quick  feet  in  the  hall,  the  heavy 
tread  of  those  who  march  to  the  grave.  Oh  1  what  are  people  to  do  amid  all  these 
sorrows  ?  Some  know  not  which  way  to  turn.  But  not  so  the  Christian  man.  He 
looks  up  toward  the  heavens.  He  sees  a  bright  appearance  in  the  heavens.  Can  it 
be  only  a  flashing  meteor?  Can  it  be  only  a  falling  star?  Nay,  nay.  The 
longer  he  looks  the  more  distinct  it  becomes,  until,  after  a  while,  he  cries  out :  "  A 
star  !  a  morning  star  1  a  star  of  comfort  I  a  star  of  grace  !  a  star  of  peace  !  The 
star  of  the  Eedeemer  I  "  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed 
be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Peace,  troubled  soul  I  I  put  the  balm  on  your  wounded 
heart  to-night.  The  morning  star,  the  morning  star  of  the  Eedeemer.  3.  Christ 
heralds  the  dawn  of  Millennial  glory.  It  is  night  in  China,  night  in  India,  night  in 
Siberia,  night  for  the  vast  majority  of  the  world's  population.  But  it  seems  to  me 
there  are  some  intimations  of  the  morning.  The  Hottentot  wiU  come  out  of  his  mud 
hovel  to  look  at  the  dawn ;  the  Chinaman  will  come  up  on  the  granite  cliffs,  the 
Norwegian  will  get  up  on  the  rocks,  and  all  the  beach  of  heaven  will  be  crowded 
with  celestial  inhabitants  come  out  to  see  the  sun  rise  over  the  ocean  of  the  world's 
agony.  They  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  from  the  north,  and 
from  the  south,  and  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  4.  Christ  heralds  the  dawn 
of  heaven  upon  every  Christian's  dying  pillow.  All  other  lights  will  fail — the  light 
that  falls  from  the  scroll  of  fame,  the  light  that  flashes  from  the  gem  in  the 
beautiful  apparel,  the  light  that  flames  from  the  burning  lamps  of  a  banquet — but 
this  light  burns  on  and  burns  on.  No  other  star  ever  pointed  a  mariner  into  so 
safe  a  harbour.  No  other  star  ever  sunk  its  silvered  anchor  so  deep  into  the 
waters.  No  other  star  ever  pierced  such  accumulated  cloud,  or  beckoned  with  such 
a  holy  lustre.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  morning  star: — Throughout  the 
Bible  the  star  is  made  a  symbol  of  dominion,  glory,  and  triumph.  1.  What  figure 
more  exquisite,  more  apt  in  illustrating  the  relation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  His 
kingdom  and  to  the  destinies  of  humanity  !  The  star  appears  small  up  yonder,  and 
yet  it  is  a  very  vast  planet;  so  Christ  appears  small  to  the  bystanders  at  His 
coming — a  mere  humble  man  like  ourselves.     How  little  did  they  know  what  was 


CHAp.xxn.]  REVELATION.  759 

in  Him  1  The  star  is  small,  but  how  wide-spreading  is  its  light !  And  so,  in 
reference  to  the  breadth  of  Christ's  kingdom  and  its  extent,  is  the  figure  exquisite 
and  applicable.  2.  In  a  time  of  gloom  the  star  appeared.  The  Koman  Empire  was 
apparently  in  its  pride  and  strength  ;  but,  as  we  all  know  now,  it  was  bloom 
outside  and  worm  within.  All  the  hopes  of  the  Jews,  one  after  another,  had 
disappeared.  The  desires  for  the  coming  of  a  Deliverer,  which  had  been  cherished 
and  expressed  here  and  there  and  yonder — not  merely  in  Judea,  but  in  all  other 
countries,  by  the  foremost  minds,  whether  inspired  or  uninspired — had  failed,  and 
it  was  an  era  of  desolateness,  vice,  and  darkness,  of  intellectual  pride,  along 
with  intellectual  weakness  when  Christ  came  upon  earth.  It  was  what  the 
Apostle  calls  the  fulness  of  time.  It  is  fitting  that  this  manifestation  of  Christ 
at  such  a  time  should  be  called  the  dawning  of  the  day-star.  3.  The  birds 
of  night  cannot  stand  before  the  coming  dawn  when  Venus  shines  in  her  lustre  in 
the  sky.  When  Christ  appeared  upon  the  earth,  the  very  first  scintillation  of  the 
day-star  was  to  warn  all  the  old  systems  of  wrong  and  outrage,  oppression  and 
darkness,  that  their  time  had  come.  {Christian  Age.)  The  bright  and  morning 
star  : — ^All  the  stars  are  very  beautiful  to  look  at.  But  if  we  get  up  before  daylight, 
in  the  morning,  and  look  out  towards  the  east,  where  "  the  bright  and  morning 
star  "  is  shining,  we  shall  see  that  this  is  more  beautiful  than  the  others.  How 
clearly  it  stands  out  in  the  dark  sky !  With  what  soft  and  silvery  light  it  shines  ! 
And,  as  we  stand  gazing  at  it,  we  cannot  help  thinking  how  well  it  may  remind 
us  of  Jesus.  I.  Guidance.  Our  sailors  understand  this  better  than  any  other 
people.  And  there  is  nothing  that  we  need  so  much  as  guidance.  We  know  not 
how  to  steer  our  vessel  so  as  to  be  able  to  reach  that  blessed  harbour.  And 
one  reason  why  Jesus  is  called  "  the  bright  and  morning  star  "  is  because  He 
shows  us  the  way  to  heaven,  and  guides  us  in  that  way.  There  are  rocks  and 
shoals  in  the  sailor's  way,  and  he  needs  guidance  to  enable  him  to  steer  clear 
of  them,  and  keep  from  being  wrecked.  And,  in  trying  to  make  our  way  to 
heaven,  the  sins  and  temptations  around  us  are  the  rocks  and  shoals  we  meet 
with ;  and  if  we  look  to  Jesus,  as  our  star.  He  will  guide  us,  so  that  we  can 
steer  clear  of  these  dangers.  It  is  mainly  through  the  Bible  that  Jesus,  our  bright 
and  Morning  Star,  gives  us  the  guidance  that  we  need.  If  we  read  it  carefully  and 
follow  its  teachings,  it  will  help  us  to  escape  a  great  many  dangers,  and  keep  ua 
safe  from  a  great  many  troubles.  II.  Hope.  The  morning  star  is  very  beautiful  to 
look  at.  It  does  not  give  a  great  deal  of  light.  You  cannot  see  to  read  by  that 
star.  But,  as  you  look  at  it,  it  tells  you  that  the  night  is  almost  gone.  You 
know  that  the  sun  wiU  soon  rise  and  shine,  and  then  there  will  be  light  enough  for 
everything.  You  will  be  able  to  see  the  fields  and  the  woods,  and  the  beautiful 
flowers,  and  all  the  glorious  things  that  God  has  made.  That  morning  star  gives 
us  the  hope  that  the  darkness  will  soon  be  gone,  and  the  light  of  day  be  shining  all 
about  us.  And  Jesus  may  well  be  compared  to  such  a  star,  because  when  He 
rises  and  shines  on  our  hearts  He  fills  them  vnth  the  sweet  hope  that  the  darkness 
of  this  world  will  soon  pass  away,  and  the  bright,  clear  light  of  heaven  will  be 
shining  around  us.  And  this  hope  is  a  bright  and  beautiful  thing.  It  is  able  to 
make  us  happy,  when  nothing  else  in  the  world  can  do  so.  IH.  Jot.  One  of  our 
great  poets  has  said:  "  A  thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  for  ever."  The  meaning  of  this  is, 
that  it  always  makes  people  glad,  or  gives  them  joy,  to  see  a  beautiful  thing.  And 
this  is  true.  Now  a  star  is  a  beautiful  thing.  And  "  the  bright  and  morning  star  " 
is  very  beautiful.  Whenever  I  think  of  this  star  I  am  reminded  of  my  first  visit 
to  Switzerland  a  good  many  years  ago.  We  went  up  from  Geneva  to  the  valley 
of  Chamouni,  to  see  Mont  Blanc.  It  was  Saturday  evening  when  we  arrived 
there.  I  wanted  very  much  to  see  how  that  great  mountain  would  look  when  the 
sun  was  rising  on  it.  So,  on  the  next  morning,  I  got  up  between  three  and  four 
o'clock  to  be  in  good  time  to  see  the  sun  rise.  I  dressed  myself,  and,  all  alone, 
walked  quietly  down  the  valley,  that  I  might  be  ready  to  catch  the  first  sight  of  the 
beams  of  the  sun,  as  they  began  to  shine  upon  the  snowy  summit  of  the  mountain, 
and  gild  it  with  golden  beauty.  It  was  a  beautifully  clear  night,  or  rather  morning, 
though  it  was  still  quite  dark.  There  was  no  mist  around  the  mountain,  and  not  a 
cloud  in  the  sky.  The  summit  of  Mont  Blanc  is  a  great,  rounded  dome  of  snow. 
This  was  lifted  far  up  into  the  clear,  dark  sky.  And  right  over  the  top  of  the 
mountain  I  saw  the  morning  star.  How  calm  it  seemed  there!  How  soft  and 
silvery  was  the  light  it  shed  !  How  brightly  and  beautifully  it  was  shining  down 
on  the  snowy  summit  of  that  great  mountain.  It  was  one  of  the  most  lovely  sights 
I  ever  saw.    I  thought  it  was  worth  while  to  go  all  the  way  to  Switzerland,  if  there 


760  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

had  been  nothing  else  to  see  there  but  just  that  beautiful  sight  of  the  morning  star 
above  the  summit  of  Mont  Blanc.  As  I  walked  slowly  down  the  valley,  looking  at 
that  beautiful  star,  I  thought  of  these  sweet  words  of  Jesus :  "  I  am  the  bright  and 
morning  star."  The  sight  of  that  star  made  me  glad.  It  gave  me  joy  then,  while 
I  was  looking  at  it.  And  it  gives  me  joy  now,  whenever  I  think  about  it.  But  all 
the  stars  in  the  world  put  together  are  not  half  so  beautiful  as  Jesus  is.  And  when 
we  see  Him,  and  know  Him,  as  our  "  bright  and  Morning  Star,"  there  is  no  joy  to 
be  found  in  anything  so  great  as  that  which  He  gives.     (22.  Newton,  D.D.) 

Yer.  17.  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say. 
Come. — ChrisVs  coming  to  the  world,  and  men's  coming  to  Christ : — The  two  halves 
of  the  verse  do  not  refer  to  the  same  persons,  or  the  same  "  coming."  The 
first  portion  is  an  invocation  or  a  prayer ;  the  second  portion  is  an  invitation  or  an 
offer.  The  one  is  addressed  to  Christ,  the  other  to  men.  The  commentary  upon  the 
former  is  the  last  words  of  the  Book,  where  we  find  the  seer  answering  the  promise 
of  his  Master — "  Behold  !  I  come  quickly !  "  with  the  sigh  of  longing :  "  Even  so  ! 
Come !  Lord  Jesus."  And  in  precisely  a  similar  fashion  the  bride  here,  longing 
for  the  presence  of  the  bridegroom,  answers  His  promise — "  Behold  I  come 
quickly,"  which  occurs  a  verse  or  two  before — with  the  petition  which  all  who  hear 
it  ave  bidden  to  swell  till  it  rolls  in  a  great  wave  of  supplication  to  His  feet.  And 
then  with  that  coming,  another  "  coming"  is  connected.  The  one  is  the  coming  of 
Christ  to  the  world  at  last ;  the  other  is  the  coming  of  men  to  Christ  now.  The 
double  oilice  of  the  Church  is  represented  here,  the  voice  that  rose  in  petition  to 
heaven  has  to  sound  upon  earth  in  proclamation.  And  the  double  relation  of 
Christ  to  His  Church  is  implied  here.  He  is  absent,  therefore  He  is  prayed  to 
come ;  but  He  is  in  such  a  fashion  present  as  that  any  who  will  can  come  to  Him. 
I.  The  invocation,  or  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the  world.  Christ  has  come, 
Christ  will  come.  These  are  the  two  great  facts  from  which,  as  from  two  golden 
hooks,  the  whole  chain  of  human  history  hangs  in  a  mighty  curve.  Memory  should 
feed  upon  the  one,  ho^e  should  leap  up  to  grasp  the  other.  Christ  "comes," 
though  He  is  always  present  in  human  history,  comes  to  our  apprehensions  in  eras 
of  rapid  change,  in  revolutionary  times  when  some  ancient  iniquity  is  smitten 
down,  and  some  new  fair  form  emerges  from  the  chaos.  The  electricity  is  long  in 
gathering  during  the  fervid  summer  heat,  in  the  slow-moving  and  changing  clouds, 
but  when  it  is  gathered  there  comes  the  flash.  The  snow  is  long  in  collecting  on 
the  precipitous  face  of  the  Alp,  but  when  the  weight  has  become  sufficient  down  it 
rushes,  the  white  death  of  the  avalanche.  For  fifty-nine  (silent)  minutes  and  fifty- 
nine  (silent)  seconds  the  hand  moves  round  the  dial,  and  at  the  sixtieth  it  strikes. 
So,  at  long  intervals  in  the  history  of  nations,  a  crash  comes,  and  men  say : 
"  Behold  the  Lord !  He  cometh  to  judge  the  world."  Surely,  surely  it  needs  no 
words  to  enforce  the  thought  that  all  who  love  Him,  and  all  who  love  truth  and 
righteousness,  which  are  His,  and  all  who  desire  that  the  world's  sorrows  should  be 
alleviated  and  the  world's  evils  should  be  chastised  and  smitten,  must  lift  up  the 
old,  old  cry:  "Even  so!  Come!  Lord  Jesus."  H.  The  invitation,  or  the 
COMING  OF  men  TO  Christ.  What  is  it  to  come  ?  Listen  to  His  own  explanation : 
*'  He  that  cometh  unto  Me  shall  never  hunger,"  &c.  Then  '•  coming,"  and  '*  taking," 
and  "drinking,"  are  all  but  various  forms  of  representing  the  one  act  of  believing 
in  Him.  We  come  to  Him  when  we  trust  Him.  To  come  to  Christ  is  faith.  Who 
is  it  that  are  asked  to  come?  "  He  that  thirsteth  "  and  "  he  that  willeth."  The 
one  phrase  expresses  the  universal  condition,  the  other  only  the  limitation  necessary 
in  the  very  nature  of  things.  "  He  that  thirsteth."  Who  does  not  ?  Your  heart 
is  parched  for  love ;  your  mind,  whether  you  know  it  or  not,  is  restless  and  athirst 
for  truth  that  you  can  cleave  to  in  all  circumstances.  Your  will  longs  for  a  loving 
authority  that  shall  subdue  and  tame  it.  Your  conscience  is  calling  out  for  cleansing, 
for  pacifying,  for  purity.  Your  whole  being  is  one  great  want  and  emptiness. 
"  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living  God,"  it  is  only  He  that  can  slake  the 
thirst,  that  can  satisfy  the  hunger.  "  Whosoever  will."  A  wish  is  enough,  but  a 
wish  is  indispensable.  How  strange,  and  yet  how  common  it  is,  that  the  thirsty 
man  is  not  the  willing  man.  Further,  what  is  oflEered  ?  "The  water  of  life." 
What  is  that  ?  Not  a  thing,  but  a  person — Christ  Himself ;  even  as  He  said :  "  If 
any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  Me  and  drink."  And  what  are  the  conditions  ?  " 
"Let  Him  take  the  water  of  life  for  nothing;  "  as  the  word  might  have  been  ren- 
dered, "For  nothing."  He  says  to  us,  "I  will  not  sell  it  to  you,  I  will  give  it  to 
jou."    And  too  many  of  us  say  to  Him,  "  We  had  rather  buy  it,  or  at  any  rate  pay 


CHAP.xxii.]  REVELATION,  761 

something  towards  it."  No  effort,  no  righteousness,  no  sacrifice,  no  anything  is 
wanted.  "  Without  money  and  without  price."  You  have  only  got  to  give  up  your- 
selves, m.  Thb  connection  between  these  two  comings.  There  is  a  twofold 
connection  that  I  would  point  out  to  you.  Christ  does  not  yet  come  in  order  that 
men  may  come  to  Him.  He  delays  His  drawing  near,  in  His  longsuffering  mercy, 
in  order  that  over  all  the  earth  the  glad  news  may  flash,  and  to  every  spirit  the  invita- 
tion may  come.  Christ  tarries  that  you  may  hear,  and  repent,  and  come  to  Him. 
That  is  the  first  phase  of  the  connection  between  these  two  things.  The  other  is— 
because  Christ  will  come  to  the  world,  therefore  let  us  come  to  Him  now.  Joyful 
as  the  spring  after  the  winter,  and  as  the  sunshine  after  the  darkness,  as  that  coming  j 
of  His  ought  to  be  to  all ;  and  though  it  be  the  object  or  desire  to  all  hearts  that 
love  Him  and  the  healing  for  the  miseries  and  sorrows  of  the  world,  do  not  forget  it 
has  a  very  solemn  and  a  very  terrible  side.  He  comes,  when  He  does  come,  to 
judge.  He  comes,  not  as  of  old,  in  lowliness,  to  heal  and  to  succour  and  to  save,  but 
He  comes  to  heal  and  to  succour  and  to  save  all  them  that  love  His  appearing,  and 
them  only,  and  He  comes  to  judge  all  men  whether  they  love  His  appearing  ori 
no.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  two   ''comes'': — I.  Our  text  begins  with  the 

heavenward  cry  of  prater.  Surely  the  sense  requires  us  to  regard  this  cry  of 
"  come  "  as  addressed  to  our  Lord  Jesus,  who  in  a  previous  verse  had  been  saying, 
"  Behold  I  come  quickly,  and  My  reward  is  with  Me."  1.  The  matter  of  this  cry — 
it  is  the  coming  of  Christ.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come."  This  is  and 
always  has  been  the  universal  cry  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Next  observe 
the  persons  crying.  The  Spirit  is  first  mentioned — "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say. 
Come."  And  why  does  the  Holy  Ghost  desire  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus?  At 
present  the  Spirit  is,  so  to  speak,  the  vicegerent  of  this  dispensation  upon  earth. 
How  much  He  is  provoked  aU  the  world  over  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  know  !  The 
ungodly  vex  Him,  they  reject  His  testimony,  and  resist  His  operations.  And,  alas, 
the  saints  grieve  Him  too ;  and  so  He  desireth  the  end  of  this  evil  estate,  and  saith 
to  our  Lord  Jesus,  '*  Come."  Beside,  the  Spirit's  great  desire  is  to  glorify  Christ. 
Now,  as  the  coming  of  Christ  will  be  the  full  manifestation  of  the  Redeemer's  glory, 
the  Spirit  therefore  desireth  that  He  may  come  and  take  to  Himself  His  great  power, 
and  reign.  Our  text  next  tells  us  that,  "  the  bride  saith.  Come."  Now,  a  bride  is 
one  whose  marriage  is  near,  either  as  having  just  happened  or  as  close  at  hand. 
So  is  the  Church  very  nearly  arrived  at  the  grand  hour,  when  it  shall  be  said  "  the 
marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come  and  His  bride  hath  made  herself  ready  " ;  and 
because  of  that  she  is  full  of  joy  at  the  prospect  of  hearing  the  cry,  "  Behold,  the 
Bridegroom  cometh."  Who  marvelleth  that  it  is  so  ?  The  next  clause  of  the  text 
indicates  that  each  separate  believer  should  breathe  the  same  desire,  "  Let  him  that 
heareth  say.  Come."  This  will  be  the  index  of  your  belonging  to  the  bride,  the 
token  of  your  sharing  in  the  one  Spirit,  if  you  unite  with  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  in 
saying,  '•  Come."  For  no  ungodly  man  truly  desireth  Christ's  coming ;  but  on  the 
contrary  he  desireth  to  get  away  from  Him,  and  forget  His  very  existence.  To 
delight  in  drawing  near  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  to  long  to  see  Him  mani- 
fested in  fulness  of  glory  is  the  ensign  of  a  true  soldier  of  the  Cross.  Do  you  feel 
this?  3.  Now  a  word  upon  the  tense  in  which  the  cry  is  put.  It  is  in  the  present 
tense.  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  are  anxious  that  Christ  should  come  at  once,  and 
he  that  knoweth  Christ  and  loveth  Him  desireth  also  that  He  should  not  tarry.  Is 
it  not  time  as  far  as  our  poor  judgments  go  that  Jesus  should  come?  II.  The 
EARTHWARD  CRT  OF  INVITATION  TO  MEN.  I  canuot  quite  tell  you  how  it  is  that  the 
sense  in  my  text  glides  away  from  the  coming  of  Christ  to  the  earth  into  the  coming 
of  sinners  to  Christ,  but  it  does.  Like  colours  which  blend,  or  strains  of  music 
which  melt  into  each  other,  so  the  first  sense  slides  into  the  second.  This  almost 
insensible  transition  seems  to  me  to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  memory  of  the  fact 
that  the  coming  of  Christ  is  not  desirable  to  all  mankind.  He  lets  the  prayer  flow 
towards  Himself,  but  yet  directs  its  flow  towards  poor  sinners  also.  He  Himself 
seems  to  say,  "  Ye  bid  Me  come,  but  I,  as  the  Saviour  of  men,  look  at  your  brothers 
and  your  sisters  who  are  yet  in  the  far  country,  the  other  sheep  which  are  not  yet 
of  the  fold,  whom  also  I  must  bring  in,  and  in  answer  to  your  cry  to  Me  to  come  I 
speak  to  those  wandering  ones,  and  say,  •  Let  him  that  is  athirst  come,  and  whoso- 
ever will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.'  "  Is  not  that  the  way  in  which  the 
sense  glides  from  its  first  direction  ?  Now,  from  whom  does  this  cry  arise  ?  1.  It 
first  comes  from  Jesus.  It  is  He  who  says,  "  Let  Him  that  is  athirst  come."  2.  But 
next,  it  is  the  call  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  Spirit  says,  "  Come."  This  Book 
which  He  has  written,  on  every  page  says  to  men, "  Come!     Come  to  Jesus."     And 


7G2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

those  secret  motions  of  power  upon  the  conscience,  those  times  when  the  heart  grows 
calm  even  amid  dissipation,  and  thought  is  forced  upon  the  mind,  those  are  the 
movements  of  the  Spirit  of  God  by  which  He  is  showing  man  His  danger  and 
revealing  to  him  his  refuge,  and  so  is  saying,  "  Come."     3.  And  this  is  the  speech 
of  the  Church  too  in  conjunction  with  the  Spirit,  for  the  Spirit  speaks  with  the  bride 
and  the  bride  speaks  by  the  Spirit.     The  Church  is  always  saying  "  Come,"   4.  The 
next  giver  of  the  mvitation  is  spoken  of  as  "  him  that  heareth."    If  you  have  had 
an  ear  to  hear,  and  have  heard  the  gospel  to  your  own  salvation,  the  very  next 
thing  you  have  to  do  is  to  say  to  those  around  you,  "  Come."     Give  your  Master's 
invitation,  distribute  the  testimony  of  His  loving  will,  and  bid  poor  sinners  come  to 
Jesus,     ni.  The  connection  between  these  two  comings.     1.  There  is  this  rela- 
tion, first,  they  are  both  suggested  in  this  passage  by  the  closing  of  the  scriptural 
canon.    It  is  because  the  Book  was  about  to  receive  its  finis  that  the  Spirit  and  the 
bride  unitedly  cried  to  the  sinners  to  come  at  once.    No  fresh  gospel  is  to  be 
expected,  therefore  let  them  come  at  once.     2.  I  think  I  perceive  another  connec- 
tion, namely,  that  those  people  who  in  very  truth  love  Christ  enough  to  cry  to  Him 
continually  to  come  are  sure  to  love  sinners  also,  and  to  say  to  them  also,  "  Come." 
3.  There  is  this  connection  also,  that  before  Christ  comes  a  certain  number  of  His 
elect  must  be  ingathered.     Oh,  then,  it  is  ours  to  labour  that  the  wanderers  may 
come  home,  for  so  we  are,  as  far  as  lieth  in  us,  hastening  the  time  when  our  Beloved 
Himself  shall  come.     4.  Once  more,  there  is  a  sort  of  coming  of  Christ  which, 
though  it  be  not  the  first  meaning  here,  may  be  included  in  it,  for  it  touches  the 
centre  of  the  sinner's  coming  to  Christ.  Because  when  we  cry,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus," 
if  He  shall  answer  us  by  giving  us  of  His  Spirit  more  fully,  so  that  He  comes  to  us 
spiritually,  then  penitent  souls  will  assuredly  be  brought  to  His  feet.   IV.  Well,  then, 
lastly,  WHAT  ARE  the  responses  ?    We  sent  up  a  cry  to  heaven,  and  said, "  Come." 
The  response  is,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  That  is  eminently  satisfactory.   Christ 
will  descend  to  earth  as  surely  as  He  ascended  to  heaven,  and  when  He  cometh 
there  will  be  victory  to  the  right  and  to  the  true,  and  His  saints  shall  reign  with  Him. 
And  now  concerning  this  other  cry  of  '•  Come."    We  ask  'sinners  to  come.     We 
have  asked  them  in  a  fourfold  voice :  Jesus,  the  Spirit,  the  bride,  and  him  that 
heareth,   they  have  all  said,   "Come."    Will  they  come?      {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  double  •'  come  "  ; — We  have  open  before  us  the  last  page  of  the  Word  of  God. 
How  shall  the  book  finish?     Shall  it  close  with  a  promise?    It  is  well  that  it 
should,  and  there  is  the  cheering  word  for  the  righteous,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  do 
His  commandments,"  <fec.     Shall  it  close  with  a  threatening  to  the  wicked  ?    Here 
it  is  :  "  without  are  dogs,"  <fec.     Shall  the  last  sentence  be  full  of  tender  invitation 
and  earnest  entreaty  to  the  sinner,  bidding  him  come  to  Christ  and  live  ?    Yes,  let 
it  be  80 ;  and  yet  shall  we  forget  the  Lord  Himself  while  we  are  thinking  of  the 
sinner  ?  He  has  told  us  that  He  will  come — should  not  the  very  last  word  of  Scrip- 
ture have  a  reference  to  Him  and  to  His  glorious  advent  ?    Should  not  the  Spirit  at 
the  last,  as  well  as  at  the  first,  bear  witness  to  Jesus  ?    Shall  not  the  last  word  that 
shall  linger  in  the  reader's  ear  speak  of  the  approaching  glory  of  the  Lord  ?    Yes, 
let  it  be  so :  but  it  would  be  best  of  all  if  we  could  have  a  word  that  would  combine 
the  four :  a  promise  to  the  righteous,  a  threatening  to  the  wicked,  an  invitation  to 
the  poor  and  needy,  and  a  welcome  to  the  coming  one.     Who  could  devise  such  a 
verse  ?    The  Holy  Ghost  is  equal  to  the  emergency.    He  can  dictate  such  a  verse  : 
He  has  dictated  it.     Here  it  is  in  the  words  of  our  text.     I.  First,  then,  let  us  con- 
sider, the  twofold  ministry.     1.  There  is  in  the  text  a  cry  for  the  coming  of  the 
Lord.    Let  every  one  that  hears  the  prophecy  of  our  Lord's  assured  coming  join  in 
the  prayer,  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  2.  But  there  is  a  second  ministry  of  the  Church, 
which  is  the  cry  for  the  coming  of  sinners  to  Christ.     In  this  respect  •'  the  Spirit 
and  the  Bride  say.  Come."    The  world  should  ring  with  "Come  to  Jesus!"     3. 
This,  then,  is  the  double  ministry,  and  I  want  you  to  notice  that  the  first  call  is  not 
opposed  to  the  second.     The  fact  that  Christ  is  coming  ought  never  to  make  us  any 
the  less  diligent  in  pressing  sinners  to  come  to  Christ.     4.  Again,  take  heed  that 
the  second  call  never  obscures  the  first.    Be  taken  up  with  evangelical  work  ;  let  it 
fill  your  heart ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  watch  for  that  sudden  appearing  which,  to 
many,  will  be  as  unwelcome  as  a  thief  in  the  night.     5.  Let  the  two  "  comes  "  leap 
at  the  same  moment  from  your  heart,  for  they  are  linked  together.     Christ  will  not 
come  until  He  hath  gathered  unto  Himself  an  elect  company ;  therefore,  when  you 
and  I  go  forth  and  say  to  sinners,  "  Come,"  and  God  blesses  us  to  the  bringing  of 
them  in,  we  are  doing  the  best  we  can  to  hasten  the  advent  of  the  Son  of  man.     II. 
This  twofold  ministry  is  secured.    According  to  our  text,  "  The  Spirit  and  the 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  763 

bride  say,  Come."     They  always  do  say  it,  and  always  will  say  it  till  Jesus  comes. 

1.  The  Spirit  says  it.  What  a  cry  must  this  be  which  comes  up  from  the  Spirit  of 
God  Himself!  Given  at  Pentecost,  He  has  never  returned  or  left  the  Church, 
but  He  dwells  in  chosen  hearts,  as  in  a  temple,  even  to  this  day.  He  is  always 
moving  men  to  pray  that  Christ  may  come,  and  moving  men  to  come  to  Christ. 

2.  This  also  is  certainly  fulfilled  by  the  Church  wherever  she  is  a  true  Church. 
III.  The  way  in  which  this  twofold  ministry  is  increased.  "  Let  him  that 
heareth  say.  Come."  The  hearing  man  is  to  say,  "  Come,"  but  the  unconverted 
man  is  not  bidden  so  to  do.  No,  he  cannot  say  "  Come  "  till  he  has  first  come 
for  himself.  You  that  are  not  saved  cannot  invite  others.  How  can  you  ?  Yet  all  of 
you  who  have  really  heard  the  gospel  with  opened  ear,  and  received  the  truth  of 
God  by  faith  into  your  souls,  are  called  upon  to  cry,  •'  Come."  1.  See  how  this 
perpetuates  the  cry.  As  in  the  old  Greek  games  the  athletes  ran  with  torches,  and 
one  handed  the  light  to  another,  and  thus  it  passed  along  the  line,  so  is  it  with  us. 
Each  man  runneth  his  race,  but  he  passeth  the  torch  on  to  another  that  the  light 
may  never  go  out  from  generation  to  generation.  Let  the  fathers  teach  the  children, 
and  the  children  their  children,  and  so  while  the  sun  and  the  moon  endure  let  the 
voice  that  crieth,  "  Come  "  to  Christ,  go  up  to  heaven,  and  let  the  voice  that  crieth, 
♦'  Come  "  to  sinners,  be  heard  in  the  chief  places  of  concourse.  2.  This  precept 
secures  the  swelling  of  the  volume  of  the  cry ;  for  if  every  man  that  hears  the 
gospel  is  to  cry,  "  Come,"  then  there  will  be  more  voices,  and  yet  more. 
(Ibid.)  On  the  invitations  of  the  gospel : — I.  What  is  implied  in  this  invi- 
tation? And  what  is  comprehended  in  coming  to  Him?  Simply  obeying  His 
word  1  Even  now  the  chief  of  sinners  is  invited  to  return  to  God,  with  the  promise 
of  free  forgiveness,  and  the  prospect  of  everlasting  felicity  held  out  to  him.  H. 
Such  is  the  invitation  before  us.  Is  it,  in  what  it  requires  us  to  do,  aught  else  than 
what  our  own  consciences  have  often  and  again  urged  us  TO  DO  ?  Has  the  still 
small  voice  within  us  never  told  us  that  while  we  are  at  a  distance  from  God,  we  never 
can  be  happy  ?  But  we  have  also  to  remember  that  the  calls  to  return  to  God, 
which  have  been  addressed  to  us  through  the  instrumentality  of  conscience,  were  in 
reality  the  dictates  of  that  Spirit  of  all  grace  and  goodness,  who  is  represented  in 
the  text  as  inviting  us  to  a  Saviour.  Though  we  cannot  explain  His  operations, 
nor  distinguish  them  usually  from  what  we  call  those  of  our  own  minds,  yet  we 
know  that  the  Spirit  of  God  suggests  and  excites  to  all  good,  that  it  is  He  who 
restrains  us  from  utter  reprobation.  But  we  have  also  to  observe,  that  the  invita- 
tions of  the  Spirit  are  addressed  to  us  in  the  written  word  of  God ;  and  oh,  how 
frequently  are  the  entreaties,  the  warnings,  and  the  calls  of  that  word  read,  without 
the  slightest  remembrance  that  it  actually  is  the  Word  of  God  to  the  reader! 
Surely  it  is  not  a  question  to  be  dismissed  without  concern,  whether  your  Maker 
has  called  on  you  to  return  to  His  service  and  favour,  and  you  are  exposed  to  the 
fearful  penalty  of  shutting  your  ears  to  His  call,  and  despising  His  reproof.  The 
Bride  saith,  "  Come !  "  The  Church  of  Christ  is  meant  by  this  expression.  That 
Church  consists  not  only  of  those  Christians  who  are  now  on  earth,  but  of  those 
also  who  have  gone  before  us,  on  the  path  which  leads  to  God,  and  now  live  in  His 
presence  in  heaven.  We  are  not  only,  through  the  mercy  of  the  Almighty,  called 
on  to  consider  the  things  which  belong  to  our  peace,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  Christian  institutions  around  us,  but  we  should  also  remember  that  they  too  call 
upon  us,  who  now  enjoy  the  reward  of  their  toils  and  have  entered  on  their  rest,  to 
foUow  in  their  footsteps  and  emulate  their  example.  The  afifections  of  nature  add 
their  entreaty  to  the  command  of  Divine  authority ;  and  every  holy  example  of 
departed  saints,  in  the  record  of  your  own  memory,  or  in  that  of  Scripture,  as  well 
as  all  the  invitations  addressed  to  you  through  the  instituted  means  of  grace,  form 
but,  as  it  were,  the  united  voice  of  the  Church  in  heaven  and  the  Church  on  earth 
— "Come!"  Come  to  participate  in  the  privileges  of  those  who  were  the  truly 
honourable  of  the  earth,  and  to  an  eternal  reunion  with  the  great  and  good,  in 
unmingled  happiness  and  perfection.  One  observation  on  the  words,  "  Let  him  that 
heareth  say.  Come  " — him  who  has  already  heard  and  obeyed  the  call.  We  are 
bound,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  make  known  the  gospel  of  our  hopes  to  others,  and 
endeavour  to  induce  them  to  believe  and  obey ;  and,  may  we  not  add,  that  this 
should  be  felt  by  Christians  as  the  impulse  of  affection,  not  merely  as  the  obligation 
of  duty.  "Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  Opportunities,  both  public  and 
private,  are  abundant,  for  this  joint  exercise  of  Christian  love  and  Christian 
obedience.  And  are  there  not  abundant  motives  to  it  ?  It  is  to  be  a  fellow- worker 
with  Christ.   It  is  to  be  an  honoured  means  in  God's  hand  of  accomplishing  greater 


764  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

good  than  lies  within  the  attainment  of  earthly  power  or  wisdom.     III.  Who  are 
THEY  to  whom  THE  INVITATION  IS  SO  ESPECIALLY  ADDRESSED,  Under  the  descriptions, 
"  Him  that  is  athirst,"  and  "  Whosoever  will  "  ?     The  metaphor  employed  in  our 
text  directs  us  intelligibly  in  pointing  out  the  first  of  the  classes  referred  to.  Let  him 
that  is  athirst  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely.    That  is,  him  who  thirsts  for  that  water  ! 
Come  to  Christ,  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely ;  intrust  yourself  unreservedly  into 
His  hands,  and  to  His  disposal,  as  your  Teacher,  your  Master,  and  your  Saviour  ; 
and  while  you  do  this  you  will  experience  that  the  more  your  knowledge  of  Him 
increases,  the  more  your  peace  and  your  hope  will  increase  also.     It  is,  in  truth,  the 
inquirer's  unwillingness  to  submit  himself  to  Christ  in  all  his  offices,  which  usually 
stands  in  the  way  of  his  own  peace.     We  believe  there  are  exceptions,  but  not  so 
numerous  as  to  disprove  the  general  assertion.     A  sense  of  sin  leads  us  to  distrust 
the  Redeemer,  or  a  love  of  some  sin  renders  us  indisposed  to  renounce  it.     To  meet 
these  obstacles  the  gospel  is,  on  the  one  hand,  abundant  in  its  assurances  that  none 
ever  did  or  shall  trust  in  God  in  vain;  and,  on  the  other,  most  peremptory  in 
its  demands  that  all  sin  shall  be  renounced  in  coming  unto  Christ.     "  And  whoso- 
ever will !  "     Whosoever  is  sincerely  desirous  to  partake  in  the  benefits  of  salvation, 
whether  his  feelings  are  characterised  or  not  by  the  excitement  of  those  just  referred 
to,  let  him  too  come  !   The  description  is  just  made  more  general  in  these  words  for 
the  purpose  |of  displaying  more  forcibly  and  -persuasively  the  Divine  goodwill 
towards  all ;  nor  can  we  conceive  a  limitation  to  the  comprehensiveness  of  this 
description,  which  would  authorise  us  in  refusing  to  any  the  hopes  and  invitations 
of  the  gospel.     {John  Park.)         God^s  mercy  toicards  a  soul-thirsting  ivorld : — I. 
In  THE  PROVISION  He  HAS  MADE  FOB  IT.     1.  The  provisiou  is  exquisitely  suitable.     2. 
The  provision  is  absolutely  free.     II.  In  the  pressing  invitation  to  the  provision, 
1.  The  Divine  Spirit  says  "Come."     2.  The  Christian  Church  says  "Come."     3. 
The  mere  hearer  is  commanded  to  say  "  Come."     (Hojuilist.)        Come,  oh  Saviour ! 
Covie,  oh  sinner  ! — I.  The  cry  for  Christ's  advent.     It  is  this  advent  that  is  the 
great  theme  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  the  central  objects  of  its  scenes.     It  opens  with, 
"  Behold,  He  cometh  "  ;  it  goes  on  with,  "  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief  "  ;  and  it  ends 
with,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."   All  the  predictions  throughout  the  book  bear  upon 
this  event,  and  carry  forward  the  Church's  hopes  to  this  great  goal.    But  there  are 
three  parties  here  represented  as  uttering  this  prayer.     1.  The  Spirit.     He  cries, 
"  Come."    What  so  interests  the  Spirit  in  the  advent?     (1)  Christ  will  then  be  fully 
glorified,  and  it  is  the  Spirit's  office  to  glorify  Christ,     (2)  Then  the  whole  earth 
will  be  converted,  and  the  Spirit  will  get  full  scope  to  all  His  longings  and  yearnings 
over  men,     2.  The  Bride — the  Lamb's  wife,  the  whole  Church  as  a  body,  as  a 
virgin  betrothed,  looking  for  the  marriage  day.     3,  He  that  heareth.     "  Blessed  is 
he  that  heareth,"     Not  as  if  the  hearer  was  not  part  of  the  Bride ;  but  the  word 
thus  singles  out  each  one  on  whose  ears  the  message  is  falling.     The  moment  you 
hear  it,  you  should  cry,  "  Come  1  Come,  Lord  Jesus !  "     For  then  our  sins  and 
sorrows  are  ended ;  then  our  victory  is  won  ;  then  this  vile  body  is  changed  ;  then  we 
meet  and  unite  forever  with  the  loved  and  lost ;  then  shall  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord 
return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs.     II.  The  invitation  to  the  sinner.     1.  The 
inviter — Christ  Himself;  the  same  who  said,  "  Come  unto  Me."     He  invited  once 
on  earth :  He  now  invites  from  heaven  with  the  same  urgency  and  love.    2.  The 
persons  invited.    Do  you  want  to  be  happy  ?    Joy  is  here  for  you,  whoever  and 
whatever  you  are.      3.  The  blessings  invited  to — the  water  of  life.      "Water," 
that  which  will  thoroughly  refresh  you  and  quench  your  thirst ;  "  water  of  life," 
living  and  life-giving ;  a  quickening  well ;  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  ever- 
lasting life.     Not  a  shower,  nor  a  stream,  but  a  well — a  fountain  (chap,  xxi.  6). 
4.  The  price— Freely  1     Free  to  each  one  as  He  is ;  though  the  chief  of  sinners, 
the  emptiest,  wickedest,  thirstiest  of  the  sons  of  men.     6.   The  time — the  invi- 
tation comes  forth  at  the  close  of  that  book  which  sums  up  all  revelation.    It 
contains  Christ's  last  words,  meant  specially  for  the  last  days  of  a  weary,  thirsty 
world ;  when  men,  having  tried  every  pleasure,  vanity,  lust,  folly,  and  found 
nothing,  having  exhausted  every  cup  and  broken  every  cistern,  will  be  found  more 
thoroughly  weary  and  thirsty  than  before.      (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)         The  bride's 
twofold  cry : — I.  That  when  the  Church  cries  most  earnestly  for  the  Master, 
she    will    strive    most   earnestly   for    the   world.      Her   prayer    to    Christ, 
and  her  invitation   to   the    perishing,   will  go   forth   from    the   self-same   lips, 
and  at  the  self-same  time.     Her  advent  song  will  have  a  good  gospel  refrain. 
There  are  times  when  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  Church  does  long  for  the 
nearer  and  fuller  manifestation  of  her  Lord— when  she  has  settled  down  into  a 


CHAP.  XXII.]  BEVELATION.  765 

state  of  apathy  and  indifference.  And  it  is  just  at  these  times  that  she  grows  lax 
in  her  evangelistic  work,  and  becomes  careless  about  the  world  which  lieth  in 
wickedness.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  times  when  the  Church  is  stirred  to  her 
deepest,  inmost  heart  for  a  fuller  and  nearer  manifestation  of  her  Master's  presence. 
And  it  is  just  at  these  times  that  she  pleads  most  earnestly  and  powerfully  with 
sinners,  and  that  her  invitations  to  the  world  go  forth  most  freely.  Calling  earnestly 
for  the  Lord,  she  calls  most  beseechingly  to  the  world.  She  finds  the  banquet  so 
rich  and  full  that  she  cannot  but  invite  the  perishing  to  partake  of  it.  II.  If  thb 
Church  would  hear  the  Lord's  voice  and  enjoy  the  Lord's  presence,  she  must 
MAKE  His  voice  heard  by  the  unconverted.  "Let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come," 
That  is — let  him  that  hearkeneth,  that  hath  his  ears  open  for  the  Master's  voice, 
and  wishes  to  enjoy  the  Master's  presence,  let  him  make  known  the  Master's 
promises  and  the  Master's  invitations  to  the  unbelieving  world.  Or  to  put  it  in  one 
brief,  simple  sentence.  The  highest  Christian  life  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  those 
who  are  wrestling  with  the  world,  and  calling  the  unbelieving  to  the  Saviour's  feet. 
The  higher  Christian  life  is  not  possible  to  those  who  coddle  and  nurse  their  own 
souls,  and  spend  all  their  strength  in  hunting  for  spiritual  joy  and  securing  their 
own  salvation.  Just  in  proportion  to  our  anxiety  about  the  salvation  of  others  will 
complete  salvation  be  attained  by  ourselves.  Christ  will  speak  most  graciously  to 
our  souls  when  our  mouths  are  open  to  declare  His  word.  You  have  heard  of  the 
old  mystics,  the  Christian  mystics  of  the  middle  ages.  They  were  men  who  thought 
that  Christ  would  appear  to  them  in  some  material  form — or  at  least  some  visible 
form — if  they  watched  and  waited  for  Him  long  and  patiently  enough.  And  they 
shut  themselves  in  their  lonely  cells,  far  away  from  the  world,  its  cares,  and 
sorrows.  But  the  vision  came  not.  The  weird  creations  of  their  own  mad  dreams 
came  to  mock  their  endeavours — nothing  more.  No  face  of  Christ  appeared  ;  there 
was  no  realisation  of  the  Divine  presence.  These  men  were  seeking  to  save  their 
own  souls,  and  only  that,  and  Christ  would  not  answer  them.  There  is  something 
akin  to  this  old  mysticism  in  the  present  day.  Men  who  have  no  desire  for  evan- 
gelisation work,  no  concern  for  the  sinning,  dying  world,  are  expecting  to  receive 
of  Christ  all  the  power  and  joy  of  faith.  They  are  sitting  down  with  open  ear  but 
closed  lips  at  the  Master's  feet ;  they  would  gain  all  for  themselves  and  nothing  for 
the  world ;  and  Christ  withholds  the  vision  now  as  He  did  in  days  of  old.  You 
shall  not  have  the  fulness  of  power.  He  says,  unless  you  will  use  it  in  the  work  of 
conversion.  I  will  not  show  you  the  glory  of  My  face  unless  you  will  make  known 
that  glory  to  others.  "  Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  III.  Those  who  long 
FOR  the  Master's  presence  have  most  paith  in  the  Master's  power.  It  is  this 
longing  and  expectant  bride  who  is  praying  for  the  second  advent — panting,  groan- 
ing for  her  Lord's  presence.  It  is  this  bride  who  utters  the  closing  invitations  of 
our  text.  It  is  because  she  has  felt  His  power — felt  it  throbbing  through  all  her 
being — that  she  longs  for  more  of  it.  It  is  because  she  has  tasted  the  water  of  life, 
and  knows  its  sweetness,  and  its  gladness,  and  its  healing  virtues,  that  she  prays 
for  a  fuller  draught.  Ah,  she  has  great  faith  in  her  Master  and  in  the  provisions 
of  His  love.  The  first  and  last  and  always  present  sign  of  an  apathetic  and 
listless  Church  is  a  loss  of  faith  in  the  power  of  the  gospel.  The  Church 
which  has  enjoyed  little  of  Christ  is  still  generally  audacious  and  unbelieving 
enough  to  think  that  it  has  enjoyed  all.  It  thinks  it  has  received  all,  or 
nearly  all,  that  He  can  give,  and  proved  the  sum  total  of  His  power.  But 
to  a  Church  which  rejoices  in  Christ,  which  has  drunk  largely  of  His  Spirit, 
and  is  crying  day  and  night  for  more  of  it,  the  gospel  is  all  the  power 
and  sweetness  of  God  to  every  one  that  it  touches.  (J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.) 
The  gracious  invitation  of  Christ  to  sinners  : — I.  What  is  implied  in  the  thirsting 
here  spoken  of.  1.  Do  any  make  the  things  of  this  world  the  chief  object  of  their 
thirst  ?  Our  Lord  tells  them  how  they  should  regulate  their  desires,  and  which 
way  they  ought  to  turn  them  (Psa.  iv.  6).  2.  If  any  thirst  after  righteousness — 
either  the  righteousness  of  justification  or  sanctification — they  must  apply  to  Jesua 
Christ  in  order  to  obtain  the  necessary  mercies  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  3.  If  any  thirst 
after  Jesus  Christ  and  His  grace ;  such  are  called  in  the  text.  This  thirst  is  a 
fruit  of  spiritual  life  :  for  how  can  a  soul  thirst  after  Jesus  unless  the  soul  knows 
Him,  and,  in  some  measure,  the  need  it  stands  in  of  an  interest  in  Him  ;  and  Hia 
suitableness  to  the  wants  of  the  soul  ?  4.  If  any  thirst  after  happiness — though 
this  thirsting  may  be  found  where  there  is  nothing  but  common  convictions,  no 
desire  after  holiness,  but  only  a  desire  to  be  saved  from  misery,  not  from  sin — ye| 
Jesus  calls  such  to  come  to  Him  for  that  happiness  which  they  desire.     Would  yo< 


766  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

"be  happy  hereafter  ?  Then  you  must  begin  with  Christ  now ;  He  is  the  Way,  the 
Truth,  and  the  Life.  (1)  Spiritual  thirst  proceeds  from  a  sense  of  the  soul's  wants : 
either  grace  and  holiness,  or  the  increase  of  these  mercies.  (2)  Souls  spiritually 
athirst  are  pained  and  uneasy  in  their  minds  till  they  obtain  the  very  mercy 
desired.  (3)  Spiritual  thirst  centres  in  Christ ;  souls  spiritually  athirst  have  their 
chief  inquiries  and  desires  after  Him  and  His  benefits  as  the  Water  of  Life ;  and 
Himself  as  the  Fountain  of  all  grace  and  blessedness.  (4)  Spiritual  thirst  after 
Jesus  Christ,  His  grace,  righteousness,  and  holiness  is  laborious ;  it  is  willing  to  be 
at  any  pains,  in  God's  way,  to  gain  satisfaction,  or  have  its  desires  answered. 
n.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  invites  evert  thirsty  soul  to  come  to  Him.  1.  What 
this  coming  is.  It  is  believing  in  Jesus  Christ  (John  vi.  35).  Not  an  act  of  the 
body,  but  of  the  soul.  The  consent  of  the  will.  Eeceiving  and  resting  upon 
Christ  alone  for  salvation.  We  first  come  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  then  to  God  by 
Him.  2.  To  whom  convinced  sinners  should  come  for  relief.  To  Jesus  Christ. 
He  is  very  God ;  arid,  as  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  He  has  an  all-fulness  in 
Him.  3.  Who  are  the  persons  that  Jesus  calls  to  come  to  Him.  HI.  How  are  wb 
TO  ukderstand  the  expression  "whosoever  will."    IV.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

WILL  ABUNDANTLY  SATISFY  EVERY  THIRSTY  SOUL   THAT  COMES  TO  HiM.    ThiS  is  CVideut 

1.  By  the  frequent  repetition  of  His  calls  and  invitations  to  sinners  to  return  and 
come  to  Him  for  His  benefits.  2.  From  the  many  instances  of  those  that  came  to 
Jesus  Christ,  in  the  days  of  His  ministry  upon  earth,  for  some  bodily  favour, 
either  for  themselves  or  friends  or  relations.  3.  By  the  experience  of  every  true 
believer.  V.  What  do  needy  souls  find  in  Jesus  Christ  upon  their  coming  to 
Him?  1.  He  that  has  natural  thirst  is  willing  to  be  at  any  reasonable  cost  for 
something  to  satisfy  his  thirst :  for  he  knows  that  if  he  has  not  timely  reUef  he  is 
in  danger  of  his  life.  So  the  soul  that  thirsts  after  Jesus  Christ  and  His  grace  is 
willing  to  part  with  all  for  Him  ;  for  he  knows  that  Christ  has  enough  in  Him  to 
satisfy  all  his  spiritual  desires.  2.  That  which  satisfies  natural  thirst  will  be 
highly  esteemed  (Job  xxiii.  12  ;  Jer.  xv.  16;  Psa.  cxix.  97).  3.  If  the  soul  is  truly 
athirst  after  Jesus  Christ  and  His  grace,  nothing  short  of  Christ  will  satisfy  it. 
4.  A  thirsty  man  will  be  glad  of,  and  thankful  for,  seasonable  relief.  5.  The 
thirsty  man's  desires  are  not  satisfied  once  for  all,  but  he  must  have  new  supplies 
(John  vi.  34  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  3,  4),  6.  A  thirsty  man  will  be  willing  to  take  any  pains 
to  obtain  his  desires.  Such  will  come  to  the  fountain,  and  sit  at  the  pool,  and  wait 
at  the  posts  of  wisdom's  gates ;  they  will  honour  the  ordinances  of  Jesus  Christ  by 
a  careful  attendance  on  them,  or  rather  on  God  in  them,  in  order  to  obtain  the 
mercies  that  their  souls  want.  To  such  as  have  experienced  this  thirsting  after 
Jesus  Christ  and  His  benefits,  and  have  been  made  willing  to  come  to  Him,  and 
look  for  salvation  from  Him  upon  His  own  terms.  Be  very  thankful  to  God  for 
what  He  has  discovered  to  you,  and  wrought  in  and  for  you.  Give  thanks  to  God 
for  the  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ  as  Mediator,  prepared  for  the  supply  of  needy  souls  ; 
and  then  for  His  showing  you,  by  the  gospel,  the  fulness  of  grace  that  is  in  Christ. 
Give  thanks  to  God  for  drawing  you.  Take  care  to  exert  and  lay  out  for  the 
honour  and  glory  of  God  and  for  the  exaltation  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  service  of 
His  kingdom  and  the  good  of  souls  whatsoever  you  have  received  from  Him. 
Oh  let  Him  have  the  honour  of  His  grace.  {W.  Notcutt.)  Come  and  welcome  : — 
The  cry  of  the  Christian  religion  is  the  simple  word  "  come."  The  Jewish  law 
said,  "  Go,  and  take  heed  unto  thy  steps  as  to  the  path  in  which  thou  shalt  walk. 
Go,  and  break  the  commandments,  and  thou  shalt  perish  ;  go,  and  keep  them,  and 
thou  shalt  live."  The  law  repels;  the  gospel  attracts.  I.  There  is  a  "  water  of 
LIFE."  Man  is  utterly  ruined  and  undone.  He  is  lost  in  a  wild  waste  wilderness. 
The  skin  bottle  of  his  righteousness  is  all  dried  up,  and  there  is  not  so  much  as  a 
drop  of  water  in  it.  Must  he  perish  ?  He  looks  aloft,  beneath,  around,  and  he 
discovers  no  means  of  escape.  Must  thirst  devour  him  ?  No ;  for  the  text  declares 
there  is  a  fountain  of  life.  Ordained  in  old  eternity  by  God  in  solemn  covenant, 
this  fountain,  this  Divine  well,  takes  its  spring  from  the  deep  foundations  of  God's 
decrees.  This  sacred  fountain,  established  according  to  God's  good  will  and 
pleasure  in  the  covenant,  opened  by  Christ  when  He  died  upon  the  Cross,  floweth 
this  day  to  give  life  and  health  and  joy  and  peace  to  poor  sinners  dead  in  sin  and 
ruined  by  the  fall.  There  is  a  "  water  of  life."  By  this  water  of  life  is  intended 
God's  free  grace,  God's  love  for  men,  so  that  if  you  come  and  drink,  you  shall 
find  this  to  be  life  indeed  to  your  soul,  for  in  drinking  of  God's  grace  you  inherit 
God's  love,  you  are  reconciled  to  God,  God  stands  in  a  fatherly  relation  to  you,  He 
loves  you,  and  His  great  infinite  heart  yearns  towards  you.    Again,  it  is  living 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION,  767 

water  not  simply  because  it  is  love,  and  that  is  life,  but  it  saves  from  impending 
death.     Come  hither  then,  ye  sin-doomed  ;  this  water  can  wash  away  your  sins, 
and  when  your  sins  are  washed  away,  then  shall  ye  live  ;  for  the  innocent  must  not 
be  punished.     Here  is  water  that  can  make  you  whiter  than  driven  snow.     "  But," 
saith  the  poor  convicted  soul,  "  this  is  not  all  I  want,  for  if  all  the  sins  I  have  ever 
committed  were  blotted  out,  in  one  ten  minutes  I  should  commit  many  more.     If  I 
were  now  completely  pardoned,  it  would  not  be  many  seconds  before  I  should 
destroy  my  soul  and  sink  helplessly  again."    Ay  1  but  see  here,  this  is  living  water, 
it  can  quench  thy  thirst  of  sin ;  entering  into  thy  soul  it  shall  overcome  and  cover 
with  its  floods  thy  propensities  to  evil.     This  is  life  indeed,  for  here  is  favour,  here 
is  pardon,  here  is  sanctity,  the  renewing  qf  the  soul  by  the  washing  of  water  through 
the  Word.     "  But,"  saith  one,  "  I  have  a  longing  within  me  which  I  cannot  satisfy. 
I  feel  sure  that  if  I  be  pardoned  yet  there  is  something  which  1  want — which 
nothing  I  have  ever  heard  of,  or  have  ever  seen  or  handled,  can  satisfy.     I  have 
within  me  an  aching  void  which  the  world  can  never  fill."    But  hearken !  thou 
that  art  wretched  and  miserable,  here  is  living  water  that  can  quench  thy  thirst. 
Gome  hither  and  drink,  and  thou  shalt  be  satisfied ;  for  he  that  is  a  believer  in 
Christ  finds  enough  for  him  in  Christ  now,  and  enough  for  ever.     You  shall  never 
thirst  again,  except  it  be  that  you  shall  long  for  deeper  draughts  of  this  living 
fountain.    And,  moreover,  he  who  drinketh  of  this  living  water  shall  never  die. 
His  body  shall  see  corruption  for  a  little  while,  but  his  soul,  mounting  aloft,  shall 
dwell   with  Jesus.     Yea !  and  his  very  body,  when  it  has  passed  through  the 
purifying  process,  shall  rise  again  more  glorious  than  when  it  was  sown  in  weakness. 
It  shall  rise  in  glory,  in  honour,  in  power,  in  majesty,  and  united  with  the  soul,  it 
shall  everlastingly  inherit  the  joys  which  Christ  has  prepared  for  them  that  love 
Him.    II.  The  invitation  is  very  wide — "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the 
WATER  or  LIFE  FREELY."    The  oue  qucstiou  I  have  to  ask  is,  art  thou  willing  ?  if  so, 
Christ  bids  thee  take  the  water  of  life.    Art  thou  willing  ?  if  so,  be  pardoned,  be 
sanctified,  be  made  whole.    For  if  thou  art  willing  Christ  is  willing  too,  and  thou 
art  freely  invited  to  come  and  welcome  to  the  fountain  of  life  and  grace.     Now 
mark,  the  question  has  to  do  with  the  will.     "Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  am  so  foolish  I 
cannot  understand  the  plan  of  salvation,  therefore  I  may  not  come  and  drink." 
But  my  question  has  nothing  to  do  with  your  understanding,  it  has  to  do  with  your 
wiTl.    You  may  be  as  big  a  fool  as  you  will,  but  if  you  are  willing  to  come  to  Christ 
you  are  freely  invited.     "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  can  understand  the  plan  of  salvation, 
but  I  cannot  repent  as  I  would.     Sir,  my  heart  is  so  hard  I  cannot  bring  the  tear  to 
my  eye.    I  cannot  feel  my  sins  as  I  would  desire."    Ay,  but  this  text  has  nothing  to 
do  with  your  heart ;  it  is  with  your  will.    Are  you  wiUing  ?     Then  be  your  heart 
hard  as  the  nether  millstone,  if  thou  art  willing  to  be  saved  I  am  bidden  to  invite 
thee.     "  Whosoever  will,"  not  "  whosoever  feels,"  but  "  whosoever  will,  let  him 
come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."     "  Yes,"  says  one,  "  I  can  honestly  say  I 
am  willing,  but  my  heart  will  not  soften.    I  wish  that  grace  would  change  me.     I 
can  say  I  wish  that  Christ  would  soften  my  heart.    I  am  wiUing."    Well,  then,  the 
text  is  for  thee,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."    If  thou  art  wiUing  thou  art 
freely  invited  to  Christ.     "  No,"  saith  one,  "  but  I  am  such  a  great  sinner.     I  have 
been  a  drunkard ;  I  have  been  a  lascivious  man ;  I  have  gone  far  astray  from 
the  paths  of  rectitude.     I  would  not  have  all  my  sins  known  to  my  fellow  creatures. 
How  can  God  accept  of  such  s^  wretch  as  I  am,  such  a  foul  creature  as  I  have 
been  ?  "     Mark  thee,  man !     There  is  no  reference  made  here  to  thy  past  life.     It 
simply  says,    "whosoever  will."    Art  thou   willing?     "Ah!"   saith  one,   "God 
knows  I  am  willing,  but  still  I  do  not  think  I  am  worthy."    No,  I  know  you  are 
not,  but  what  is  that  to  do  with  it?    It  is  not,  "  whosoever  is  worthy,"  but  "  who- 
soever will,  let  him  come."     "  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  believe  that  whosoever  will  may 
come,  but  not  me,  for  I  am  the  vilest  sinner  out  of  hell."    But  hark  thee,  sinner, 
it  says,    "  whosoever."    What  a  big  word  that  is  1     Whosoever  I     There   is  no 
standarJ-height  here.     It  is  of  any  height  and  any  size.     HI.  How  clear  the  path 
IB,   "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."    That  word 
"let  "is  a  very  curious  word,  because  it  signifies  two  opposite  things.     "Let"  is 
an  old-fashioned  word  which  sometimes  signifies  "  hinder."    "  He  that  letteth  shall 
be  taken  away  " — that  is,  "  He  that  hindereth."   But  here,  in  our  text,  it  means  the 
removing  of  all  hindrance.     "  Let  him  come  " — methinks  I  hear  Jehovah  speaking 
this.     Here  is  the  fountain  of  love  and  mercy.    But  you  are  too  unworthy,  you  are 
too  vile.     Hear  Jehovah!     He  cries,  "Let  him  come,  he  is  willing.     Stand  back  1 
doubts  and  fears;  away  with  you,  let  him  come;  make  a  straight  road;  let  Hin^ 


768  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

come  if  he  be  but  willing."  Then  the  devil  himself  comes  forward,  and  striding 
across  the  way,  he  says  to  the  poor  trembling  soul,  "  I  will  spiU  thy  blood  ;  thou 
shalt  never  have  mercy.  I  defy  thee ;  thou  shalt  never  believe  in  Christ,  and  never 
be  saved."  But  Christ  says,  "  Let  him  come  "  ;  and  Satan,  strong  though  he  be, 
quails  beneath  Jehovah's  voice,  and  Jesus  drives  him  away,  and  the  path  stands 
clear,  nor  can  sin,  nor  death,  nor  hell,  block  up  the  way  when  Jehovah  Jesus 
says,  "  Let  him  come."  Standing  one  day  in  the  court-house,  some  witness  was 
required,  I  forget  his  name  ;  it  may  have  been  Brown,  for  instance,  in  one  moment 
the  name  was  announced,  "  Brown,  Samuel  Brown  " ;  by  and  by  twenty  others 
take  up  the  cry,  "  Samuel  Brown,  Samuel  Brown."  There  was  seen  a  man  pushing 
his  way  through  ;  "  Make  room,"  said  he,  "  make  room,  his  honour  calls  me,"  and 
though  there  were  many  in  his  path  they  gave  way,  because  his  being  called  was  a 
sufficient  command  to  them,  not  to  hinder  him,  but  to  let  him  come.  And  now, 
soul,  if  thou  be  a  willing  sinner,  though  thy  name  is  not  mentioned — if  thou  be  a 
willing  sinner,  thou  art  as  truly  called  as  though  thou  wert  called  by  name,  and 
therefore,  push  through  thy  fears.  Make  elbow  room,  and  come ;  they  that  would 
stop  thee  are  craven  cowards.  He  has  said,  "  Let  him  come,"  and  they  cannot 
keep  you  back;  Jehovah  has  said,  "Let  him  come,"  and  it  is  yours  now  to  say, 
"  I  will  come.  IV.  The  condition  which  is  the  death  op  all  conditions — let  him 
TAKE  IT  FBEELT.  Mcthiuks  I  see  one  here  who  is  saying,  "  I  would  be  saved  and  I 
will  do  what  I  can  to  be  worthy  of  it."  The  fountain  is  free,  and  he  comes  with 
his  halfpenny  in  his  hand,  and  that  a  bad  one,  and  he  says,  "  Here,  sir,  give  me  a 
cup  of  this  living  water  to  drink  ;  I  am  well  worthy  of  it,  for  see  the  price  is  in  my 
hand."  Why,  man,  if  thou  could'st  bring  the  wealth  of  Potosi,  or  all  the  diamonds 
of  Galconda,  and  all  the  pearls  of  Ormuz,  you  could  not  buy  this  most  costly 
thing.  Put  up  your  money,  you  could  not  have  it  for  gold  or  silver.  The  man 
brings  his  merit,  but  heaven  is  not  to  be  sold  to  meritmongers.  Or  perhaps  you 
say,  "I  will  go  to  church  regularly,  I  will  give  to  the  poor,  I  will  attend  my 
meeting-house,  I  will  take  a  sitting,  I  will  be  baptized,  I  will  do  this  and  the  other, 
and  then  no  doubt  I  shall  have  the  water  of  life."  Back,  miserable  herd,  bring  not 
your  rags  and  rubbish  to  God,  He  wants  them  not.  Stand  back,  you  insult  the 
Almighty  when  you  tender  anything  as  payment.  Back  with  ye ;  He  invites  not 
such  as  you  to  come.  He  says  come  freely.  He  wants  nothing  to  reconunend  y9u. 
He  needs  no  recommendation.  You  want  no  good  works.  Do  not  bring  any.  But 
you  have  no  good  feelings.  Nevertheless  you  are  willing,  therefore  come.  He 
wants  no  good  feelings  of  you.  You  have  no  belief  and  no  repentance,  yet  never- 
theless you  are  willing.  Do  not  try  to  get  them  yourself — come  to  Him,  and  He 
will  give  them  to  you.  Come  just  as  you  are ;  it  is  "  freely,"  "  without  money  and 
without  price."  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  Let  him  bring  nothing  to 
recommend  him.  Let  him  not  imagine  he  can  give  any  payment  to  God,  or  any 
ransom  for  his  soul ;  for  the  one  condition  that  excludes  all  conditions  is,  "  Let 
him  come  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  There  is  a  man  of  God  here  who  has 
drank  of  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  many  times ;  but  he  says,  "  I  want  to  know 
more  of  Christ,  I  want  to  have  nearer  fellowship  with  Him  ;  I  want  to  enter  more 
closely  into  the  mystery  of  His  sacrifice  ;  I  want  to  understand  more  and  more  of 
the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  and  to  be  made  conformable  unto  His  death." 
Well,  believer,  drink  freely.  You  have  filled  your  bowl  of  faith  once,  and  you 
drank  the  draught  off  ;  fill  it  again,  drink  again,  and  keep  on  drinking.  Put  your 
mouth  to  the  fountain  if  you  will  drink  right  on.  As  good  Rutherford  says  in  one 
of  his  letters,  "  I  have  been  sinking  my  bucket  down  into  the  well  full  often,  but 
now  my  thirst  after  Christ  has  become  so  insatiable  that  I  long  to  put  the  well  itself 
to  my  lips  and  drain  it  all,  and  drink  right  on."  Well,  take  it  freely  as  much  as  ever 
you  can.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Let  him  that  hearetb  say.  Come. — The  great 
commission: — It  is  midnight  in  the  crowded  city.  A  million  of  people,  weary 
with  the  cares  and  burdens  of  the  day,  have  sought  relief  in  sleep.  In 
thousands  of  houses  the  lights  are  extinguished,  and  nothing  breaks  the  silence 
of  healthy  repose.  From  an  upper  window,  unseen  of  any,  came  a  puff  of 
smoke  and  curled  upward  into  the  night  air.  The  watchman  passed  the  building, 
and,  to  his  observation,  all  was  safe.  He  turned  the  corner  of  his  beat,  but  a  steady 
column  of  smoke  was  rising  in  place  of  the  single  puff.  Ere  he  returns  to 
point  of  view  a  fiery  wave  is  rolling  up  to  heaven.  The  heated  air  has  waked  a 
current,  and  the  fire-fiends  are  in  glee  as  through  the  thin  partitions  of  the  blocks 
the  greedy  flames  make  their  way.  Who  shall  arouse  the  sleeping  city?  Who 
shall  save  the  dwellers  in  yonder  house,  already  lighted  with  the  reflected  beams  as 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  769 

though  the  devils  were  dancing  on  its  rafters  in  glee  at  its  speedy  destruction? 
Must  we  wait  for  the  city's  appointment,  the  mayor's  seal,  the  otRcial's  paper  ? 
Let  him  that  seeth  cry,  "  Fire !  "  Let  him  that  heareth  cry,  "  Fire  !  "  and  roll  the 
cry  in  deafening  thunders  on  till  every  soul  is  stirred,  every  family  safe.  The 
possession  of  a  tongue  is  the  evidence  of  heaven's  commission — the  roaring  flame  is 
the  voice  of  authority  commanding  to  immediate  alarm,  to  instant  toil,  and  none 
may  find  excuse  from  blame  who  withhold  their  cries  as  they  stand  beside  the 
charred,  disfigured  bodies  of  the  unalarmed.  Here  is  the  ground  for  universal 
Christian  labour.  The  dangerous  exposure  of  man  voices  the  Divine  commission 
to  each.  Let  us  try  again :  The  clouds  refused  their  moisture,  and  the  hot  sun 
poured  incessantly  upon  the  dry  and  parching  earth.  The  seed  lost  its  power  of 
reproduction ;  fruit  juices  dried  in  the  vine  and  tree  ;  grass  withered  in  the  field, 
and  when  the  winds  of  autumn  blew  not  a  barn  held  any  treasure,  not  a  home  had 
any  provision.  The  days  of  famine  came ;  children  cried  for  food  their  parents 
could  not  give ;  infants  died  upon  the  famished  breasts  of  their  mothers ;  strong 
men  crept  about  in  the  helplessness  of  infancy  ;  the  flocks  were  destroyed ;  weeping 
and  wailing  were  on  every  side.  The  dreadful  news  was  sent  to  distant  lands,  and 
the  cry  for  bread  burdened  every  breeze.  The  eager  watchers  sat  upon  the 
mountains  and  gazed  upon  the  far-off  sea.  At  length,  slow  rising  on  the  distant 
edge,  a  sail  appears ;  with  beating  hearts  they  watch ;  nearer  it  comes,  sailing  to 
their  relief.  The  shore  is  reached ;  it  is  the  relief-ship,  crammed  with  bread  and 
fruits  of  life.  The  busy  hands  roll  the  cargo  out  and  spread  it  on  the  shore  and 
welcome  all.  The  starving  are  at  home.  The  dying  want  only  a  crust  of  bread  to 
bring  them  back  to  life  again.  And  now  in  rich  abundance  plenty  for  all  is  heaped 
upon  the  land.  The  few  upon  the  border  satisfy  their  wants;  the  multitudes 
beyond  the  hill  that  skirts  the  beach  are  ignorant  of  any  provision,  and  as  the 
minutes  pass  their  lives  go  out.  Who  shaU  proclaim  that  plenty  waits  their 
coming  ?  Who  shall  carry  the  glad  news  over  the  hills  into  the  inland  cities  that 
the  suffering  is  at  an  end  and  there  is  enough  for  all  ?  Let  him  that  has  a  voice 
cry,  "  Bread  upon  the  shore ! "  and  him  that  heareth  cry,  "  Bread  upon  the  shore  1 " 
till  the  echo  rings  through  the  whole  famished  land  and  has  fallen  upon  every  ear 
and  the  multitudes  are  flocking  to  satisfy  their  wants.  What  shall  be  said  of  him 
who,  knowing  the  destitution  and  made  acquainted  with  the  supply,  coolly  declares, 
"  Let  them  find  it  out  for  themselves.  I  have  eaten."  Or  who  is  content  to  let  only 
the  appointed  herald  make  proclamation  once  for  all  ?  What  shall  be  said  of  him 
who  sees  a  starving  family,  notes  the  faltering  steps,  the  hollow  cheeks,  the  tear- 
dimmed  eye,  the  haggard  look,  and  ventures  no  information  that  the  food  has 
come?  Again,  we  have  found  a  call  for  universal  Christian  toil  emphasised  by 
supply  as  well  as  need.  Heaven  cries  to  each  through  teeming  bounty  for  all.  "  0 
that  the  Christian  world  would  wake  to  faithfulness,  and  when  the  Spirit  and  the 
Bride  has  said,  '  Come,'  even  he  that  heareth  would  say,  ♦  Come.* "  The  great 
realities  of  the  Christian  faith  demand  individual  effort  for  their  promulgation.     I. 

ThK   DANaEB   OF   THE   SOUL   CALLS    FOB   THE   ALARM   CRT   OF   EACH.      If   the  flameS  of  a 

burning  city  call  to  each  to  give  alarm,  how  much  more  the  flames  that  throw  their 
glare  upon  the  living  soul?  We  need  not  cross  the  borders  of  this  world,  nor 
travel  out  of  the  circle  of  personal  acquaintance,  to  find  consuming  men,  burning 
with  a  heat  that  stirs  the  pity  which  they  treat  with  scorn.  Thinlc  of  the 
pitiful  crowds  of  women  out  of  whose  being  all  trace  of  mother-love  is  burned,  all 
tender  affections  gone— sweetness,  kindness,  virtue — the  very  ashes  of  all  nobleness 
blown  away,  and  the  bestial  fires  still  glowing  in  their  souls ;  yet  they  were  fair, 
favoured,  honoured  as  any  till  the  torch  was  applied,  the  conflagration  started,  and 
no  soul  sought  to  quench  it.  There  is  no  soul  in  all  the  world  to  which  the  fiery 
torch  of  sin  has  not  been  placed.  The  peril  of  each  is  imminent.  The  watchman 
passes  by  but  does  not  see  the  smouldering  passion,  the  heated  imagination.  The 
inflamed  soul  is  careless  of  others.  But  there  are  those  who  have  been  dashed  with 
the  waters  of  life  and  see  and  know  the  increasing  danger ;  there  are  those  who 
have  themselves  been  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning.  They  note  the  first 
puff  that  indicates  in  their  friend,  in  a  passer-by,  the  kindled  fire ;  they  see  the 
glare  in  the  eye,  on  the  cheek,  in  the  spirit ;  that  detects  the  glow  that  heralds  the 
blazing  city  of  the  soul;  honour,  honesty,  obedience  to  God,  regard  for  human 
rights,  child-love,  wife-love,  even  self-love,  are  wrapped  in  smoke  and  flame,  and 
yet  the  cry  of  alarm  is  withheld.  Seize  the  child  with  blazing  garments  and  wrap 
her  in  a  rug,  no  matter  who  she  is,  no  matter  where  she  stands  ;  it  shall  save  a  life. 
Baise  the  cry  for  instant  help.     Summon  the  ambulance.     This  is  the  voice  of 

49 


770  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

humanity.  How  much  louder  then  should  be  the  call,  how  much  more  vigorous 
the  effort  to  relieve  the  endangered  soul !  Begin  in  your  own  home  to-day  where 
the  danger  is  truly  personal.  Is  it  enough  that  you  talk  of  all  matters  but  the 
soul's  escape  from  sin  ?  Is  it  enough  that  the  preacher  cries  out  in  trumpet-tones, 
♦'  Let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come  ?  "  Assail  each  ear  with  the  cry  that  God  has 
put  upon  your  lips.  II.  The  provision  for  saving  the  soul  calls  for  individuaii 
PROCLAMATION.  If  the  sca-sidc  watchers,  failing  to  inform  the  famine  land  of  plenty, 
deserve  the  detestation  of  mankind,  what  is  the  righteous  judgment  on  him  who 
fails  to  inform  of  the  spiritual  supply  for  endangered  and  perishing  souls?  " Let 
him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  It  is  not  the  results  of  his  own  investigations  that 
man  is  sent  to  proclaim.  It  is  of  the  glorious  provision  of  God.  Not  the  subtleties 
of  abstruse  metaphysical  reasoning,  nor  the  teachings  of  learned  scientists,  but 
pardon  for  the  guUty,  a  Saviour  for  the  lost,  he  is  to  shout  and  whisper  into  every 
ear,  that  the  dying  may  hear  it  and  never  die,  that  the  living  may  catch  its  mean- 
ing and  hve  for  ever.  'Tis  not  a  call  for  the  investigation  of  provision,  but  for  its 
distribution.  Its  summons  is  not  to  the  trained  scholars  of  the  land  alone,  to  the 
skilful  reasoners,  to  the  eloquent  lips,  but  to  hearers  of  every  class.  The  sacred 
privilege,  the  solemn  duty,  opens  before  every  one  who  hears  to  proclaim  the  mercy 
and  the  grace  of  God  toward  men  to  give  hope  to  the  hopeless,  courage  to  the 
faint,  a  Saviour  to  all.  The  commission  bears  no  time  limitation.  Not  once  a 
week,  when  Sabbath  bells  ring,  but  every  day  and  every  time  a  needy  soul  is  met 
may  the  word  be  spoken,  "  Come  to  the  open  fountain !  Come  to  the  bread  of 
life  !  "  I  have  read  that  during  a  heavy  storm  off  the  coast  of  Spain  a  dismantled 
merchantman  was  observed  by  a  British  frigate  drifting  before  the  gale.  Every  eye 
and  glass  were  on  her,  and  a  canvas  shelter  on  the  deck  almost  level  with  the  sea 
suggested  the  idea  that  there  yet  might  be  life  on  board.  Instantly  the  order 
sounded  to  put  the  ship  about,  and  a  boat  puts  off  with  instructions  to  bear  down 
upon  the  wreck  and  rescue  life  if  aught  remained.  Away  after  that  drifting  hulk 
go  the  gallant  men,  risking  their  own  lives  on  the  mountain  billows  of  the  roaring 
sea.  Beaching  it  they  cry  aloud,  and  from  the  canvas  screen  creeps  out  what 
proved  to  be  the  body  of  a  man  so  shrivelled  and  wasted  as  to  be  easily  lifted  on 
board.  In  tender  pity  the  rough  men  rub  the  chilled  and  wasted  body.  About  to 
pull  away,  the  saved  man  moves  and  moans  and  whispers,  and  as  they  listen  they 
can  catch  the  muttered  words,  "  There  is  another  man."  The  saved  would  save 
his  friend,  though  almost  in  the  hands  of  death.  It  is  the  lesson  for  us  all.  While 
another  man  treads  the  globe  unsaved  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  ho,  brethren  to  the 
rescue  1  Not  in  the  feebleness  of  your  own  strength,  but  in  obedience  to  Him  who 
sends  the  thrilling  message  to  all  whose  ears  have  been  touched  with  the 
heavenly  music,  saying,  "Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come."  {S.  H.  Virgin,  D.D.) 
Let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come : — 1.  Notice  the  party  addressed :  "  Him  that 
heareth."    There  is  no  reference  here  to  age,  or  position,  or  gifts,  or  learning. 

2.  Observe  the  terms  in  which  this  duty  is  prescribed.  He  that  heareth  is  to  "  say, 
Come."  The  terms  here  used  are  very  general,  and  in  many  respects  indefinite. 
If  you  cannot  •'  say.  Come,"  in  the  church,  you  can  say  it  in  the  shop,  or  at  the 
fireside,  or  on  the  roads.  The  Sabbath,  for  example,  is  a  most  suitable  time  to 
say,  "  Come,"  when  the  minds  of  men  are  less  occupied  with  worldly  cares  and 
business  ;  or  a  time  of  affliction,  when  the  heart  is  likely  to  be  somewhat  softened. 
I.  Show  how  the  truth  of  the  text  is  confirmed  and  exemplified  by  otheb 
PASSAGES  IN  THE  WoRD  OP  GoD  (Psa.  Ixvi.  16 ;  Isa.  ii.  3 ;  Zech.  viii,  21 ;  John 
i.  41,  45,  46 ;  iv.  29,  &c.).  It  is  no  new  commandment,  but  one  which  has  been 
from  the  beginning,  that  they  who  have  accepted  the  invitation  of  the  gospel 
should  straightway  invite  others  to  the  feast.  II.  The  motives  that  should 
stimulate  us  to  carry  out  this  exhortation.  1.  For  Christ's  sake  we  ought 
to  say,  Come.  How  then  can  we  pretend  to  love  Christ  if  we  are  habitually 
neglecting  to  say.  Come  ?  Does  it  not  evince  base  ingratitude  if  we  are  not  working 
for  Him  who  did  and  suffered  so  much  for  us  ?  2.  The  condition  of  Christless 
souls  may  well  excite  our  pity,  and  prompt  us  to  active  exertion  on  their  behalf. 

3.  For  our  own  sake  we  ought  to  say.  Come.  However  difficult  a  duty  is,  it  is 
never  for  our  interest  to  neglect  it.  And  think  what  a  noble  service  this  is  1  It 
makes  us  partakers  with  Christ  in  His  work.  Christian  activity,  like  mercy,  is 
twice  blessed.  In  watering  others  our  own  souls  are  also  watered.  "  A  traveller 
was  crossing  mountain  heights  alone  over  almost  untrodden  snows.  Warning  had 
been  given  him  that  if  slumber  pressed  down  his  weary  eyelids  they  would 
inevitably  be  sealed  in  death.    For  a  time  he  went  bravely  along  his  dreary  path. 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  771 

But  with  the  deepening  shade  and  freezing  blast  of  night  there  fell  a  weight  upon 
his  brain  and  eyes  which  seemed  to  be  irresistible.  In  vain  he  tried  to  reason  with 
himself ;  in  vain  he  strained  his  utmost  energies  to  shake  off  that  fatal  heaviness. 
At  this  crisis  of  his  fate  his  foot  struck  against  a  heap  that  lay  across  his  path. 
No  stone  was  that,  although  no  stone  could  be  colder  or  more  lifeless.  He  stooped 
to  touch  it,  and  found  a  human  body  half  buried  beneath  a  fresh  drift  of  snow. 
The  next  moment  the  traveller  had  taken  a  brother  in  his  arms,  and  was  chafing 
his  chest,  and  hands,  and  brow,  breathing  upon  the  stifif,  cold  lips  the  warm  breath 
of  his  living  soul,  pressing  the  silent  heart  to  the  beating  pulses  of  his  own  generous 
bosom.  The  effort  to  save  another  had  brought  back  to  himself  life,  warmth,  and 
energy.  He  saved  his  brother  and  was  saved  himself.  Go  thou  and  do  likewise." 
Earnest  efforts  for  the  salvation  of  others  will  save  us  many  a  bitter  regret.  HI. 
Directions  as  to  how  you,  are  "to  say.  Come,"  1,  Humbly.  Beware  of  cherishing 
high  thoughts  of  yourselves,  as  if  through  any  merit  or  efforts  of  your  own  you 
had  attained  your  present  position.  Beware  of  despising  any  to  whom  you  say 
Come,  as  if  you  had  all  your  lives  been  immensely  superior  to  them.  2.  Earnestly. 
Such  awful  realities  as  the  soul,  sin,  Christ,  death,  judgment,  eternity,  are  not 
matters  to  be  lightly  or  coldly  spoken  of.  3.  Believingly  and  prayerfully.  Have 
confidence  in  the  power  of  God's  truth  when  it  is  accompanied  with  the  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  And,  having  this  faith,  let  your  prayer  ascend  to  God  on 
behalf  of  your  unconverted  friends,  and  on  your  own  behalf,  that  you  may  be 
rightly  guided  in  saying  Come  to  them.  4,  Perseveringly.  Be  not  discouraged  by 
even  many  rebuffs  and  refusals.  Give  none  up  in  despair.  Kemember  how  long- 
suffering  the  Lord  was  to  you,  and  be  you  as  long-suffering  towards  others. 
{J.  G.  Dalgliesh.)  The  duty  of  missionary  enterprise : — Let  me  give  you  one  or 
two  reasons  why  missions  are  especially  incumbent  upon  this  nation.  1,  First, 
because  we  owe  to  them  immeasurable  benefits.  I  throw  in  without  estimate  all 
that  missions  have  done  for  the  cause  of  science,  though  there  is  scarcely  one 
single  science  that  does  not  owe  to  them  an  immense  advance.  I  throw  in  without 
estimate  all  they  have  done  to  the  cause  of  civilisation,  though  no  less  a  witness 
than  Charles  Darwin  said  that  the  lesson  of  the  missionary  was  the  enchanter's  wand. 
I  throw  in  without  estimate  all  that  they  have  done  for  the  diminution  of  human 
misery,  the  suppression  of  war,  the  spread  of  commerce,  the  abolition  of  execrable 
cruelties.  "It  is  Christ,"  says  Chunder  Sen — and  you  could  have  no  more 
unprejudiced  witness — "  it  is  Christ,  and  not  the  British  Government,  that  rules 
India."  "  Our  hearts,"  he  says,  speaking  for  his  countrymen,  "  our  hearts  have 
been  conquered,  not  by  armies,  not  by  your  gleaming  bayonets,  and  your  fiery 
cannon,  but  by  a  higher  and  different  power,  and  that  power  is  Christ,"  and  "  it 
is  for  Jesus,"  he  adds,  "  and  for  Jesus  only,  that  we  wiU  give  up  the  precious 
diadem  of  India."  Without  missions  the  sagacity  of  Lawrence  and  the  heroic 
courage  of  Havelock  would  have  been  in  vain.  2.  Because  to  us  of  this  British 
race  God  has  undoubtedly  assigned  the  whole  future  of  the  world.  Before  a 
century  is  over  the  English-speaking  people  will  be  one-third  of  the  whole  human 
race.  From  this  little  island  have  sprung  the  millions  of  America,  of  Australasia, 
of  colonies  which  are  empires  on  which  the  sun  never  sets.  Why  is  it  that  God 
has  thus  enlarged  Japhet  ?  Was  it  for  the  benefit  of  brewers  and  gin  distillers  ? 
Was  it  that  the  coffers  of  our  merchants  might  burst  with  their  accumulated 
hoards?  3.  Because,  if  our  numbers  have  increased  fivefold,  our  wealth  at  the 
same  time  has  increased  sevenfold.  For  what  cause  did  God  pour  this  river  of 
gold  into  the  coffers  of  our  people  ?  Was  it  that  we  should  settle  on  our  lees  and 
live  in  ease  on  the  earth  ?  Or  was  it  rather  that  we  should  send  forth  that  great 
angel  who  has  the  everlasting  gospel  in  his  hands  ?  4.  Because  we  have  taken 
with  us  all  over  the  world  a  ruinous  and  a  clinging  curse,  the  curse  of  drink.  It 
is  not  the  only  wrong  we  have  done  by  any  means.  The  diseases  we  have  inflicted 
have  been  bad  enough,  but  our  drink  is  worst  of  all ;  and  as  yet  the  conscience  of 
this  nation  is  as  hard  as  the  nether  millstone  to  the  fact  of  our  guilt.  Let  the 
shameful  truth  be  spoken,  that  mainly  because  of  drink  our  footsteps  amongst 
savage  races  have  again  and  again  been  footsteps  dyed  in  blood.  We  have  cursed 
all  India  with  our  drink  and  our  drunkenness ;  and  at  this  moment,  after  so 
short  an  occupation,  we  are  cursing  Egypt  with  it  too.  We  have  poured  upon 
these  nations  the  vials  of  this  plague  of  ours — are  we  not  bound  to  give  them  the 
antidote  ?  5.  I  might  dwell  on  many  more  reasons,  above  all  the  truly  apostolical 
succession  of  heroic  personalities  inspired  by  the  immediate  Spirit  of  God  whom 
missions  have  called  forth,  of  men  who,  even  in  this  nineteenth  century,  have  won 


772  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

the  purple  crown  of  martyrdom,  and  shown  us  that  there  may  be  something  higher 
and  more  heroic  in  religion  than  the  quotidian  arguing  of  our  religious  squabbles 
and  our  ceremonial  routine.  But  this  only  I  will  add,  whenever  a  cause  is  noble, 
and  is  necessary,  and  calls  for  self-denial,  it  always  evokes  a  mushroom  crop  of 
stale  epigrams  expressing  the  wit  of  prudential  selfishness  and  the  excuse  of  close- 
fisted  greed.  Do  not,  then,  be  misled  by  the  plausible  devil's  plea  that  we  have  too 
much  heathenism  at  home  to  trouble  ourselves  with  heathenism  abroad.  We  have 
heathenism  enough  at  home,  God  knows,  but  when  long  ago  a  member  of  the 
Massachusetts  legislature  said,  "  We  have  not  religion  enough  at  home,  and  cannot 
afford  to  send  any  abroad,"  a  wiser  and  sincerer  man  than  he  answered,  "  The 
religion  of  Christ  is  such  that  the  more  you  send  abroad  the  more  you  have  at 
home."  {Dean  Farrar.)  Babes  in  grace  can  say,  ''Come": — There  is  your 
qualification ;  you  have  proved  the  truth  of  God  in  your  own  soul,  and  so  can 
speak  experimentally ;  you  have  found  Christ ;  you  have  drunk  the  living  water, 
and  you  can  say,  "  Come,"  I  wanted  a  drink  one  day  in  a  thirsty  place  in  Italy, 
and  by  the  coachman's  help  I  asked  at  a  house  for  water.  The  owner  of  the 
house  was  busy  and  did  not  come  to  show  me  where  the  water  could  be  found ; 
but  he  sent  a  girl  with  me;  she  was  very  little,  but  she  was  quite  big  enough, 
for  she  led  the  way  to  a  well,  and  I  was  soon  refreshed.  She  had  not  to 
make  a  well,  but  only  to  point  it  out,  and  therefore  her  youth  was  no  dis- 
advantage. We  have  not  to  invent  salvation,  but  to  tell  of  it ;  and  therefore 
you  who  are  but  babes  in  grace  can  perform  the  work.  You  have  heard  the 
voice  of  Jesus  say,  "  Stoop  down,  and  drink,  and  live  "  :  go  forth  and 
echo  that  voice  till  thousands  quench  their  thirst.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Bring  another  brother : — During  the  exhibition  of  1867  in  Paris,  a  minister  met  with 
an  instance  of  direct  labour  for  souls,  which  he  states  he  can  never  forget.  In  con- 
versation with  an  engineer  employed  on  one  of  the  pleasure-boats  which  ply  .on  the 
Seine,  the  discovery  was  made  that  the  man  was  a  Christian,  and  on  the  inquiry 
being  put,  by  what  means  he  was  converted,  he  replied  :  "  My  mate  is  a  Christian, 
and  continually  he  told  me  of  the  great  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  His  readiness  to 
save,  and  he  never  rested  until  I  was  a  changed  man.  For  it  is  a  rule  in  our  church 
that  when  a  brother  is  converted,  he  must  go  and  bring  another  brother ;  and  when 
a  sister  is  converted,  she  must  go  and  bring  another  sister  ;  and  so  more  than  a 
hundred  of  us  have  been  recovered  to  the  simplicity  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 
This  is  the  way  in  which  the  gospel  is  to  spread  through  the  whole  world.  By  the 
silent  force  of  a  consistent  life,  by  the  prevalence  of  importunate  prayer,  by  the 
seasonable  testimony  of  our  lips  in  converse  with  our  fellow-men,  let  us  love  to 
make  Jesus  known.  Spreading  the  tidings : — ^An  English  Presbyterian  missionary 
relates  an  interesting  incident  which  occurred  as  he  was  halting  for  refreshments 
under  a  great  tree  on  the  boundaries  of  the  Fukien  province.  He  chanced  to  over- 
hear a  Chinaman  speaking  with  an  unusually  pleasant  and  impressive  voice,  and 
giving  to  the  bystanders  an  account  of  the  Christian  religion.  He  did  this  as  if 
uttering  the  deepest  convictions  of  his  own  heart.  The  missionary  afterwards 
learned  that  this  man  had  been  a  patient  in  one  of  the  hospitals,  and  though  not 
weU  he  was  travelling  towards  his  home,  and  on  his  way  was  preaching  the  gospel 
which  he  had  himself  heard.  How  many  such  cases  there  may  be  we  do  not  know, 
but  it  is  interesting  to  find  that  at  least  some  of  those  who  are  casually  reached  are 
becoming  earnest  promulgators  of  the  truth  they  have  heard.  Taking  good  news 
home  : — A  New  Zealand  girl,  who  was  brought  over  to  England  to  be  educated,  in 
the  course  of  time  became  a  true  Christian.  When  the  time  came  for  her  to  return 
to  her  own  country,  some  of  her  playmates  endeavoured  to  dissuade  her.  They 
said,  "  Why  do  you  want  to  go  back  to  New  Zealand  ?  You  have  become  accus- 
tomed to  England.  You  love  its  shady  lanes  and  clover-fields.  Besides,  you  may 
be  shipwrecked  on  the  return  voyage.  And  if  you  should  get  back  safe  your  own 
people  may  kill  you  and  eat  you.  Everybody  there  has  forgotten  you."  "  What," 
she  said,  "  do  you  think  that  I  could  keep  the  Good  News  to  myself  ?  Do  you  think 
that  I  could  be  content  with  having  got  pardon,  and  peace,  and  eternal  life  for 
myself,  and  not  go  and  tell  my  dear  father  and  mother  how  they  may  get  it  too  ?  I 
would  go  if  I  had  to  swim  there !  "  And  let  Mm  that  is  athirst  come. 
— Christ's  last  invitation  from  the  throne : — I.  Now,  first  let  me  suggest  thb 
QUESTION — To  WHOM  Chbist  iTBOH  THE  THRONE  THUS  OALiiS?  The  pcrsons  ad- 
dressed are  designated  by  two  descriptions  :  they  that  are  "  athirst,"  and 
those  that  "  will."  In  one  aspect  of  the  former  designation  it  is  universal ; 
in  another  aspect  it  is  by  no  means  so.      There    are  many  men  that  ^irst ; 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  773 

and,  strange  as  it  seems,  will  not  to  be  satisfied.  The  first  qualification  is  need, 
and  the  sense  of  need.  These  two  things,  alas !  do  not  go  together.  There 
is  a  universal  need  stamped  upon  men,  by  the  very  make  of  their  spirits,  which 
declares  that  they  must  have  something  or  some  one  external  to  themselves,  on 
whom  they  can  rest,  and  from  whom  they  can  be  satisfied.  The  heart  yearns  for 
another's  love  ;  the  mind  is  restless  till  it  grasps  reality  and  truth.  No  man  is  at 
rest  unless  he  is  living  in  conscious  amity  with,  and  in  possession  of,  the  Father's 
heart  and  the  Father's  strength.  But  half  of  you  do  not  know  what  ails  you.  You 
recognise  the  gnawing  discontent.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  misinterpreting  the 
cry  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  misinterpretation  is  the  crime  and  the  misery  of  millions 
of  men.  That  they  shall  stifle  their  true  need  under  a  pile  of  worldly  things,  that 
they  shall  direct  their  longings  to  what  can  never  satisfy  them,  is  indeed  the  state 
and  the  misery  of  many  of  us.  Perverted  tastes  are  by  no  means  confined  to  certain 
forms  of  disease  of  the  body.  There  is  the  same  perversion  of  taste  in  regard  of 
higher  things.  You  and  I  are  made  to  feed  upon  God,  and  we  feed  upon  ourselves, 
and  one  another,  and  the  world,  and  all  the  trash,  in  comparison  to  our  immortal 
desires  and  capacities,  which  we  find  around  us.  Do  you  interpret  aright  the 
immortal  thirst  of  your  soul  ?  Now,  I  daresay  there  are  many  of  my  hearers  who 
are  not  aware  of  this  thirst  of  the  soul.  No !  you  have  crushed  it  out,  and  for  a 
time  you  are  quite  satisfied  with  worldly  success,  or  with  the  various  objects  on 
which  you  have  set  your  hearts.  It  will  not  last !  So  far  as  the  sense  of  need  goes 
this  text  may  not  appeal  to  you.  So  far  as  the  reality  of  the  need  goes  it  certainly 
does.  Then,  look  at  the  other  designation  of  the  persons  to  whom  Christ's  merciful 
summons  comes :  "  Whosoever  will  let  him  take."  There  is  nothing  sadder,  there 
is  nothing  more  certain,  than  that  we  poor  little  creatures  can  assert  our  will  in  the 
presence  of  the  Divine  lovingkindness,  and  can  thwart,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned, 
the  counsel  of  God  against  ourselves.  "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered,"  <fec. 
I  do  not  enter  now  upon  the  various  reasons  or  excuses  which  men  offer  for  this 
disinclination  to  accept  the  Divine  mercy,  but  I  do  venture  to  say  that  unwillingness 
to  be  saved  upon  Christ's  conditions  underlies  a  vast  deal — not  all,  but  a  vast  deal 
— of  the  supposed  intellectual  difficulties  of  men  in  regard  to  the  gospel.  The  will 
bribes  the  understanding  in  a  great  many  regions.  But  for  the  most  of  you  who 
stand  apart  from  Jesus  Christ  this  is  the  truth,  that  your  attitude  is  a  merely 
negative  one.  It  is  not  that  you  will  not  to  have  Him  but  that  you  do  not  wiU  to 
have  Him.  You  know  the  old  proverb :  One  man  can  take  a  horse  to  the  water, 
ten  cannot  make  him  drink.  We  can  bring  you  to  the  water,  or  the  water  to  you, 
but  neither  Christ  nor  His  servants  can  put  the  refreshing,  life-giving  liquid  into 
your  mouth  if  you  lock  your  lips  so  tight  that  a  bristle  could  not  go  in  between 
them.  Wishing  is  one  thing ;  willing  is  quite  another.  Wishing  to  be  delivered 
from  the  gnawing  restlessness  of  a  hungry  heart,  and  to  be  satisfied,  is  one  thing ; 
willing  to  accept  the  satisfaction  which  Christ  gives  on  the  terms  which  Christ  lays 
down  is,  alas !  quite  another.  II.  That  brings  me,  secondly,  to  say  a  word  about 
WHAT  Christ  from  heaven  thus  offers  to  us  all.  The  water  of  life  is  not  merely 
living  water,  in  the  sense  that  it  flashes  and  sparkles  and  flows ;  but  it  is  water 
which  communicates  life.  "  Life "  here  is  to  be  taken  in  that  deep,  pregnant, 
comprehensive  sense  in  which  the  Apostle  John  uses  it  in  all  his  writings.  The 
first  thought  that  emerges  from  this  "  water  of  life,"  considered  as  being  the  sum  of 
all  that  Christ  communicates  to  humanity  is — then,  where  it  does  not  run  or  is  not 
received,  there  is  death.  Ah,  the  true  death  is  separation  from  God,  and  the  true 
separation  from  God  is  not  brought  about  because  He  is  in  heaven,  and  we  are 
upon  earth ;  or  because  He  is  infinite  and  incomprehensible,  and  we  are  poor 
creatures  of  an  hour,  but  because  we  depart  from  Him  in  heart  and  mind,  and,  as 
another  apostle  says,  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Death  in  life,  a  living  death, 
is  far  more  dreadful  than  when  the  poor  body  is  laid  quiet  upon  the  bed,  and  the 
spirit  has  left  the  pale  cheeks.  And  that  death  is  upon  us,  unless  it  has  been 
banished  from  us  by  a  draught  of  the  water  of  life.  But,  then,  besides  all  these 
thoughts,  there  come  others,  on  which  I  need  not  dwell,  that  in  that  great  emblem 
of  the  water  that  gives  life  is  included  the  satisfaction  of  all  desires,  meeting  and 
over-answering  all  expectations,  filling  up  every  empty  place  in  the  heart,  in  the 
hopes,  in  the  whole  inward  nature  of  man,  and  lavishing  upon  him  all  the  blessings 
which  go  to  make  up  true  gladness,  true  nobleness,  and  dignity.  Nor  does  the 
eternal  life  cease  when  physical  death  comes.  The  river — if  I  might  somewhat 
modify  the  figure  with  which  I  am  dealing,  and  regard  the  man  himself  in  his 
Christian  experience  as  the  river— flows  through  a  narrow,  dark  gorge,  like  one  of 


774  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

the  canons  on  American  streams,  and  down  to  its  profoundest  depths  no  sunlight 
can  travel.  III.  Lastly,  what  Chkist  from  heaven  calls  us  to  do.  "  He  that  is 
athirst  let  him  come  ;  and  whosoever  will  let  him  take  !  "  The  two  things,  coming 
and  taking,  as  it  seems  to  me,  cover  substantially  the  same  ground.  So  let  us  put 
away  the  metaphors  of  "  coming"  and  "  taking"  and  lay  hold  of  the  Christ-given 
interpretation  of  them,  and  say  the  one  thing  that  Christ  asks  me  to  do  is  to  trust 
my  poor,  sinful  self  wholly  and  confidently  and  constantly  and  obediently  to  Him. 
That  is  all.  Ah!  All!  And  that  is  just  where  the  pinch  comes.  "  My  father! 
my  father !  "  remonstrated  Naaman's  servants,  when  he  was  in  a  towering  passion 
because  he  was  told  to  go  wash  in  the  Jordan ;  "  if  the  prophet  had  bidden  thee  do 
some  great  thing,  wouldst  thou  not  have  done  it  ?  How  much  rather  then  when 
he  saith  to  thee,  wash  and  be  clean."  I  do  believe  that  great  multitudes  of  people 
would  rather,  like  the  Hindoos,  stick  hooks  in  the  muscles  of  their  backs,  and  swing 
at  the  end  of  a  rope  if  that  would  get  heaven  for  them,  than  simply  be  content  to 
come  in  forma  pauperis,  and  owe  everything  to  Christ's  grace,  and  nothing  to  their 
own  works.  "  Let  him  take."  Well,  that  being  translated,  too,  is  but  the  exercise 
of  lowly  trust  in  Him.  Faith  is  the  hand  that,  being  put  out,  grasps  this  great 
gift.  You  must  make  the  universal  blessing  your  own.  Are  you  athirst  ?  I  know 
you  are.  Do  you  know  it  ?  Are  you  willing  to  take  Christ's  salvation  on  Christ's 
terms,  and  to  live  by  faith  in  Him,  communion  with,  and  obedience  to  Him  ?  If 
you  are,  then  earth  may  yield  or  deny  you  its  waters,  but  you  will  not  be  dependent 
on  them.  When  all  the  land  is  parched  and  baked,  and  every  surface  well  run 
dry,  you  will  have  a  spring  that  fails  not,  and  the  water  that  Christ  "  will  give  you 
will  be  in  you  a  fountain  of  water  leaping  up  into  everlasting  life."  {A.Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Whosoever  will  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely. — Whosoever 
^oill : — The  Bible  invitation  turns  on  the  human  will.  It  invites  every  man 
that  chooses,  but  there  it  stops.  The  Bible  rests  on  the  assumption  that  every 
man,  if  he  enters  into  life,  must  enter  into  it  by  his  own  free  choice.  Jesus 
Christ  comes  with  invitations,  but  they  are  only  invitations.  He  opens  the 
door,  but  He  allows  men  to  come  in  or  stay  out,  as  they  choose.  He  offers  help, 
but  He  only  offers  it.  If  salvation  were  what  a  great  many  people  even  in  our  day 
seem  to  imagine  it  to  be,  God  might  give  it  to  men  whether  they  wanted  it  or  not. 
If  it  were  getting  into  a  beautiful  city,  with  domes  and  palaces  and  pearly  gates  and 
golden  streets,  God  could  take  the  man  and  put  him  there  and  lock  the  gates  and 
shut  him  in.  If  it  were  getting  into  a  certain  outward  circumstance,  God  could  put 
a  man  there  whether  he  chose  or  not.  Virtue  is  the  free  choice  of  the  will.  There  is, 
therefore,  no  way  by  which  God  Almighty  can  make  a  man  virtuous  against  his 
will.  Is  not  God  omnipotent  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  omnipotence  ?  Do  you 
mean.  Cannot  God  make  a  man  virtuous  whether  he  wills  to  be  virtuous  or  not  ? 
No  !  because  virtuous  is  willing  to  be  virtuous.  That  is  virtue.  If  God  could  make 
a  man  virtuous  despite  himself,  he  would  not  be  virtuous  when  he  was  made.  Virtue 
is  the  free  choice  of  righteousness,  and  the  free  revolt  from  that  which  is  unrighteous. 
God  can  confer  a  certain  measure  of  happiness ;  God  can  surround  a  man  with 
certain  conditions  that  will  help  him  to  virtue ;  God  can  bring  influences  about  him 
that  will  take  him  away  from  vice ;  but  in  the  last  analysis  every  man  must  choose 
for  himself  what  shall  be  his  life,  because  life  is  choice  and  choice  is  life.  Have 
you  a  wish,  a  purpose  to  be  a  nobler,  a  truer  man?  Then  there  is  help  for  you. 
If  not,  then  there  is  nothing  to  do  except  to  wait  until  you  do  have  such  a  purpose.  Let 
me  take  this  simple  proposition  to  classify  men,  measuring  them  by  this  one  simple 
standard.  First,  then,  in  the  moral  scale,  is  the  Pharisee.  He  may  be  in  the 
Church,  he  may  be  outside  the  Church  ;  for  the  Pharisee  is  a  man  who  is  contented 
with  himself.  He  has  no  moral  ideals ;  he  has  no  dissatisfaction  with  the  past ;  he 
has  no  aspiration  for  a  nobler  future  ;  he  lives  from  hand  to  mouth ;  he  lives  from 
day  to  day.  If  he  has  any  question  to  ask  of  the  Christian,  the  question  is,  "  How 
will  it  help  me  ?  If  I  am  a  Christian  man,  will  God  help  me  in  my  business  ?  If  I 
am  a  Christian  man,  shall  I  get  more  honour,  more  pleasure,  more  satisfaction  out 
of  life  ?  "  Above  this  Pharisee  is  the  man  who  has  some  dissatisfaction  for  the  past 
and  some  aspiration  for  the  future,  and  does  want  to  be  a  better  man.  Perhaps 
some  minister  has  touched  some  chord  in  his  heart,  and  his  soul  has  responded. 
Perhaps  some  sudden  sin  has  shaken  him  out  of  his  self-satisfaction.  Perhaps  he 
has  broken  down  just  where  he  thought  he  was  strong,  yielded  to  some  sudden 
temptation,  and  found  he  was  weak  when  he  did  not  know  that  he  was  weak.  In 
some  such  way  he  has  come  into  a  dissatisfaction  with  himself  and  a  desire  for 
something  better  and  nobler.    The  man  who  has  been  in  the  gutter  and  is  ashamed 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION,  776 

of  the  smell  of  the  gutter,  the  man  who  has  any  desire  toward  a  better  life  or  any 
hate  of  the  life  that  is  past,  goes  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  the  man  who  is 
satisfied  with  himself.  But  aspiration  is  not  enough  ;  dreaming  is  not  doing, 
dreaming  is  not  even  wishing.  The  man  has  dreamed  something  better,  the  man 
has  had  some  dissatisfaction  with  his  past ;  and  now  out  of  this  dissatisfaction  and 
out  of  this  dream  there  comes  a  wish.  He  wishes  to  be  a  better  man  ;  perhaps  he 
even  prays  to  be  a  better  man ;  perhaps  he  even  goes  to  a  minister  or  friend  and 
says,  "  What  can  I  do  to  be  a  better  man  ?  "  The  life  that  now  is  awakened  in 
him  is  more  than  an  aspiration ;  it  is  a  definite  desire.  But  desiring  is  not  enough. 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  Aye,  if  he 
will.  If  he  is  dissatisfied  with  the  past,  if  he  is  desirous  of  something  better  in  the 
future,  and  so  desirous  that  he  chooses  it,  and  chooses  it  now,  the  doors  are  open  to 
him.  (L.  Abbott,  D.D.)  The  last  invitation  in  the  Bible: — I.  The  great- 
ness OF   THE   BLESSING   OFFERED.      II.    ThE   SIMPLICITY  OF   THE   TERMS   ON  WHICH   THE 

OFFER  18  MADE.  We  havc  but  to  come  and  take.  We  are  at  a  distance  natur- 
ally, and  alienated  by  wicked  works  ;  therefore  we  must  turn  and  "  come."  III. 
The  character  of  those  to  whom  the  blessing  is  offered.  IV.  The  unanimity  of 
THOSE  who  offer  THE  BLESSING.  There  are  four  voices  ;  and  none  of  them  are  dis- 
cordant, or  "  without  significance."  Four  witnesses  to  the  greatness  and  freeness 
of  the  gospel;  four  who  call  us  away  to  the  Water  of  Life.  (Alex.  Warrack.) 
The  gospel  invitation : — I.  The  blessings  offered.  These  are  represented  to  us 
under  the  image  of  "  water."  1.  Water  is  an  element  absolutely  necessary,  in  the 
present  constitution  of  things,  to  the  preservation  and  continuance  of  life.  2.  Water 
is  an  element  productive  of  purity.  3.  Water  is  an  element  which  refreshes  the 
weary,  and  invigorates  the  weak.  II.  The  persons  to  whom  these  blessings  ark 
offered,  in.  The  terms  upon  which  these  blessings  are  offered.  Why  are 
they  free  ?  1.  One  reason  is,  that  they  are  above  all  price,  and  though  they  had 
been  much  less  worth  than  they  are,  we  had  nothing  to  give.  We  must  have  them 
freely  or  not  at  all.  The  best  of  God's  temporal  gifts  are  free,  the  air  that 
we  breathe  is  free,  the  light  of  heaven  is  free,  the  sun  descends  upon  the  just 
and  the  unjust.  2.  But,  again,  these  blessings  are  offered  freely  to  us,  because 
the  price  of   them  has  already  been   paid   by  another.      {Jos.   Clason.)  The 

last  message  of  God  to  men : — I.  "  The  Spirit  saith  Come,  and  take  the 
WATER  OF  life  FREELY."  To  the  Holy  Spirit  in  an  especial  manner,  are  to 
be  ascribed,  from  first  to  last,  the  conversion,  the  regeneration,  the  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  the  ultimate  salvation,  of  every  sinner.  But  even  if  you  do  not 
belong  to  the  number  of  those  to  whom  the  invitation  of  the  text  has  been 
brought  home  with  saving  power,  yet  it  is  no  less  certain  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
in  many  different  ways  still  addressing  you  with  the  invitation  to  come  and  take  of 
the  water  of  life  freely.  You  cannot  deny  that,  in  the  course  of  Divine  Providence, 
you  have  had  the  Bible,  which  the  Spirit  dictated  concerning  Christ,  put  into  your 
hands  in  a  language  which  you  could  both  read  and  understand ;  that  you  have 
been  familiar,  even  from  your  youth  up,  with  the  great  truths  which  it  proclaims  of 
your  own  lost  condition  by  nature,  and  oi  the  method  of  recovery  through  a  Saviour ; 
and  that  these  truths  have  been  pressed  home  upon  your  attention  so  often  and  in 
so  many  ways  as  to  leave  you  without  excuse,  if  still  careless  or  unmindful  of  them. 
Nay,  is  it  not  possible  for  you  to  recollect  certain  seasons  in  your  past  history,  when 
Divine  things  were  more  peculiarly  brought  home  to  your  hearts;  a  season  of 
affliction  perhaps,  when  you  were  clearly  taught  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of 
present  enjoyments ;  a  season  of  personal  danger  or  family  bereavement,  when 
the  thought  of  death  and  eternity  overawed  your  soul;  a  season  of  conviction, 
when  such  views  of  your  own  character  as  sinners,  and  such  impressions  of 
your  own  danger  as  rebels  before  God,  were  awakened,  as  almost  forced  you  to 
cry  out  in  terror,  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  You  must  be  constrained  to 
admit  that  every  such  event  was  sent  by  Him  for  the  purposes  of  your  spiritual 
awakening  and  conversion.  They  were  so  many  distinct  demands  upon  you  on  His 
part  to  consider  your  ways,  and  to  repent  and  be  saved.  11.  "  The  Bride  saith, 
Come,  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  If  we  view  the  Church  generally, 
as  a  community  of  believers  separated  from  the  world  around  them  by  the 
possession  of  the  peculiar  faith  and  privileges  and  hopes  of  Christ,  or  if  we  view 
the  Church  more  especially  in  reference  to  the  office-bearers  whom  Christ  has 
appointed,  and  the  ordinances  He  has  established  in  the  midst  of  it ;  in  either 
case  it  must  be  apparent  that  one  of  its  grand  purposes  is  to  hold  forth  a 
witness  in  behalf  of  the  gospel  among  men,   and  to  make  provision   for  the 


776  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

pressing  of  its  invitations  and  its  claims  upon  all.  The  very  fact  of  the  continued 
existence  for  eighteen  hundred  years  of  a  visible  community  of  saints,  divided  from 
the  rest  of  mankind,  and  united  together  by  the  belief  and  practice  of  the  gospel, 
notwithstanding  of  the  enmity  and  persecution  of  a  hostile  world,  is  the  strongest 
of  all  historical  testimonies  to  the  Divine  and  saving  power  of  that  faith  which  they 
profess.  Every  saint  within  that  Church  has  been  a  witness  on  behalf  of  the  truth 
to  the  men  of  the  age  and  the  place  where  he  lived.  His  faith,  his  hope,  his  holy 
life,  his  triumphant  death,  have  each  been  a  testimony  to  others  that  was  neither 
silent  nor  unseen.  And  when  we  consider  the  provision  that  has  been  made  in  the 
ordinance  of  a  stated  ministry,  and  of  the  administration  of  the  sacraments,  for 
the  preservation  and  furtherance  of  the  gospel  in  the  world,  we  cannot  fail  to 
perceive  the  force  and  propriety  of  the  statement  of  the  text,  that  "the  Bride," 
or  the  Church,  joins  with  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  invitation  to  sinners  to  take  of 
the  water  of  life  freely.  III.  "Let  him  that  heabeth  say.  Come,  and  take  of 
THE  WATER  OF  LITE  FREELY."  There  is  no  man,  of  whatever  character,  that 
either  lives  or  dies  for  himself  alone  (Eom.  xiv.  7) ;  he  must  be  the  means  of 
spreading  either  a  salutary  or  a  pernicious  influence  around  him.  If  a  man  is 
still  under  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  cherishes  in  his  bosom  a  principle  of 
ungodliness,  he  will  become  the  centre,  so  far  as  his  influence  extends,  whence 
moral  evil  is  diffused  about  him.  If,  on  the  contrary,  he  has  been  himself 
converted,  and  regenerated,  his  life  and  character  will  bear  testimony  to  the 
truths  which  he  has  believed ;  and  he  must,  from  the  very  nature  of  the 
thing,  become  a  witness  for  God  and  the  gospel  in  the  sight  of  all  with 
whom  he  associates.  And  how  much  more  will  this  be  the  case,  when  the 
Christian  sees  in  the  common  ruin  in  which  all  men  are  by  nature  involved, 
the  equal  necessity  which  all  have  for  some  method  of  recovery  and  salvation; 
and  when  he  recognises  in  the  gospel,  which  he  himself  has  believed,  a  provision 
made  for  reaching  the  case  and  ministering  to  the  wants  of  all.  Having  tasted  of 
the  waters  of  salvation  himself,  he  will  be  anxious  to  unseal  the  living  fountain  to 
his  fellowmen.  And  even  did  he  bear  no  testimony  to  the  Saviour,  but  that  which 
his  faith  and  holiness  and  heavenly  peace  and  joy  afforded,  yet  these  alone  would 
speak  in  a  language  which  could  not  be  misunderstood,  and  would  proclaim  to  aU 
the  grace  and  blessedness  of  the  gospel.  It  is  thus  that  not  only  the  Church  in  its 
collective  character,  but  every  individual  believer  that  is  gathered  within  its  pale, 
becomes  a  missionary  of  the  faith  to  press  its  claims  and  its  importance  upon  the 
attention  and  the  consciences  of  his  fellowmen ;  and  while  the  Spirit  is  striving 
with  the  hearts  of  sinners  in  secret,  and  the  Bride  is  openly  proclaiming  the  tidings 
of  salvation  to  all,  the  man  whose  ears  have  been  opened  to  hear  and  receive  the 
truth,  will  find  in  that  fact  both  the  warrant  and  the  will  to  join  in  the  united 
invitation  to  others  to  "  come,  and  take  of  the  waters  of  life  freely."    IV.  "  Let 

HIM  that  is  ATHIRST  COME  ;  AND   WHOSOEVER  WILL,  LET  HIM   TAKE  THE   WATER  OF  LIFB 

FREELY."  The  expression,  "  whosoever  will,"  is  evidently  applicable  to  the  case  of 
every  human  being  without  exception ;  and  is  plainly  demonstrative  of  the  freeness 
with  which  the  gospel  invitation  is  addressed  to  all,  without  reference  to  character, 
or  circumstance,  or  condition.  The  expression,  "he  that  is  athirst,"  is  no  less 
universally  applicable  to  all  mankind,  inasmuch  as  it  is  descriptive  of  the  condition 
of  every  human  being  who  is  not  in  possession  of  happiness  up  to  the  full  measure 
of  his  desires,  and  who  still  longs  after  the  experience  of  a  peace  and  blessedness 
which  may  be  permanent  and  satisfying.  Every  son  of  man  who  feels  in  his 
heart  one  unsatisfied  desire,  one  disappointed  hope,  one  bereaved  affection,  one 
yearning  after  happiness  which  he  does  not  yet  enjoy;  in  short,  any  human 
being  that  knows  the  existence  of  human  feeling  within  his  bosom,  comes  under 
the  description  of  "  he  that  is  athirst."  The  two  expressions,  then,  are  virtually 
the  same ;  they  embrace  essentially  the  same  description  of  persons ;  and  they 
prove  that  the  invitation  of  the  text  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  class 
or  character  of  individuals,  but  is  equally  and  unreservedly  addressed  to  all. 
Have  you  never  felt  the  hopelessness  of  those  efforts  by  which  you  have  sought 
to  work  out  a  justifying  righteousness  for  yourselves,  and  earn,  as  it  were,  your  own 
acceptance  with  God  ?  Then  unto  you  is  this  salvation  offered,  freely  and  without 
price.  (Jca.  Bannerman,  D.D.)  The  will: — I.  What  is  a  will?  It  is  that 
faculty  of  the  soul  which  is  governed  by  the  understanding,  but  which  is  itself 
the  governor  of  the  actions.  II.  What  can  the  will  of  the  natural  man 
PERFORM?  Anything  consistent  with  the  strength  of  body  and  mind  which  the 
person  may  possess ;  for  instance,  a  man  may  have  a  will  to  walk  forty  miles  in 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  777 

a  day,  and  yet  his  strength  may  only  be  sufficient  for  half  that  distance ;  he 
may  have  a  will  to  be  a  great  scholar,  and  his  mind  be  incapable  of  containing 
what  he  desires  to  know — it  may  perform  any  external  act,  may  cause  him  to 
take  medicine,  but  cannot  insure  health ;  may  make  him  a  good  husband,  attend 
to  all  relative  duties,  and  even  external  acts  of  religion,  but  nothing  whatever 
of  a  spiritual  nature.  III.  How  no  ant  possess  thb  will  mentioned  in  mt  text  ? 
Not  by  compulsion — the  will  cannot  be  forced,  for  then  it  would  cease  to  be  a  will ; 
but  by  being  changed  by  the  supernatural  power  and  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  the  terms  conversion  and  regeneration  ased  to  mark  this  change  plainly  prove. 
{A.  Hewlett,  M.A.) 

Vers.  18, 19.  If  any  man  shall  add  unto  these  things. — The  Divine  Word,  and 
t7u  doom  of  its  de/acers : — I.  The  perfection  of  God's  Word.  Man  may  not 
intermeddle  with  it,  either  to  add  or  to  take  away.  Can  man  improve  the  works  of 
God  ? — the  mountains,  rivers,  flowers  ? — the  blue  sky,  the  stars,  the  sun  ?  Even 
so  is  the  Word  of  God  too  perfect  for  him  to  touch.  II.  The  honour  God  puts  on 
IT.  He  has  magnified  it,  even  above  His  works ;  so  that  he  who  disparages  the 
Word  of  God  is  more  guilty  than  he  who  disparages  the  works  of  God.  It  is  the 
fullest  expression  of  His  mind,  the  completest  revelation  of  His  character,  in. 
Our  responsibilities  in  regard  to  it.  It  is  not  given  us  for  mere  speculation  or 
gratification ;  but  for  something  far  higher.  We  are  responsible  for  the  way  we 
treat  it,  study  it,  profit  by  it.  Its  perfection  makes  our  responsibility  very  great, 
and  appeals  to  our  consciences  most  powerfully.  IV.  The  sin  op  tamperino  with 
IT.  Every  low  thought  about  the  Bible  is  sin.  Every  attempt  to  touch  it,  either  in 
the  way  of  addition  or  subtraction,  is  sin.  V.  The  danger  op  meddling  with  it. 
The  danger  is  exceeding  great ;  and  the  punishment  awarded  to  the  intermeddlers 
is  the  declaration  of  the  danger.  God  will  not  be  mocked  in  this  thing.  (H. 
Bonar,  DJ).) 

Ver.  20.  He  which  testifleth  these  things,  salth,  snrely  I  come  quickly. — On  the 
coming  of  Christ : — I.  Some  of  the  great  events  which  will  most  unquestionably 
TAKE  PLACE  AT  OUR  Saviour's  SECOND  APPEARANCE.  1.  He  will  come  again  with  inex- 
pressible dignity  and  grandeur.  2.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  another 
glorious  result  of  our  Saviour's  second  appearance.  3.  The  dissolution  of  this 
globe  will  be  the  awful  consequence,  also,  of  our  Saviour's  reappearance.  H.  Fob 
what  purpose  these  great  events  will  take  place  on  our  Saviour's  reappear- 
AMCB.  1.  Jesus  will  come  again  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  Divine  administra- 
tion, and  to  evince  the  admirable  wisdom  and  justice  with  which  it  has  been 
administered.  2.  The  eternal  separation  of  the  virtuous  from  the  wicked.  3.  The 
equitable  and  unerring  distribution  of  eternal  rewards  and  punishments  which  will 
then  take  place.  Lessons:  1.  The  consideration  of  our  Saviour's  second  coming 
to  reward  every  one  according  to  his  works,  should  have  a  permanent  influence  on 
our  present  temper  and  conduct.  2.  The  appointment  of  our  Saviour  to  be  our 
Judge  is  a  merciful  condescension  to  the  weakness  and  imperfection  of  our  natures, 
which  would  be  overwhelmed  by  the  infinite  splendour  of  that  Almighty  Being,  in 
whose  presence  the  angels  cover  their  faces  with  their  wings,  which  would  be  other- 
wise dazzled  with  such  immensity  of  glory.  {A.  Stirling,  LL.D.)  Even  so  come. 
Lord  Jesus. — Man  hailing  the  judgment : — There  are  four  states  of  mind  amongst 
men  in  relation  to  the  last  day.  Some  are  indifferent  to  it,  as  were  the  antediluvians 
in  relation  to  the  Deluge ;  some  scornfully  deny  it,  as  did  the  infidels  in  the  days  of 
Peter ;  some  are  horror-stricken  at  it,  as  were  the  demoniacs  in  the  time  of  Christ ; 
and  some  welcome  it,  as  John  did  now.  Three  things  are  implied  in  this  last  state 
of  mind — I.  A  conviction  that  such  a  day  will  dawn.     II.  A  conviction  op  a 

PREPAREDNESS  TO  ENTER  ON  THE  TRIAL.      HI.   A  CONVICTION  THAT  THE  RESULTS  OF  THAT 

DAY  WILL  BE  FRAUGHT  WITH  PERSONAL  GOOD.  {Homilist.)  Yearning  for  Christ : — 
A  state  of  expectation  tries  faith  and  feeds  it  too.  The  veil  which  hides,  suggests. 
A  doubtful  bestowment,  to  be  able  to  raise  it  before  the  time !  Hope  nurses  energy. 
Energy  is  trained  in  mingled  knowledge  and  ignorance.  I.  The  yearning  of  our 
SOULS  FOB  THE  FULNESS  OF  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  Christ.  The  life  wc  livc  is  a  longing. 
There  is  discord  which  only  Jesus  can  resolve.  There  is  possibility  which  in  the 
light  of  His  presence  will  see  this  out  into  fact.  Gloom,  in  which  we  wait  with  our 
eyes  towards  the  east,  waiting  for  the  sun-rising.  We  are  children  crying  for  the 
Comforter.  JI.  The  purpose  of  our  hearts  to  be  prepared  fob  the  higher 
BERVicE.    Gome  and  give  us  our  place  in  Thy  kingdouL    Come  and  take  up  the 


778  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

fruits  of  our  life  into  Thy  gamer,  and  make  them  the  seed-corn  of  the  everlasting 
future.  The  response  of  the  lips  wiU  be  the  key-note ;  the  fullest  most  varied 
existence  will  never  lose  it ;  on  that  the  music  will  rest  and  melt  into  the  praise  of 
Heaven.  {R.  Bedford,  LL.B.)  Sudden  death  : — The  primary  reference  in  the 
words  may  be,  and  probably  is,  to  His  coming  for  the  initiation  of  those  august 
procedures  in  history  which  are  prophetically  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Eevelation  ; 
but  also  there  may  be  an  underlying  reference  in  them  to  His  appearing  at  death  to 
the  individual  disciple.  The  death  of  the  believer  is  always,  in  a  true  sense,  the 
coming  of  Christ  to  him.  Applying  the  words  in  this  way,  then,  as  having  a  possible 
personal  relation  to  ourselves,  the  question  naturally  occurs :  Can  we  take  up  and 
repeat  this  reply  of  the  apostle,  "Amen.  Even  so,  come  quickly.  Lord  Jesus?" 
John  evidently  spoke  thus  in  all  sincerity  and  solemn  earnestness.  But  we  may 
not  feel,  perhaps,  that  John  was  a  type  for  us,  since  he  surpassed  us  in  so  many 
things.  He  was  "the  beloved  disciple."  He  had  been  admitted  to  a  peculiar 
personal  intimacy  with  Christ.  Especially,  perhaps,  we  think  he  could  say  this 
when  he  may  have  been  at  this  time — it  is  not  certain — in  the  decline  of  life,  or 
already  advanced  in  years  ;  when,  at  any  rate,  he  was  dwelling  in  a  world  unfriendly 
to  him  and  to  his  faith,  without  companions,  without  a  home,  a  lonely  exile  upon 
the  rock  of  Patmos.  It  was  then  only  natural  and  proper,  we  may  think,  that  he 
should  utter  this  prayer  to  Christ.  But  we  may  not  so  freely  repeat  it  after  him. 
There  is  a  certain  tremor  of  hesitation,  natural  to  the  heart,  in  echoing  the  words. 
We  have  no  right  to  offer  such  a  prayer.  Even  John  did  not  offer  it  until  the 
Master  had  manifested  to  him  His  purpose  of  coming  quickly,  and  then  he  simply 
responded  to  the  declared  will  of  the  Lord.  We  may  do  that,  I  think,  with  equal 
cheerfulness  and  gladness.  When  the  Master  forewarns  us  that  His  coming  is  to 
be  sudden  and  speedy,  we  may  take  up  without  hesitation,  if  we  are  His  followers, 
the  words  of  the  apostle  :  "  Amen.  Even  so,  come.  Lord  Jesus  !  "  The  example 
of  John  justifies  us  in  this.  He  was  an  eminent  disciple ;  he  had  had  peculiar 
intimacy  of  relation  with  the  Master.  But  he  was  still  a  man  who  needed  forgiveness, 
even  as  you  and  I  do.  He  was  a  man  only  sanctified  in  part,  as  you  and  I  are. 
Yet  he  spoke  these  words,  because  he  knew  the  Master  fully.  He  had  known  Him 
on  earth,  and  he  had  now  seen  Him  in  heaven.  He  knew  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Lord,  but  he  knew  as  well  His  spirit  of  self-sacrifice ;  he  knew  how  He  had  died  on 
the  Cross  when  He  need  not  have  done  so  unless  He  had  chosen,  for  the  salvation 
of  sinners.  Therefore,  knowing  His  tenderness  as  well  as  His  holiness,  His  infinite 
sympathy  as  well  as  His  sovereign  and  unlimited  power,  he  could  say :  "  Even  so ! 
I  am  not  timid  before  Thy  coming ;  Thy  word  does  not  smite  me  with  fear.  Come, 
Lord  Jesus."  If  we  are,  then,  in  fellowship  with  John,  through  a  similar  faith  In 
the  Divine  Master,  we  also  may  take  up  and  echo  his  words.  Consider  also  why 
Christ  comes  at  death  to  His  disciple ;  what  things  He  comes  to  accomplish. 
1.  He  comes  for  the  recognition  of  character  in  His  beloved.  For  this,  in  part.  His 
approach  and  death  are  made.  2.  He  comes  also  for  the  consummation  of  character 
in  the  disciple ;  not  only  to  recognise  it,  but  to  bring  it  to  its  completeness.  Every 
Christian  grace  has  its  vital  root  in  faith,  that  is,  in  loyal  and  undoubting  confi- 
dence toward  the  Son  of  God.  And  precisely  as  this  faith  becomes  clear  and  firm, 
in  that  proportion  the  graces  which  spring  from  it  are  multiplied  and  enriched,  are 
raised  to  a  sweeter  and  mightier  supremacy.  When,  then,  at  last  faith  culminates 
in  vision,  and  we  see  the  Lord — not  merely  in  the  evangelical  records,  not  merely 
in  the  worship  of  the  Church,  or  its  manifesting  sacraments,  but  "  face  to  face  " — 
then  every  grace  which  has  been  within  us,  in  element  and  germ,  shall  rise  to 
sudden  superlative  completeness,  and  to  the  fulness  of  perfect  exhibition.  3.  He 
comes,  too,  for  the  coronation  of  character,  as  well  as  for  its  recognition  and  its 
supreme  consummation.  Character,  rooted  in  faith  towards  Himself,  is  the  one 
thing  precious  on  earth  to  Christ.  The  production  of  it  in  the  human  soul  was  the 
very  purpose  of  His  coming  in  the  incarnation.  His  whole  life  on  earth  bore 
evidently  upon  this  result.  Every  miracle  said,  "  Believe  in  Me."  Every  gracious 
■word  of  promise  attracted  to  such  belief  in  Him.  And  when  this  faith  is  ready  to 
be  transferred  to  the  skies,  Christ  comes  at  death  to  consummate  and  to  crown  it. 
That  is  the  fulfilment  of  His  purpose  in  Redemption.  He  must  crown  the  spirit 
which  He  seeks  and  loves.  Therefore  it  was  that  John  could  say,  "  Amen.  Even 
so.  Lord,  come  quickly."  And  so  we  need  not,  either  of  us,  fear,  if  we  are  in  the 
faith  and  fellowship  of  John,  to  take  upon  our  lips  the  same  sublime  and  solemn 
words.  4.  I  think  that  here  is  suggested  a  fair  preliminary  test  of  experience  in 
us.     Suppose  that  Christ  were  to  come  to  us  at  this  moment,  that  for  us  the  earth 


CHAP.  XXII.]  REVELATION.  779 

swung  suddenly  away  into  darkness  and  silence,  that  unto  us  the  heavens  were 
opened :  would  He  find  in  us  that  which  He  at  this  instant  would  accept  and 
approve  ?  Should  we  be  able  to  welcome  Him  now  at  that  swift  coming  ?  6.  If 
we  can  meet  this  test  we  need  no  more  to  be  afraid  of  sudden  death.  Within  our- 
selves is  that  which  Christ  Himself  hath  wrought,  in  which  He  has  gladness.  Then 
we  shall  share,  when  we  die,  in  the  glory  of  the  transfigured  Lord ;  not  seeing  it 
merely,  as  silently  and  suddenly  it  came  to  the  Apostles,  but  ourselves  being  partici- 
pants in  it.     And  that  will  be  all  that  death  is  to  the  disciple.     {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  alL— T^i*  grace  of  Jesus 
Christ : — It  is  the  last  text  in  the  Bible  and  it  fits  well  the  last  day  of  the  year.  It  is 
well  we  should  take  a  blessing  to  ourselves,  or  at  least  try  to  fancy  that  it  may  be  ours, 
for  we  need  it  sorely  on  this  day.  Dwell  as  we  will  on  the  brighter  side  of  things,  life 
is  very  hard,  and  men  and  women  are  hard  on  one  another,  and  we  ourselves  are 
growing  hard,  and  that  is  the  worst  of  all.  We  need  something  to  soften,  in  no  en- 
feebling way,  the  hardness  of  life,  and  of  men,  and  of  our  own  heart.  And  most  of  the 
blessings  we  seek  of  our  own  will,  weaken  our  souls,  and  in  the  weakening 
make  us  harder  in  the  future.  But  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  if  we  could 
win  it  and  take  it,  softens  all  things  by  making  us  stronger  towards  goodness  and 
truth  and  righteousness  and  love.  What  is  it  ?  What  is  His  grace  ?  Whatever  it 
is,  it  does  not  come  from  one  who  is  ignorant  of  all  we  need.  He  has  known  to 
the  fuU  the  weight  of  human  suffering,  and  the  blessing  of  His  grace  that  is  with 
us  is  brought  home  to  us  by  that  knowledge.  Christ  can  give  inspiration,  can 
bless,  and  give  of  His  power  because  He  mastered  the  evil  forces  of  life.  None  have 
ever  done  that  so  completely,  but  many  can  do  it  in  His  spirit.  And  those  who  do, 
can  help  and  bless  their  fellows  in  proportion  to  their  victory.  Remember  that  this 
day,  you  who  are  in  warfare  with  pain  or  guilt.  You  will  be  able  to  bring  grace 
and  blessing  to  others  in  the  future,  whatever  your  pain  be  now,  if  you  conquer  it. 
And,  in  order  to  conquer,  win  His  grace  who  has  conquered,  and  who  will  give  it  to 
you.  That  grace  is,  first,  kindness,  the  goodwill  of  love.  It  is  the  showing  forth 
of  aU  those  sweet  and  beautiful  qualities  which  make  home  and  social  life  so  dear, 
and  the  showing  forth  of  them  in  perfection.  It  is  the  filial  tenderness  which  laid 
down  the  consciousness  of  genius  and  all  its  impulses  for  thirty  years  at  the  feet 
of  His  mother  in  a  quiet  and  silent  life  and  which  won  her  pondering  and 
passionate  love.  It  is  the  penetrating  love  which  saw  into  the  character  of  His 
friends  and  made  them  believe  in  their  own  capacity  for  greatness,  which  led  men 
like  Peter  and  John  and  James  to  find  out  and  love  one  another,  which  bound  His 
followers  together  in  a  love  that  outlasted  death.  It  is  the  tender  insight  which 
saw  into  the  publican's  heart,  which  when  the  sinner  drew  near  in  tears,  believed 
in  her  repentance  and  exalted  her  into  a  saint,  which  had  compassion  on  the  multi- 
tude and  on  the  weariness  of  a  few,  which  wept  over  Jerusalem,  which  in  all 
human  life  and  the  movement  of  its  passions  and  hopes  and  faiths  did,  said,  and 
thought  the  loving  and  just  thing  at  the  right  moment,  without  doing  or  saying  the 
weak  thing.  Think  of  it  all,  you  who  know  the  story,  and  an  image  of  the  grace 
of  Christ  as  loving-kindness  will  grow  before  your  soul.  And  it  will  be  strange  if 
you  do  not,  ravished  with  the  sight,  say,  "  Let  that  blessed  power  be  mine  in  life. 
May  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be  with  me."  But  there  is  more  in  it  than  this. 
Human  love,  left  alone,  spends  itself  only  on  those  near  to  us,  or  on  those  that  love 
us  in  return,  and,  in  its  form  of  kindness  and  pity,  on  those  whom  we  compassionate. 
Kept  within  a  narrow  circle,  it  tends  to  have  family  or  a  social  selfishness.  Given 
only  to  those  who  suffer,  it  tends  to  become  self-satisfied.  To  be  perfect,  it  ought 
to  reach,  through  frank  forgiveness,  those  who  injure  us;  through  interest  in  the 
interests,  ideas,  and  movements  of  human  progress,  those  who  are  beyond  our  own 
circle,  in  our  nation,  nay,  even  in  the  world ;  and  finally  all  men,  those  even 
who  are  our  bitterest  foes,  through  desire  that  they  should  have  good  and  be  good. 
It  was  the  very  glory  of  the  grace  of  Christ,  as  love,  that  it  rose  into  this  wonderful 
height  and  universality.  All  men  were  infinitely  precious  and  divine  in  Christ's 
sight,  for  He  saw  them  all  consciously  and  unconsciously  going  into  the  outstretched 
arms  of  God.  Therefore  He  could  not  help  loving  them  all.  That  is  the  grace  of 
Christ — the  loving-kindness  of  Jesus — the  human  love  raised  into  the  Divine 
without  losing  one  touch  of  its  humanity,  save  only  as  light  is  lost  in  greater  light. 
I  pray  that  this  grace  of  Christ  be  with  you  all ;  the  grace  of  natural  love  lifted 
into  Divine  and  universal  love  through  faith  in  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  It  is 
Christ's  to  give  because  He  had  it,  and  when  we  have  it  we  can  give  it  also.    Gain 


780  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

it  and  give  it,  and  you  will  be  blessed  and  a  blessing.  Secondly,  grace  has  another 
meaning  other  than  loving-kindness.  It  means  the  kind  of  beauty  we  express  by 
the  word  charm;  and  in  this  sense  we  may  translate  the  text,  "The  beautiful  charm 
of  Christ  be  with  you  all."  Do  you  remember  how,  when  the  world- worn  Pharisee 
expressed  his  scorn  of  the  sinful  woman,  Christ  felt  her  boundless  love,  and  said, 
'•  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven  ;  for  she  loved  much  " ;  how,  when  Mary 
sat  at  His  feet  and  was  blamed  by  Martha,  He  alone  saw  love  and  Tightness  of 
choice  in  her  silence ;  how,  when  the  rude  utilitarian  saw  waste  in  the  extravagant 
love  which  lavished  on  Him  the  precious  spikenard,  He  accepted  it,  not  for  its 
extravagance,  but  for  its  passion ;  how  when  Peter  had  sinned  by  a  threefold 
treachery,  He  believed  in  the  repentance,  and  only  gave  one  look  of  sore  and 
loving  reproach ;  how,  when  He  was  dying.  He  provided  for  His  friend  a  mother, 
and  for  His  mother  a  son  ?  What  charm,  what  grace  in  them  all !  And  their 
beauty  could  not  stand  alone.  That  kind  of  exquisite  sensitiveness  flowered 
through  the  whole  of  His  life  with  men.  It  was  His  grace,  and  all  felt  its  charm. 
Nor  is  it  less  seen  in  His  speech  than  in  His  act.  In  directness,  in  temperance,  in 
a  certain  sweet  wisdom  and  ordered  humanity,  and  in  the  beauty  that  results  from 
these,  there  is  nothing  in  the  loveliest  Greek  work  which  matches  the  parables  of 
Christ,  or  such  sayings  as  "  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they  grow ;  they 
toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin ;  and  yet  I  say  unto  you,  that  even  Solomon  in  all  his 
glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these  "  ;  or  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour," 
&o.  In  thinking  of  Him  as  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  in  having  imposed  on  us  by  the 
ascetic  that  He  had  no  form  or  comeliness,  we  forget  what  must  have  been  His 
irresistible  charm.  In  the  reaction  which  Christendom  felt  from  that  heathen 
worship  of  beauty  which  ended  in  moral  deformity,  nay,  linked  beauty  to  sensualism, 
the  loveliness  of  Christ  was  too  long  hidden  from  us ;  we  lost  the  sense  of  His 
grace  in  the  meaning  which  the  nobler  Greek  would  have  given  to  the  term.  Do 
not  you  forget  it.  Seek  the  blessing  of  the  charm  that  comes  of  sensitiveness  to 
the  feelings  of  others,  of  sensitiveness  to  all  that  is  beautiful,  of  an  inward  harmony 
of  nature,  and  of  the  expression  of  that  harmony  in  beautiful  act  and  speech. 
Say  to  yourselves  in  this  sense  also,  "  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be  with  me  and 
all."  And  if  we  are  worthy  of  it  and  see  it.  He  will  give  it  to  us.  It  is  given, 
indeed,  through  our  seeing  it.  The  moment  we  see  loveliness  we  cannot  help 
desiring  it,  and  the  moment  we  desire  it  we  begin  our  effort  after  it.  It  is  by  being 
beautiful  that  Christ  gives  us  of  His  beauty,  and  makes  us  into  His  image.  It  is 
in  quite  a  natural,  and  not  a  supernatural  manner  that  we  are  "  changed  into  the 
same  image  from  glory  to  glory."  Once  more,  His  grace  and  His  love  of  doing  and 
being  the  Beautiful  was  not  apart  from,  or  greater  than,  His  love  of,  and  doing  of 
moral  things,  but  coincident  with  them.  Nothing  which  was  false  or  impure  or 
unjust  was,  in  itself,  beautiful  to  Christ,  and  the  first  glory  of  His  grace  and  charm 
was  its  harmony  with  righteousness.  We  look  at  it,  then,  not  only  with  tenderness, 
such  as  we  feel  for  loving-kindness,  not  only  with  delight,  such  as  we  feel  for 
beauty,  but  also  with  all  that  earnest  approval  and  grave  enthusiasm  which  we  give 
to  things  and  persons  who  are  good.  Christ's  charm  has  its  root  in  love,  and  is 
identical  with  truth  and  justice  and  purity  and  courage.  It  grasps  the  hand  of  the 
Platonist  and  the  Stoic  alike,  without  the  vagueness  of  the  one  and  the  rigour  of  the 
other.  And  while  it  holds  to  the  Epicurean  so  far  as  the  early  Epicureans  said 
that  pleasure  was  the  highest  good  because  goodness  was  identical  with  pleasure,  it 
turns  aside  from  the  later  Epicureans  and  from  those  of  our  day  who  put  pleasure 
in  beauty  first,  to  the  loss  or  lessening  of  moral  goodness.  Guarded  thus  on  all 
sides,  yet  taking  in  all  that  is  noble  in  all  efforts  to  find  the  highest  good,  it  was  in 
truth  grace  in  its  sense  of  beauty  that  Christ  possessed.  That  grace,  so  guarded, 
BO  complete,  pray  that  it  may  be  with  you  all  in  the  year.  It  will  bless  your 
lives  and  it  will  make  of  you  a  blessing.  It  will  make  you  at  one  with  all 
that  is  tender,  pitiful,  dear,  and  sweet  in  human  loving-kindness.  It  will  make 
you  at  one  with  all  that  is  sensitive  and  delicate  and  graceful  in  manner  and 
speech,  and  create  in  you  an  harmonious  soul.  Men  will  think  your  life  beautiful, 
and  inspiration  and  effort  will  flow  from  it.  It  will  make  you  at  one  with  moral 
good,  just  and  true  and  pure.  And  it  will  take  all  that  is  loving  in  humanity,  and 
all  that  is  fair,  and  aU  that  is  moral,  and  link  them  to  and  complete  them  by 
uniting  them  to  the  love  of  God,  and  to  God's  love  for  all  men  ;  so  that  to  human 
love  and  moral  love  and  imaginative  love  will  be  added  the  spiritual  love  which 
gathers  them  all  into  perfection.  {S.  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  last  words  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments  (see  Matt.  iv.  6) : — Just  as  Christ,  in  His  ascension,  was 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  781 

taken  from  them  whilst  His  hands  were  lifted  up  in  the  act  of  blessing,  so  it  is 
fitting  that  the  revelation  of  which  He  is  the  centre  and  the  theme  should  part 
from  us  as  He  did,  shedding  with  its  final  words  the  dew  of  benediction  on  our 
upturned  heads.  I.  The  apparent  contrast  and  the  real  harmony  and  unitt 
OF  these  two  texts.  "  Lest  I  come  and  smite  the  land  with  a  curse."  If  instead 
of  the  word  "  curse  "  we  were  to  substitute  the  word  "  destruction,"  we  should  get 
the  true  idea  of  the  passage.  And  the  thought  that  I  want  to  insist  upon  is  this, 
that  here  we  have  distinctly  gathered  up  the  whole  spirit  of  milleniums  of  Divine 
revelation,  all  of  which  declare  this  one  thing,  that  as  certainly  as  there  is  a  God, 
every  transgression  and  disobedience  receives,  and  must  receive,  its  just  recompense 
of  reward.  That  is  the  spirit  of  law,  for  law  has  nothing  to  say,  except,  "  Do  this, 
and  thou  shalt  live ;  do  not  this,  and  thou  shalt  die."  And  then  turn  to  the  other. 
"  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."  What  has  become  of  the 
thunder  ?  AU  melted  into  dewy  rain  of  love  and  pity  and  compassion.  Grace  is 
love  that  stoops ;  grace  is  love  that  foregoes  its  claims,  and  forgives  sins  against 
itself.  Grace  is  love  that  imparts,  and  this  grace,  thus  stooping,  thus  pardoning, 
thus  bestowing,  is  a  universal  gift.  So  there  is  a  very  real  and  significant  contrast. 
*•  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse  "  sounds  strangely  unlike  "  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."  So  I  want  you  to  notice  that  beneath  this 
apparent  contrast  there  is  a  real  harmony,  and  that  these  two  utterances,  though 
they  seem  to  be  so  diverse,  are  quite  consistent  at  bottom,  and  must  both  be  taken 
into  account  if  we  would  grasp  the  whole  truth.  For,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  nowhere 
are  there  more  tender  utterances  and  sweeter  revelations  of  a  Divine  mercy  than  in 
that  ancient  law  with  its  attendant  prophets.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  nowhere, 
through  all  the  thunderings  and  lightnings  of  Sinai,  are  there  such  solemn  words 
of  retribution  as  dropped  from  the  lips  of  the  Licarnate  Love.  There  is  nothing 
anywhere  so  dreadful  as  Christ's  own  words  about  what  comes,  and  must  come,  to 
sinful  men.  II.  The  relation  of  the  grace  to  the  punishment.  Is  it  not  love 
which  proclaims  judgment  ?  Are  not  the  words  of  my  first  text,  if  you  take  them 
all,  merciful,  however  they  wear  a  surface  of  threatening  ?  "  Lest  I  come."  Then 
He  speaks  that  He  may  not  come,  and  declares  the  issue  of  sin  in  order  that  that 
issue  may  never  need  to  be  experienced  by  us  that  listen  to  Him.  It  is  love  that 
threatens  ;  it  is  mercy  to  tell  us  that  the  wrath  will  come.  And  just  as  one  relation 
between  the  grace  and  the  retribution  is  that  the  proclamation  of  the  retribution  is 
the  work  of  the  grace,  so  there  is  another  relation — the  grace  is  manifested  in 
bearing  the  punishment,  and  in  bearing  it  away  by  bearing  it.  He  has  come 
between  every  one  of  us,  if  we  will,  and  that  certain  incidence  of  retribution  for 
our  evil,  taking  upon  Himself  the  whole  burden  of  our  sin  and  of  our  guilt,  and 
bearing  that  awful  death  which  consists  not  in  the  mere  dissolution  of  the  tie 
between  soul  and  body,  but  in  the  separation  of  the  conscious  spirit  from  God,  in 
order  that  we  may  stand  peaceful,  serene,  untouched,  when  the  hail  and  the  fire  of 
the  Divine  judgment  are  falling  from  the  heavens  and  running  along  the  earth. 
The  grace  depends  for  all  our  conceptions  of  its  glory,  its  tenderness,  and  its  depth 
on  our  estimate  of  the  wrath  from  which  it  delivers.  IH.  The  alternative  which 
these  texts  open  for  us.  You  must  have  either  the  destruction  or  the  grace.  And, 
more  wonderful  still,  the  same  coming  of  the  same  Lord  will  be  to  one  man  the 
destruction,  and  to  another  the  manifestation  and  reception  of  His  perfect  grace. 
As  it  was  in  the  Lord's  first  coming,  '*  He  is  set  for  the  rise  and  the  fall  of  many  in 
Israel."  The  same  heat  softens  some  sabstances  and  bakes  others  into  hardness. 
The  same  gospel  is  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death,"  by  the 
giving  forth  of  the  same  influences  killing  the  one  and  reviving  the  other;  the 
same  Christ  is  a  Stone  to  build  upon  or  a  Stone  of  stumbling ;  and  when  He  cometh 
at  the  last,  Prince,  King,  Judge,  to  you  and  me.  His  coming  shall  be  prepared  as 
the  morning;  and  ye  "  shall  have  a  song  as  in  the  night  as  when  one  cometh  with 
a  pipe  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  "  ;  or  else  it  shall  be  a  day  of  darkness  and  not 
of  light.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — These  are 
the  last  words  of  the  second  volume  of  God  to  man.  The  last  word  that  God  has 
to  give  to  man  in  His  holy  book  is  a  blessing  upon  man.  Could  any  one  wish  you 
more  or  better  than  that  the  "grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  yours,  be  mine  "  ? 
Now,  look  first  at  what  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is.  The  word  "grace" 
is  used  in  the  New  Testament  in  two  distinct  senses  : — First,  it  is  the  grace  that 
belongs  to  Christ  Himself ;  the  grace  or  graces  of  Christ.  Second,  it  is  the  grace, 
or  great  grace,  or  great  gift  that  Christ  gives  to  men.  Now,  look,  first,  at  the  grace 
of  Christ — the  personal  grace.    Christ  seemingly  was  the  most  attractive  of  men 


782  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

in  His  personality.     He  exercised  over  the  men  and  women  of  His  time  a  strong 
personal  fascination.     It  is  rather  strange  that  there  is  no  real  portrait  or  picture 
of  Christ  in  His  human  form.     But  I  think  it  is  a  great  advantage  rather  than 
otherwise  that  we  have  no  picture  of  His  person.     For  myself,  I  always  picture  the 
Lord  Jesus  as  a  man  of  great  attractiveness  personally,  of  winning  demeanour, 
and  His  whole  personality  one  such  as  to  attract  and  win  to  Himself.     I  will  give 
you  three  simple  reasons  for  this.     Notice,  first,  that  Christ  was  come  of  a  kingly 
race — of  the  house  of  David.     Now,   David  himself  was  a  man  famed  for  his 
physical  beauty;  so  were  his  sons — two,  at  least — men  of  great  physical  beauty 
and  attractiveness ;  and,  if  there  is  one  great  lesson  that  modern  science  has  taught 
us,  it  is  the  lesson  of  heredity ;  and  I  do  not  press  it  too  far  if  I  say  that  Christ 
had  the  grace  and  beauty  of  His  predecessors.     In  the  second  place,  if  you  will 
study  Christ's  life,  you  will  find  there  are  particular  occasions  when  the  majesty  of 
His  person  impressed  all  around  Him,  and  especially  His  disciples.    Third,  He 
seems  to  have  had  a  great  attraction  for  children.   Now,  no  one  who  is  not  attractive 
in  his  personality,  and  has  not  sweetness  of  countenance,  has  that  subtle  attraction 
for  children  which  will  draw  them  to  him.     It  is  well  to  strive  to  have  the  graces  of 
Christ.     Let  us  strive,  each  according  to  our  endowments  from  the  Most  High,  to 
exercise  this  sweet  attractiveness  of  personality — to  become  not  only  good  and 
strong  men  as  Christians,  but  to  become  attractive  and  winning  ;  I  would  venture 
to  say,  have  the  winsomeness  of  Christ.     This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  first  great 
personal  grace  of  Christ,  winsomeness  ;  but  there  are  deeper  and  richer  graces  than 
this  that  Christ  had,  and  which  we  may  all  have.    I  would  ask  you  to  notice  three 
great  graces  in  addition  to  His  personality — the  graces  of  character,  the  great  root 
graces.    He  had  that  most  beautiful  of  graces — the  grace  of  humility.    I  have 
noticed  in  life  that  the  greater  a  man's  position  is,  the  greater  is  his  power ;  the 
higher  his  position,  mentally  or  worldly,  the  more  he  is  admired,  if  he  be  a  humble 
man  ;  that  seemingly  the  admiration  for  his  humility  increases  in  the  ratio  of  his 
worldly  greatness.    Now  this  is  just  the  wonderful  quality  about  Christ.    We  speak 
of  the  good  ones  and  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  but  there  is  no  one  who  can 
compare  in  the  least  with  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  for  greatness,  power,  might, 
intellect :  for  every  quality  that  man  recognises  as  great.   Christ  is  the  great  revela- 
tion of  God — not  merely  man  but  God  Himself  of  very  God.     And  the  great  and 
wonderful  thing  about  His  humility  is  that  He  emptied  Himself,  as  Paul  says,  of 
this  Divine  majesty  and  power,  and  came  down  to  this  world,  became  of  no  repute, 
humble  as  the  humblest,  born  in  a  manger,  living  and  working  at  the  carpenter's 
bench.     That  is  somewhat  of  the  humility  of  Christ.     It  is  a  great  virtue.     It  is  a 
temptation  for  us  all  at  times,  not  to  feel  humble,  but  to  become  self-confident. 
Having  put  before  you  the  infinite  grace  and  humility  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I 
pray  for  you  and  for  myself  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  grace  of 
Divine  humility — may  be  yours,  may  be  mine.     His  humility  was  His  second  great 
grace ;  and  His  third  was  His  unselfishness.     Christ,  I  think,  is  most  wonderful  of 
all  for  His  unselfishness.     Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  endowed  with  every  quality 
that  would  make  a  man  a  success  in  the  world — endowed  with  the  richest  intel- 
lectual and  spiritual  gifts — laid  them  all  aside,  or  only  used  them  for  the  sake  of 
others.     Pray  that  the  grace  of  the  unselfishness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be 
ours.     And  then  just  a  few  words  upon  another  grace.     I  have   spoken  of  His 
personal  attractiveness.  His  humility,  His  unselfishness ;  greater  than  these  gifts 
and  graces  is  the  last — love,  love.     The  measure  of  a  man's  greatness,  whether  he 
be  great  in  the  world  or  little,  the  true  measure  of  a  man's  greatness  is  his  power 
for  love.     That  is  the  greatest  power  for  men  and  women — their  capacity  for  love, 
Divine  love,  human  love.     In  Christ  you  have  the  most  perfect  example  of  it.  His 
Divine  love  for  God  His  Father,  was  absolutely  perfect.    What  shall  I  say  of  His 
love  to  man?     We  cannot  grasp  it;  a  finite  mind  like  yours  and  m'ne  cannot 
adequately  realise  the  greatness  of  the  love  of  God :  we  can  only  adore  it.     Love 
that  led  Him  to  live,  to  die,  to  sacrifice  everything  for  men  and  women  like  you  and 
me.     Above  all  the  graces  you  can  have,  get  love — love  that  brightens,  love  that 
deepens,  love  that  purifies  men's  natures.     These  were  simply  some  of  Christ's 
own  graces  or  gifts.     What  is  the  great  grace  or  gift  that  He  has  to  give  to  men  ? 
It  is  simply  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins.     Is  that  a  little  thing  ?     Men  seem  to 
think  that  it  is.     If  you  would  take  a  deeper  view  of  yourself  and  human  nature, 
you  would  see  what  a  great  thing  it  really  is.     Sin  that  caused  the  death  of  God's 
Son  is  a  dreadful  thing ;  it  ruins,  and  mars,  and  corrupts  your  nature  and  mine. 
The  greatest  gift  that  could  be  made  to  men,  is  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins.     I 


CHAP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  783 

have  tried  to  show  you  the  graces  of  Christ's  person,  His  attractiveness,  His 
unselfishness,  His  humiUty,  and  His  love ;  all  these  gifts  are  in  vain  unless  you  get 
the  great  gift  of  forgiveness  of  sins  from  Christ,  the  foundation  of  every  grace  and 
virtue  possible  to  man.  This  gift  may  be  had  by  all  here,  young  and  old.  It  is  a 
gift  that  is  not  limited  to  the  young,  to  little  children,  to  men  in  the  prime  of  their 
days,  or  to  old  men.  It  is  a  great  gift  for  all.  If  you  and  I  could  get  first  the 
grace  of  forgiveness,  then  those  of  personal  attractiveness,  humility,  unselfishness, 
and  greatest  of  all  graces  and  gifts,  the  love  of  Christ— love  like  Christ's— earth 
wiere  heaven  now.  Men  speak  of  a  golden  age  that  shall  come;  saints 
and  sages  have  spoken  of  it ;  there  is  an  instinctive  craving  of  the  human 
heart  after  a  golden  age  that  shall  dawn ;  could  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  really  be  with  you  and  me,  now  were  the  golden  age,  not  in  the  time 
to  come,  but  now,  in  this  daily  life  of  ours.  One  day  we  shall  not  have 
to  say  "the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all";  but  we  shall 
say  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  us  all.  {IVm.  Souper,  M.A.) 
The  free  love  of  Christ : — Thus  the  Bible  closes  with  blessing.  In  this  prayer  we 
have  the  summing-up  of  all  the  blessings  which  the  Word  of  God  has  uttered. 
Man  is  simply  the  receiver  and  the  enjoyer  of  a  love  as  boundless  as  it  is  unbought. 
I.  What  is  this  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Free  love  I  Divine  favour, 
unbought,  unsolicited,  and  undeserved !  Keturn  to  your  Father's  house,  and  be 
blest !  Come,  and  be  forgiven  I  Look,  and  be  saved !  Touch,  and  be  healed ! 
Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  I  II.  How  rr  has  been  shown.  In  many  ways,  but 
chiefly  in  the  Cross.  The  words  of  Christ  were  grace;  the  doings  of  Christ 
were  grace;  but  at  the  Cross  it  came  forth  most  fully.  The  "  it  is  finished" 
of  Golgotha  was  the  throwing  down  of  the  barriers  that  stood  between  the 
sinner  and  the  grace.  The  grace  itself  was  uncreated  and  eternal;  it  did 
not  originate  in  the  purpose,  but  in  the  nature  of  God.  Still  its  outflow  to 
sinners  was  hemmed  in  by  righteousness ;  and  until  this  was  satisfied  at  the 
Cross  the  grace  was  like  forbidden  fruit  to  man.  Divine  displeasure  against 
sin  and  Divine  love  of  holiness  found  their  complete  satisfaction  at  the  altar, 
where  the  "  consuming  fiire "  devoured  the  great  burnt-offering,  and  gave  full 
vent  to  the  pent-up  stores  of  grace.  HI.  How  we  get  it.  Simply  by  taking  it  as 
it  is,  and  as  we  are ;  by  letting  it  flow  into  us ;  by  believing  God's  testimony  con- 
cerning it.  Grace  supposes  no  preparation  whatsoever  in  him  who  receives  it,  save 
that  of  worthlessness  and  guilt,  whether  these  be  felt  or  unfelt.  The  dryness  of 
the  ground  is  that  which  fits  it  for  the  rain ;  the  poverty  of  the  beggar  is  that  which 
fits  him  for  the  alms  ;  so  the  sin  of  the  sinner  is  that  which  fits  him  for  the  grace 
of  Christ.  If  anything  else  were  needed,  grace  would  be  no  more  grace,  but  would 
become  work  or  merit.  Where  sin  abounds  there  it  is  that  grace  much  more 
abounds.  IV.  What  it  does  for  us.  1.  It  pardons.  2.  It  pacifies.  3.  It 
liberates.  4.  It  enlightens.  6.  It  strengthens.  6.  It  purifies.  V.  How  long  it 
lasts  :  For  ever.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Till  we  meet  again : — This  is  an  expression 
suitable  to  the  most  gracious  heart,  a  prayer  wherewith  the  behever  may  vent  his 
best  wishes  and  express  his  most  devout  desires.  I.  Consider  this  benediction. 
1.  What  is  this  which  John  desires?  The  word  ia '*  charis."  It  has  for  its  root 
"  joy."  There  is  joy  at  the  bottom  of  charis,  or  grace.  It  also  signifieth  favour, 
kindliness,  and  especially  love.  Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  generally  mentioned  in  our 
benedictions  as  having  grace,  and  the  Father  as  having  love  ;  and  our  usual  bene- 
diction begins  with  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  love  of  God.  Is  that 
the  proper  order  ?  The  order  is  correct  to  our  experience,  and  in  an  instructive 
benediction  the  Holy  Spirit  intendeth  this  for  our  learning.  The  Father's  love  is, 
as  it  were,  the  secret,  mysterious  germ  of  everything.  That  same  love  in  Jesus 
Christ  is  grace ;  His  is  love  in  its  active  form,  love  descending  to  earth,  love  wearing 
human  nature,  love  paying  the  great  ransom  price,  love  ascending,  love  sitting  and 
waiting,  love  pleading,  love  soon  to  come  with  power  and  glory.  This  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  therefore  the  grace  of  a  Divine  person.  We  wish  you,  as  we 
wish  for  ourselves,  the  grace  of  God  Himself,  rich,  boundless,  unfathomable,  im- 
mutable. Divine  ;  no  temporary  grace  such  as  some  speak  of,  which  keepeth  not  its 
own,  but  suffereth  even  the  sheep  of  its  own  pasture  to  go  astray  and  perish  ;  but 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  Having  loved  His  own 
which  were  in  the  world.  He  loved  them  unto  the  end  " ;  that  grace  most  potent 
which  said,  "  None  shall  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand."  This  is  no  small  treasure — 
this  grace  of  a  Divine  Person.  Yet  is  our  Lord  Jesus  also  human,  as  truly  human 
as  He  is  Divine,  and,  beUeving  in  Him,  you  have  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Man 


734  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

to  be  with  you  all.     May  you  feel  His  tenderness,  His  brotherliness,  His  grace.    He 
is  your  Kinsman,  and  He  graciously  favours  His  own  kinsfolk.     Bead  the  text 
again,  and  pause  a  while  in  the  middle  to  enjoy  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord."    The 
grace  that  cometh  from  His  Majesty,  the  grace  that  cometh  from  His  Headship,^the 
grace  that  cometh  from  His  Divinely  human  supremacy  over  His  Church,  which  is 
His  body — this  is  the  grace  which  we  desire  for  you  all.     Bead  the  next  word: 
"  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus."     May  that  be  with  you ;  that  is  to  say,  the  grace 
of  our  Saviour,  for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  Jesus."    All  His  saving  grace, 
all  that  which  redeems  from  guilt,  from  sin,  from  trouble,  all  that  which  saves  us 
with  an  everlasting  salvation — may  that  be  yours  to  the  full.     Then  comes  the 
other  word,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you"  ;  may  He,  as  the 
Anointed  One,  visit  you.     May  you  have  that  anointing  from  the  Holy  One  which 
shall  make  you  know  all  things.     2.  Our  next  division  is.  How?     "  May  the  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."    What  meaneth  this  ?     Our  first  answer 
is  the  wish  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  may  rest  upon  you  as  a  matter  of  fact — that 
He  may  love  you  truly  and  intensely ;  love  you,  not  only  as  He  loves  the  world,  but 
as  He  loved  His  own  which  were  in  the  world.    Next,  may  you  believe  that  grace, 
may  you  trust  that  grace,  may  it  be  with  you  because  your  faith  has  closed  in  with 
it,  and  you  are  relying  upon  it.     Still  further,  may  His  grace  be  with  you  as  the 
object  of  faith,  so  that  your  belief  comes  to  be  full  assurance,  till  you  know  the  love 
which  Christ  hath  towards  you,  and  no  more  doubt  it  than  you  doubt  the  love  of 
the  dearest  friend  you  have  on  earth.    And  may  His  grace  be  with  you,  next,  as  to 
the  favours  which  flow  out  of  it.     May  you  enjoy  all  the  blessings  which  the  grace 
of  Christ  can  yield,  the  grace  of  a  peaceful  conscience,  the  grace  of  a  cleansed  walk, 
the  grace  of  access  to  God,  the  grace  of  fervent  love,  the  grace  of  holy  expectancy, 
the  grace  of  self-denial,  the  gi-ace  of  perfect  consecration,  and  the  grace  of  final 
perseverance.    And  may  grace  be  with  us,  next,  so  as  to  produce  constant  com- 
munion between  us  and  Christ,  His  favour  flowing  into  our  heart,  and  our  hearts 
returning  their  gratitude.     Oh,  to  come  to  this  pass,  that  our  WeU-beloved  is  with 
us,  and  we  enjoy  sweet  mutual  intercourse :  this  is  to  have  the  love,  or  grace,  of 
Jesus  with  us.     May  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thus  in  His  grace  be  with  us,  and  may 
He  work  for  us  aU  that  He  can  work.    What  better  benediction  could  John  Himself 
utter  ?    3.  But,  now,  the  third  part  of  our  discourse  comes  under  the  head  of  "  to 
whom."    "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."    Every  now  and 
then  you  come  across  a  book  written  by  one  who  is  a  long  way  off  from  understand- 
ing aU  the  truth,  yet  he  knows  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  you  read  the  sweet  words  that 
come  from  His  pen  concerning  the  Master  you  feel  your  heart  knit  to  Him.    If  a 
man  knows  Christ  he  knows  the  most  important  of  matters,  and  is  possessed  of  a 
secret  quite  as  precious  as  any  in  our  own  keeping,  for  what  know  we  more  than 
Christ,  and  what  hope  have  we  but  in  Christ  ?     There  is  a  life  which  is  the  same  in 
all  that  have  it,  however  diverse  they  may  happen  to  be  upon  opinion  or  outward 
ceremony.     There  is  a  life  eternal,  and  that  life  is  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  all  that 
have  that  life  we  do  with  intensity  of  heart  say,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  be  with  you  all."    II.  The  position  of  this  benediction.     First,  I  draw 
what  I  have  to  say  from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  last  word  of  Scripture.     I  regard  it, 
therefore,  as  being  the  apostle's  last  and  highest  wish.     We  cannot  do  with  less 
than  this,  and  we  do  not  want  more  than  this.     If  we  get  grace  from  Jesus  we  shall 
have  glory  with  Jesus,  but  without  it  we  are  without  hope.     Standing  at  the  end  of 
the  Book  of  Bevelation  as  this  does,  I  next  regard  its  position  as  indicating  what 
we  shall  want  till  the  end  comes  ;  that  is,  from  now  till  the  descent  of  our  Lord  in 
His  second  advent.     This  is  the  one  thing  we  require,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."     May  it  be  with  us  daily,  hourly !     May  it  be  with 
us,  instructing  us  as  to  our  behaviour  in  each  generation  !     Placed  as  this  blessing 
is  at  the  end  of  the  book  there  is  but  this  one  more  thought — this  is  what  we  shall 
wish  for  when  the  end  cometh.     We  shall  come  to  the  end  of  life,  as  we  come  to 
the  end  of  our  Bibles.     And  oh,  aged  friend,  may  thy  failing  eyes  be  cheered  with 
the  sight  of  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  on  the  last  page  of  life,  as  thou  wilt 
find  it  on  the  last  page  of  thy  well-thumbed  Bible.     Peradventure  some  of  you  may 
come  to  the  last  page  of  life  before  you  get  grace  :  I  pray  that  there  you  may  find 
it.     The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you.     Or,  suppose  we  should  not 
die ;  suppose  the  Lord  should  suddenly  come  in  His  temple.     Oh,  then  may  we 
have   grace   to  meet   Him.     (C.  H.   Surgeon.)        A  faithful  minister's  parting 
blessing  : — ^First,  His  restraining  grace.     Why,  if  it  were  not  for  this,  God's  people 
would  be  just  as  weak  and  wicked  as  other  folks  are.     Secondly,  there  is  convicting 


CBiP.xxn.]  REVELATION.  785 

grace,  which  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  acts  every  day  and  hour.  A  man  may 
speak  to  the  ear,  but  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  can  speak  to  the  heart.  What 
does  Jesus  Christ  do  in  temptations,  trials,  and  afflictions  ?  He  fetches  His  people 
home,  and  convinces  them  that  they  have  done  amiss.  Thirdly,  there  is  the  con- 
verting grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  is  a  most  excellent  prayer  in  our 
commination  office,  "  Tom  us,  0  good  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned."  We  can  no 
more  turn  our  hearts  than  we  can  turn  the  world  upside  down ;  it  is  the  Redeemer, 
by  His  Spirit,  must  take  away  the  heart  of  stone,  and  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  give  us  a  heart  of  flesh.  Then  there  is  establishing  grace.  David  prays, 
"  Create  in  me  a  new  heart,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  In  the  margin 
it  is  "  constant  spirit  " ;  and  you  hear  of  some  that  are  rooted  and  grounded  in  the 
love  of  God,  and  the  apostle  prays  that  they  may  always  abound  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord.  Again,  it  is  good  to  have  the  heart  established  with  grace.  There  is  a  good 
many  people  have  some  religion  in  them,  but  they  are  not  established.  Hence  they 
are  mere  weather-cocks,  turned  about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine.  What  think  you 
of  the  Redeemer's  comforting  grace  ?  Oh,  what  can  you  do  without  it  ?  "  Li  the 
multitude  of  my  thoughts  within  me,"  says  the  psalmist,  "  Thy  comforts  have 
refreshed  my  soul."  And  there  are  so  many  afflictions  and  trials,  that  if  it  were  not 
for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  comfortings,  no  flesh  could  bear  them.  In  a  word,  what 
think  you  of  the  quickening  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Remember  David 
says,  "  Quicken  me  according  to  Thy  word,  quicken  me  in  Thy  way,  quicken  me  in 
Thy  righteousness. "  God's  people  want  quickening  everyday;  this  is  trimming 
our  lamps,  girding  up  the  loins  of  our  minds,  stirring  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in 
us.  It  is  just  with  a  soul  as  it  is  with  the  plants  and  trees  ;  how  would  it  be  with 
them  if  the  Lord  did  not  command  quickening  life  to  them  after  the  winter  ?  The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  His  people  in  prayer.  Who  can  pray  with- 
out grace  ?  The  grace  of  God  is  with  His  people  in  His  providence.  "  Oh,"  says 
Bishop  Hall,  *'  a  little  aid  is  not  enough  for  me."  My  going  on  the  waters  puts  me 
in  mind  of  what  I  have  seen  many  times.  If  the  sailors  perceive  a  storm  coming, 
they  do  not  choose  to  speak  to  the  passengers  for  fear  of  frightening  them ;  they 
will  go  quietly  on  deck,  and  give  orders  for  proper  care  to  be  taken ;  and  if  a  sailor 
can  tell  of  storms  approaching  by  the  clouds,  why  cannot  God's  people  tell  why 
God  does  so  and  so  with  them  ?  The  people  of  God  eye  Him  in  His  providence ; 
the  very  hairs  of  their  heads  are  all  numbered,  and  the  grace  of  God  is  with 
them  in  the  common  business  of  life.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
with  His  people  when  sick  and  when  dying.  Oh,  what  shall  we  do  when 
death  comes  ?  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  we  have  got  a  good  Master  to  carry  us 
through  that  time!  (G.  Whitefield,  M.A.)  Amen. — The  Church's  Amen: — I. 
The  last  testimony.  The  whole  Bible  is  the  testimony ;  for  in  it  Christ  is  both 
the  Teacher  and  the  Lesson,  the  Witness  and  the  Testimony.  But  the  Revelation 
is  His  last  testimony  ;  and  the  marvellous  words  of  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter 
are  more  especially  so.  Let  the  Church  listen  ;  let  the  world  give  heed.  II.  The 
LAST  PROPHECY.  "  Surely  I  come  quickly."  Brief  but  distinct  is  this  announce- 
ment ;  and  it  comes  from  His  own  lips.  He  heralds  Himself  and  His  kingdom. 
He  puts  the  trumpet  to  His  own  mouth  to  sound  abroad  this  last  message,  "  I 
come  !  "  I  who  came,  and  departed,  am  coming  again.  •'  I  come  quickly."  Here 
is  something  more.  He  will  lose  no  time ;  nor  delay  a  moment  longer  than  is 
absolutely  necessary.  He  will  not  be  slack  concerning  His  promise  (2  Pet.  iii.  9) ; 
He  will  come  and  not  tarry  (Heb.  x.  37).  "  Surely  I  come  quickly."  Appearances 
may  indicate  no  such  thing  ;  the  world's  sky  may  be  cloudless,  and  its  sea  smooth ; 
men  may  have  assured  themselves  of  prosperous  days,  and  be  saying,  "  Peace  and 
safety"  ;  yet  surely  He  cometh  !  As  a  snare,  as  a  thief,  as  lightning,  He  cometh. 
He,  the  very  Christ,  the  risen  Saviour,  Jesas  of  Nazareth — He  cometh !  In  His 
own  glory,  in  His  Father's  glory,  with  His  mighty  angels,  in  the  clouds  of  heaven, 
King  and  Judge,  Conqueror  and  Avenger,  Redresser  of  wrongs.  Opener  of  prison- 
doors,  Binder  of  Satan,  Renewer  of  creation.  Bridegroom  of  His  Church,  Star  of 
Jacob,  Sun  of  Righteousness,  Owner  of  the  golden  sceptre,  Wielder  of  the  iron  rod. 
Wearer  of  the  crowns  of  earth — He  cometh !  HI.  The  last  prayer — "  Amen. 
Even  so  come.  Lord  Jesus  "  ;  or  more  hterally,  "  Yes,  surely,  come.  Lord  Jesus  "  ; 
for  the  words  the  apostle  here  uses,  in  his  response,  are  the  same  as  those  used  by 
Christ  in  His  announcement ;  as  if  he  caught  up  the  Master's  words  and  echoed 
them.  Thus  gladly  and  fervently  does  the  Church  respond  to  the  promise  ;  as  one 
who  felt  the  blank  created  by  the  Lord's  absence,  and  welcomed  with  her  whole 
heart  the  intimation  of  His  return.    This  is  the  summing-up  of  her  petitions,  as 

50 


786  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

was  the  seventy-second  Psalm  the  filling  up  of  all  David's  prayers  (Psa.  Ixxii.  20). 
Are  our  hearts,  like  hers,  thus  beating  toward  the  Beloved  One  ?  Is  this  the  burden 
of  our  prayers  ?  IV.  The  last  blessing.  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
be  with  you  all."  Earthly,  human  love,  is  of  all  things  here  the  most  fitted  to 
gladden  ;  how  much  more,  then,  that  which  is  heavenly  and  Divine !  V.  The  last 
AMEN.  This  is  not  an  amen  to  this  chapter  only,  or  this  book  only ;  but  to  the  whole 
Bible,  of  which  the  burden,  from  Genesis  to  Eevelation,  is  Jesus  Christ,  the  seed 
of  the  woman.  It  is  an  amen  to  the  prayer  for  the  grace  of  Christ ;  it  is  an  amen  to 
the  sigh  for  the  Lord's  appearing.  It  is  an  amen  to  the  prophetic  announcement  of 
all  the  glorious  and  all  the  terrible  things  written  in  this  book.  It  is  the  concentrated 
utterance  of  the  Church's  longings;  her  glad  response  to  all  that  God  has  spoken; 
the  subscription  of  her  name  to  her  belief  in  all  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  written ; 
the  summing-up  of  her  unutterable  groan.  How  much  does  this  amen  comprise  ! 
Faith,  hope,  and  love  are  in  it;  and,  with  these,  such  a  boundless  satisfaction  of 
spirit  as  can  only  get  vent  to  itself  in  that  one  brief  word,  which  sums  up  all  the 
aspirations  of  its  joy,  "  Amen  and  amen  ! "  {H.  Bonur,  D.D.)  The  last  amen : — 
Amen  is  a  Hebrew  word,  signifying  truth  and  certainty  in  the  first  place  ;  and  then 
our  affirmation  of  something  as  a  certainty,  or  our  desire  that  it  should  be  so.  It 
comes  also  to  signify  faithfulness  and  stedfastness  in  a  person,  so  that  that  person 
is  himself  regarded  as  truth  personified — the  truth,  the  Amen.  Hence  it  is  that 
Christ  takes  to  Himself  the  designation  of  the  Truth,  and  the  Amen — the  faithful 
and  true  Witness.  Further,  it  has  come  to  signify  faith  and  confidence — specially 
faith  and  confidence  in  God.  It  is  the  word  used  in  reference  to  Abraham,  "  He 
believed  God,"  and  to  Israel,  "  They  believed  the  Lord."  But  it  is  with  the  common 
use  of  it  that  we  have  now  to  do — that  use  of  it  which  we  make  daily  when  we 
conclude  even  our  shortest  prayer.  Amen  ;  that  is,  so  let  it  be  ;  let  it  be  according 
to  our  request,  and  according  to  Thy  promise.  Used  in  this  way  it  means  much. 
There  are,  however,  different  ways  of  using  it ;  different  feelings  with  which  it  is 
uttered :  and  it  is  to  these  that  we  would  now  attend.  I.  There  is  the  Amen  of 
IGNORANCE.  Simple  and  common  as  the  word  is,  thousands  use  it  without  knowing 
what  it  means,  or  what  they  themselves  intend.  It  is  to  them  a  word,  no  more ; 
a  concluding  word  or  sound,  where  the  voice  ceases,  and  after  which  the  eyes  are 
opened,  and  the  hands  unclasped !  Are  your  Amens  of  this  kind  ?  or  are  they 
uttered  with  the  understanding — the  f uU  realisation  of  the  large  and  solemn 
meaning  which  they  contain  ?  IE.  The  Amen  of  habit.  All  are  not  ignorant  of 
its  significance.  Ask  many  what  they  intend  by  affixing  it  to  their  prayers,  and  at 
once  they  will  tell  you.  Yet  mark  them,  and  you  will  find  the  word  slipping  from 
their  tongue  without  any  corresponding  thought  as  to  its  sense.  Are  your  Ameng 
those  of  habit — pieces  of  ornament,  the  useless  appendages  of  useless  devotion — or 
is  your  soul  thrown  into  them  ?  Are  they  the  essence  of  your  previous  petitions — 
the  concentration  and  summing-up  of  all  your  desires?  III.  The  Amen  of  un- 
belief. It  seems  strange  that  a  word  like  this  should  ever  be  uttered  in  unbelief  ; 
yet  such  is  the  case.  Nay,  sometimes  it  would  seem  as  if  the  most  unbelieving 
part  of  our  prayer  is  that  which  should  be  the  most  believing — the  Amen.  We 
may  weU  wonder  how  it  should  be  so.  It  seems  almost  incredible  that  a  word  like 
this,  meant  to  be  associated  with  faithfulness,  and  truth,  and  certainty,  should  be 
connected  with  unbelief,  nay,  should  be  the  utterance  of  unbelief — the  frequent,  the 
daily  utterance  of  unbelief ;  yet  so  it  is.  Our  unbelieving  Amens  are  about  the 
most  melancholy  parts  of  our  prayers — the  worst  indications  of  distrust  in  God. 
rV.  The  Amen  of  faith.  This  is  the  true  Amen ;  the  Amen  of  souls  who  have 
heard  the  gracious  words  of  Him  who  cannot  lie,  and  who  act  upon  these.  But 
why  should  Amen  be  thus  linked  with  faith  ?  Because  that  which  calls  it  forth  ia 
not  simply  a  desirable  thing,  but  a  truth  and  a  certainty.  It  has  to  do  with  such 
things  as  the  following :  1.  The  free  love  of  God.  In  every  prayer  we  keep  our  eye 
on  this ;  for  without  the  recognition  of  this  grace,  this  abundant  grace,  what  would 
prayer  be  ?  2.  The  truthfulness  of  God.  God  is  true— truthful,  faithful ;  we  will 
not  make  Him  a  liar  in  any  one  thing,  in  any  of  our  communications  with  Him — 
least  of  all  in  our  prayers.  3.  The  power  of  God.  What  He  has  promised  He  ia 
able  also  to  perform.  He  is  able  to  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly,  above  all  we 
ask.  In  addition  to  these  things,  to  which  the  faith  of  our  Amens  attaches  itself, 
we  would  only  further  say  that  it  specially  leans  upon  the  Cross  of  Christ  in  con- 
nection with  these  three.  It  is  round  that  Cross  that  this  faith  flings  its  arms  ;  it 
is  here  that  it  sits  down  in  quiet  satisfaction.  V.  The  Amen  of  hope.  We  say, 
"  Hallowed  be  Thy  name,"  and  we  add  the  Amen  of  hope  ;  "  Thy  kingdom  come," 


CHAP,  xxn.]  REVELATION.  787 

and  we  add  the  Amen  of  hope ;  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven," 
and  we  add  the  Amen  of  hope.  We  hear  the  Lord's  own  voice  from  heaven  saying, 
*♦  Surely  I  come  quickly,"  and  we  add  with  the  apostle:  "Even  so,  come,  Lord 
Jesus.  Amen !  "  Each  time  we  utter  the  Amen  in  connection  with  these  blessed 
futurities,  does  our  hope  kindle  up  anew — the  hope  calling  up  the  Amen,  and  the 
Amen  making  the  hope  to  shine  out  with  fresh  brightness  ?  Li  anticipating  such  a 
future,  how  can  we  utter  a  cold,  heartless,  passive,  or  despairing  Amen  ?  VI.  The 
Amen  op  jot.  It  is  the  joy  of  conscious  pardon ;  the  joy  of  friendship  with  God  ; 
the  joy  of  adoption  and  heirship ;  the  joy  of  our  whole  new  created  being ;  the  joy 
because  of  the  blessedness  in  prospect.  Past,  present,  and  future — all  furnish  us 
with  materials  for  joy.  And  in  our  thanksgivings  for  the  past,  we  breathe  out  an 
Amen  of  joy ;  in  our  consciousness  of  present  peace  and  heavenly  favour,  we  repeat 
our  Amen  of  joy ;  in  our  pleadings  for  larger  blessing  to  ourselves  and  to  our  world, 
we  say  Amen  with  gladness ;  and  in  our  pressing  forward  to  the  mark  for  the  prize 
of  our  high  calling,  looking  for  and  hastening  to  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God,  we 
say  Amen  and  Amen  with  ever-deepening  joy  of  heart.    {Ibid.) 


Theological  Semmary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01127  8316 


Date  Due 

fAOUf  r 

"fOp 

^mm 

m 

, 

- 

^ 

