Presented  to  the 

LIBRARY  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

from 

the  Library  of 
THOMAS   J.    KIPHART 


THE  CHEQUE  BOOK 

OF 

THE  BANK  OF  FAITH 


THE  CHEQUE   BOOK 

OF 

THE  BANK  OF  FAITH 


BEING  PRECIOUS  PROMISES 
ARRANGED  FOR  DAILY  USE 
WITH  BRIEF  COMMENTS 


BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON 


AMERICAN  TRACT  SOCIETY 

150   NASSAU   STREET,    NEW  YORK 


By  agreement  with  Messrs.  Passmore  &  Alabaster, 
and  with  my  full  authority,  this  book  is  published  in 
America  by  Messrs.  Armstrong  &  Son,  of  New  York. 

C.  H.  S. 

Right  of  publication  in  America  transferred  to  the 
American  Tract  Society,  March  10,  1893.  A.  C.  A. 


preface. 


H  PROMISE  from  God  may  very  instructively  be 
compared  to  a  cheque  payable  to  order.  It  is 
given  to  the  believer  with  the  view  of  bestow 
ing  upon  him  some  good  thing.  It  is  not  meant  that 
he  should  read  it  over  comfortably,  and  then  have 
done  with  it.  No,  he  is  to  treat  the  promise  as  a 
reality,  as  a  man  treats  a  cheque. 

He  is  to  take  the  promise,  and  endorse  it  with  his 
own  name  by  personally  receiving  it  as  true.  He  is 
by  faith  to  accept  it  as  his  own.  He  sets  to  his  seal 
that  God  is  true,  and  true  as  to  this  particular  word 
of  promise.  He  goes  further,  and  believes  that  he 
has  the  blessing  in  having  the  sure  promise  of  it, 
and  therefore  he  puts  his  name  to  it  to  testify  to  the 
receipt  of  the  blessing. 

This  done,  he  must  believingly  present  the  promise 
to  the  Lord,  as  a  man  presents  a  cheque  at  the  coun 
ter  of  the  Bank.  He  must  plead  it  by  prayer,  expect 
ing  to  have  it  fulfilled.  If  he  has  come  to  heaven's 
bank  at  the  right  date,  he  will  receive  the  promised 
amount  at  once.  If  the  date  should  happen  to  be 
further  on,  he  must  patiently  wait  till  its  arrival;  but 
meanwhile  he  may  count  the  promise  as  money,  for 
the  Bank  is  sure  to  pay  when  the  due  time  arrives. 

Some  fail  to  place  the  endorsement  of  faith  upon 
v 


vi  preface. 


the  cheque,  and  so  they  get  nothing;  and  others  are 
slack  in  presenting  it,  and  these  also  receive  nothing. 
This  is  not  the  fault  of  the  promise,  but  of  those  who 
do  not  act  with  it  in  a  common-sense,  business-like 
manner. 

God  has  given  no  pledge  which  he  will  not  redeem, 
and  encouraged  no  hope  which  he  will  not  fulfil. 
To  help  my  brethren  to  believe  this,  I  have  prepared 
this  little  volume.  The  sight  of  the  promises  them 
selves  is  good  for  the  eyes  of  faith:  the  more  we 
study  the  words  of  grace,  the  more  grace  shall  we 
derive  from  the  words.  To  the  cheering  Scriptures 
I  have  added  testimonies  of  my  own,  the  fruit  of 
trial  and  experience.  I  believe  all  the  promises  of 
God,  but  many  of  them  I  have  personally  tried  and 
proved.  I  have  seen  that  they  are  true,  for  they 
have  been  fulfilled  to  me.  This,  I  trust,  may  be 
cheering  to  the  young;  and  not  without  solace  to  the 
older  sort.  One  man's  experience  may  be  of  the  ut 
most  use  to  another;  and  this  is  why  the  man  of  God 
of  old  wrote,  "  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me ;" 
and  again,  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord 
heard  him." 

I  commenced  these  daily  portions  when  I  was  wad 
ing  in  the  surf  of  controversy.  Since  then  I  have 
been  cast  into  "waters  to  swim  in,"  which,  but  for 
God's  upholding  hand,  would  have  proved  waters  to 
drown  in.  I  have  endured  tribulation  from  many 
flails.  Sharp,  bodily  pain  succeeded  mental  depres 
sion,  and  this  was  accompanied  both  by  bereavement, 
and  affliction  in  the  person  of  one  dear  as  life.  The 
waters  rolled  in  continually,  wave  upon  wave.  I  do 
not  mention  this  to  exact  sympathy,  but  simply  to 
let  the  reader  see  that  I  am  no  dry-land  sailor.  I 


preface. 


have  traversed  those  oceans  which  are  not  Pacific 
full  many  a  time:  I  know  the  roll  of  the  billows,  and 
the  rush  of  the  winds.  Never  were  the  promises  o£ 
Jehovah  so  precious  to  me  as  at  this  hour.  Some  of 
them  I  never  understood  till  now;  I  had  not  reached 
the  date  at  which  they  matured,  for  I  was  not  myself 
mature  enough  to  perceive  their  meaning. 

How  much  more  wonderful  is  the  Bible  to  me  now 
than  it  was  a  few  months  ago!  In  obeying  the  Lord, 
and  bearing  his  reproach  outside  the  camp,  I  have 
not  received  new  promises;  but  the  result  to  me  is 
much  the  same  as  if  I  had  done  so,  for  the  old  ones 
have  opened  up  to  me  with  richer  stores.  Specially 
has  the  Word  of  the  Lord  to  his  servant  Jeremiah 
sounded  exceedingly  sweet  in  mine  ears.  His  lot  it 
was  to  speak  to  those  who  would  not  hear,  or  hear 
ing,  would  not  believe.  His  was  the  sorrow  which 
comes  of  disappointed  love,  and  resolute  loyalty;  he 
would  have  turned  his  people  from  their  errors,  but 
he  would  not  himself  quit  the  way  of  the  Lord.  For 
him  there  were  words  of  deep  sustaining  power, 
which  kept  his  mind  from  failing  where  nature  un 
aided  must  have  sunk.  These  and  such  like  golden 
sentences  of  grace  I  have  loved  more  than  my  neces 
sary  food,  and  with  them  I  have  enriched  these 
pages. 

Oh,  that  I  might  comfort  some  of  my  Master's 
servants!  I  have  written  out  of  my  own  heart  with 
the  view  of  comforting  their  hearts.  I  would  say  to 
them  in  their  trials  —  My  brethren,  God  is  good.  He 
will  not  forsake  you:  he  will  bear  you  through. 
There  is  a  promise  prepared  for  your  present  emer 
gencies;  and  if  you  will  believe  and  plead  it  at  the 
mercy-seat  through  Jesus  Christ,  you  shall  see  the 


viii  Ipretace* 


hand  of  the  Lord  stretched  out  to  help  you.  Every 
thing  else  will  fail,  but  his  word  never  will.  He  has 
been  to  me  so  faithful  in  countless  instances  that  I 
must  encourage  you  to  trust  him.  I  should  be  un 
grateful  to  God  and  unkind  to  you  if  I  did  not  do  so. 

May  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  inspire  the 
people  of  the  Lord  with  fresh  faith!  I  know  that, 
without  his  divine  power,  all  that  I  can  say  will  be 
of  no  avail;  but,  under  his  quickening  influence,  even 
the  humblest  testimony  will  confirm  feeble  knees,  and 
strengthen  weak  hands.  God  is  glorified  when  his 
servants  trust  him  implicitly.  We  cannot  be  too 
much  of  children  with  our  heavenly  Father.  Our 
young  ones  ask  no  question  about  our  will  or  our 
power,  but  having  once  received  a  promise  from 
father,  they  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  its  fulfilment, 
never  doubting  that  it  is  sure  as  the  sun.  May  many 
readers,  whom  I  may  never  see,  discover  the  duty 
and  delight  of  such  child-like  trust  in  God  while  they 
are  reading  the  little  bit  which  I  have  prepared  for 
each  day  in  the  year. 

For  long  years  several  thousands  of  God's  people 
have  read  my  MORNING  BY  MORNING  and  EVENING  BY 
EVENING,  and  many  of  them  have  been  good  enough 
to  write  me,  and  acknowledge  the  benefit  of  such  a 
perusal.  I  hope  this  little  book  will  not  interfere 
with  those  volumes.  These  daily  portions  are  gath 
ered  from  a  more  varied  range  of  topics,  and  are  all 
the  more  profitable  because  they  deal  with  doctrine, 
experience,  practice,  and  everything  else.  This  is  a 
sweetmeat  of  promise  only,  and  it  must  not  interfere 
with  the  fuller  meals:  nay,  rather,  I  hope  it  will  ex 
cite  a  desire  for  them. 


preface, 


May  our  Lord  Jesus  accept  this  my  service  for  his 
sheep  and  lambs,  from 

His  unworthy  Servant, 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


ffaitb's  Cbeauc  JSSoofc. 


JANUARY  i. 

"And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed  and  her,- 
seed;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt 
bruise  his  heel."  —  Gen.  iii.  15. 


is  the  first  promise  to  fallen  man.  It 
contains  the  whole  gospel,  and  the 
essence  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  It  has 
been  in  great  measure  fulfilled.  The  seed  of 
the  woman,  even  our  Lord  Jesus,  was  bruised 
in  his  heel,  and  a  terrible  bruising  it  was. 
How  terrible  will  be  the  final  bruising  of 
the  serpent's  head!  This  was  virtually  done 
when  Jesus  took  away  sin,  vanquished  death, 
and  broke  the  power  of  Satan;  but  it 
awaits  a  still  fuller  accomplishment  at  our 
Lord's  Second  Advent,  and  in  the  day  of 
Judgment.  To  us  the  promise  stands  as  a 
prophecy  that  we  shall  be  afflicted  by  the 
powers  of  evil  in  our  lower  nature,  and  thus 
bruised  in  our  heel:  but  we  shall  triumph  in 
Christ,  who  sets  his  foot  on  the  old  serpent's 
head.  Throughout  this  year  we  may  have  to 
learn  the  first  part  of  this  promise  by  experi 
ence,  through  the  temptations  of  the  devil, 
and  the  unkindness  of  the  ungodly  who  are 
his  seed.  They  may  so  bruise  us  that  we 
may  limp  with  our  sore  heel;  but  let  us  grasp 
the  second  part  of  the  text,  and  we  shall  not 
be  dismayed.  By  faith  let  us  rejoice  that  we 
shall  reign  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  woman's  seed. 
1 


3Faitb's  Cheque  JBoofc. 


JANUARY  2. 

"And  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 
under  your  feet  shortly.'' — Rom.  xvi.  20. 


promise  follows  well  upon  that  of 
yesterday.  We  are  evidently  to  be  con 
formed  to  our  covenant  Head,  not  only 
in  his  being  bruised  in  his  heel,  but  in  his 
conquest  of  the  evil.  one.  Even  under  our 
feet  is  the  old  dragon  to  be  bruised.  The 
Roman  believers  were  grieved  with  strife  in 
the  church ;  but  their  God  was  "  the  God  of 
peace,"  and  gave  them  rest  of  soul.  The 
arch-enemy  tripped  up  the  feet  of  the  unwary, 
and  deceived  the  hearts  of  the  simple;  but 
he  was  to  get  the  worst  of  it,  and  to  be  trod 
den  down  by  those  whom  he  had  troubled. 
This  victory  would  not  come  to  the  people  of 
God  through  their  own  skill  or  power;  but 
God  himself  would  bruise  Satan.  Though  it 
would  be  under  their  feet,  yet  the  bruising 
would  be  of  the  Lord  alone. 

Let  us  bravely  tread  upon  the  tempter! 
Not  only  inferior  spirits,  but  the  Prince  of 
darkness  himself,  must  go  down  before  us. 
In  unquestioning  confidence  in  God,  let  us 
look  for  speedy  victory.  "  Shortly."  Happy 
word!  Shortly  we  shall  set  our  foot  on  the 
old  serpent!  What  a  joy  to  crush  evil! 
What  dishonour  to  Satan  to  have  his  head 
bruised  by  human  feet!  Let  us  by  faith  in 
Jesus  tread  the  tempter  down. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBoofc. 


JANUARY  3. 

"The  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will 
I  give  it." — Gen.  xxviii.  13. 

jl 

mO  promise  is  of  private  interpretation: 
it  belongs  not  to  one  saint,  but  to  all 
believers.  If,  my  brother,  thou  canst 
in  faith  lie  down  upon  a  promise,  and  take 
thy  rest  thereon,  it  is  thine.  Where  Jacob 
"  lighted,"  and  tarried,  and  rested,  there  he 
took  possession.  Stretching  his  weary 
length  upon  the  ground,  with  the  stones  of 
that  place  for  his  pillows,  he  little  fancied 
that  he  was  thus  entering  into  ownership  of 
the  land;  and  yet  so  it  was.  He  saw  in  his 
dream  that  wondrous  ladder  which  for  all 
true  believers  unites  earth  and  heaven;  and 
surely  where  the  foot  of  the  ladder  stood  he 
must  have  a  right  to  the  soil,  for  otherwise  he 
could  not  reach  the  divine  stairway.  All  the 
promises  of  God  are  Yea  and  Amen  in  Christ 
Jesus ;  and  as  he  is  ours,  every  promise  is  ours 
if  we  will  but  lie  down  upon  it  in  restful  faith. 
Come,  weary  one,  use  thy  Lord's  words  as 
thy  pillows.  Lie  down  in  peace.  Dream 
only  of  Him.  Jesus  is  thy  ladder  of  light. 
See  the  angels  coming  and  going  upon  him 
between  thy  soul  and  thy  God;  and  be  sure 
that  the  promise  is  thine  own  God-given  por 
tion,  and  that  it  will  not  be  robbery  for  thee 
to  take  it  to  thyself,  as  spoken  specially  to 
thee. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBoofc. 


JANUARY  4. 

"I  will  make  them  to  lie  down  safely" 
Hosea  ii.  18. 


S,  the  Saints  are  to  have  peace.  The 
passage  from  which  this  gracious  word 
is  taken  speaks  of  peace  "  with  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls  of 
heaven,  and  with  creeping  things  of  the 
ground."  This  is  peace  with  earthly  enemies, 
with  mysterious  evils,  and  with  little  annoy 
ances!  Any  of  these  might  keep  us  from  ly 
ing  down,  but  none  of  them  shall  do  so.  The 
Lord  will  quite  destroy  those  things  which 
threaten  his  people  :  "  I  will  break  the  bow 
and  the  sword,  and  the  battle  out  of  the 
earth."  Peace  will  be  profound  indeed  when 
all  the  instruments  of  disquiet  are  broken. 

With  this  peace  will  come  rest.  "  So  he 
giveth  his  beloved  sleep."  Fully  supplied 
and  divinely  quieted,  believers  lie  down  in 
calm  repose. 

This  rest  will  be  a  safe  one.  It  is  one 
thing  to  lie  down,  but  quite  another  "to  lie 
down  safely."  We  are  brought  to  the  land 
of  promise,  the  house  of  the  Father,  the  cham 
ber  of  love,  and  the  bosom  of  Christ:  surely 
we  may  now  "lie  down  safely."  It  is  safer 
for  a  believer  to  lie  down  in  peace  than  to  sit 
up  and  worry. 

"  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pas- 

ires."     We    never 
makes  us  lie  down. 


's  dbeque  ;fi3oofc. 


JANUARY  5. 
"I  will  strengthen  thee" — Isa.  xli.   10. 

Ji 

MHEN  called  to  serve  or  to  suffer,  we 
take  stock  of  our  strength,  and  we 
find  it  to  be  less  than  we  thought,  and 
less  than  we  need.  But  let  not  our  heart  sink 
within  us  while  we  have  such  a  word  as  this 
to  fall  back  upon,  for  it  guarantees  us  all  that 
we  can  possibly  need.  God  has  strength  om 
nipotent;  that  strength  he  can  communicate 
to  us;  and  his  promise  is  that  he  will  do  so. 
He  will  be  the  food  of  our  souls,  and  the 
health  of  our  hearts ;  and  thus  he  will  give  us 
strength.  There  is  no  telling  how  much 
power  God  can  put  into  a  man.  When  divine 
strength  comes,  human  weakness  is  no  more 
a  hindrance. 

Do  we  not  remember  seasons  of  labour  and 
trial  in  which  we  received  such  special 
strength  that  we  wondered  at  ourselves?  In 
the  midst  of  danger  we  were  calm,  under  be 
reavement  we  were  resigned,  in  slander  we 
were  self-contained,  and  in  sickness  we  were 
patient.  The  fact  is,  that  God  gives  unex 
pected  strength  when  unusual  trials  come 
upon  us.  We  rise  out  of  our  feeble  selves. 
Cowards  play  the  man,  foolish  ones  have  wis 
dom  given  them,  and  the  silent  receive  in  the 
self-same  hour  what  they  shall  speak.  My 
own  weakness  makes  me  shrink,  but  God's 
promise  makes  me  brave.  Lord,  strengthen 
me  "  according  to  thy  word." 


ffaftb's  Gbeaue  JBoofc. 


JANUARY  6. 
'Yea,   I   imU   help    thee"—Isa.   xli.    10. 


ESTERDAY'S  promise  secured  us 
strength  for  what  we  have  to  do,  but  this 
guarantees  us  aid  in  cases  where  we  can 
not  act  alone.  The  Lord  says,  "  I  will  help 
thee."  Strength  within  is  supplemented  by 
help  without.  God  can  raise  us  up  allies  in 
our  warfare  if  so  it  seems  good  in  his  sight; 
and  even  if  he  does  not  send  us  human  as 
sistance,  he  himself  will  be  at  our  side,  and 
this  is  better  still.  "  Our  August  Ally "  is 
better  than  legions  of  mortal  helpers. 

His  help  is  timely :  he  is  c.  very  present  help 
in  time  of  trouble.  His  help  is  very  wise:  he 
knows  how  to  give  each  man  help  meet  and 
fit  for  him.  His  help  is  most  effectual,  though 
vain  is  the  help  of  man.  His  help  is  more 
than  help,  for  he  bears  all  the  burden,  and 
supplies  all  the  need.  "The  Lord  is  my 
helper,  I  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto 
me." 

Because  he  has  already  been  our  help,  we 
feel  confidence  in  him  for  the  present  and 
the  future.  Our  prayer  is,  "  Lord,  be  thou 
my  helper " ;  our  experience  is,  "  The  Spirit 
also  helpeth  our  infirmities  " ;  our  expectation 
is,  "  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills, 
whence  cometh  my  help  " ;  and  our  song  soon 
will  be,  "  Thou,  Lord,  hast  holpen  me." 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  338ooft 


JANUARY  7. 

Thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  these" 
John  i.  50. 


HIS  is  spoken  to  a  childlike  believer,  who 
was  ready  to  accept  Jesus  as  the  Son  of 
God,  the  King  of  Israel,  upon  one  con 
vincing  piece  of  argument.  Those  who  are 
willing  to  see  shall  see:  it  is  because  we  shut 
our  eyes  that  we  become  so  sadly  blind. 

We  have  seen  much  already.  Great  things 
and  unsearchable  has  the  Lord  showed  unto 
us,  for  which  we  praise  his  name;  but  there 
are  greater  truths  in  his  Word,  greater  depths 
of  experience,  greater  heights  of  fellowship, 
greater  works  of  usefulness,  greater  discov 
eries  of  power,  and  love,  and  wisdom.  These 
we  are  yet  to  see  if  we  are  willing  to  believe 
our  Lord.  The  faculty  of  inventing  false 
doctrine  is  ruinous,  but  power  to  see  the 
truth  is  a  blessing.  Heaven  shall  be  opened 
to  us,  the  way  thither  shall  be  made  clear  to 
us  in  the  Son  of  man,  and  the  angelic  com 
merce  which  goes  on  between  the  upper  and 
the  lower  kingdoms  shall  be  made  more  mani 
fest  to  us.  Let  us  keep  our  eyes  open  to 
wards  spiritual  objects,  and  expect  to  see 
more  and  more.  Let  us  believe  that  our  lives 
will  not  drivel  down  into  nothing,  but  that  we 
shall  be  always  on  the  growing  hand,  seeing 
greater  and  still  greater  things,  till  we  behold 
the  Great  God  himself,  and  never  again  lose 
the  sight  of  him. 


ffaftb's  Cbeaue  JSoofc* 


JANUARY  8. 

"Blessed  are  the  rfure  in  heart:  for  they 
shall  see  God."— -Matt.  v.  8. 
4 

•j|VURITY,  even  purity  of  heart,  is  the  main 
||v  ^ing  to  be  aimed  at.  We  need  to  be 
**•  made  clean  within  through  the  Spirit 
and  the  Word,  and  then  we  shall  be  clean 
without  by  consecration  and  obedience. 
There  is  a  close  connection  between  the  affec 
tions  and  the  understanding:  if  we  love  evil, 
we  cannot  understand  that  which  is  good. 
If  the  heart  is  foul,  the  eye  will  be  dim.  How 
can  those  men  see  a  holy  God  who  love  un 
holy  things? 

What  a  privilege  it  is  to  see  God  here!  A 
glimpse  of  him  is  heaven  below!  In  Christ 
Jesus  the  pure  in  heart  behold  the  Father. 
We  see  him,  his  truth,  his  love,  his  purpose, 
his  sovereignty,  his  covenant  character,  yea, 
we  see  himself  in  Christ.  But  this  is  only  ap 
prehended  as  sin  is  kept  out  of  the  heart. 
Only  those  who  aim  at  godliness  can  cry, 
"  Mine  eyes  are  ever  towards  the  Lord." 
The  desire  of  Moses,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show 
me  thy  glory,"  can  only  be  fulfilled  in  us  as 
we  purify  ourselves  from  all  iniquity.  We 
shall  "  see  him  as  he  is " ;  and  "  every  one 
that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself." 
The  enjoyment  of  present  fellowship  and  the 
hope  of  the  beatific  vision  are  urgent  motives 
for  purity  of  heart  and  life.  Lord,  make  us 
pure  in  heart,  that  we  may  see  thee! 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  ffioofe. 


JANUARY  9. 

"The  liberal  soul  shall   be  made   fat." 

Prov.  xi.  25. 

# 

+ff*F  I  desire  to  flourish  in  soul,  I  must  not 
hoard  up  my  stores,  but  must  distribute 
to  the  poor.  To  be  close  and  niggardly 
is  the  world's  way  to  prosperity,  but  it  is  not 
God's  way,  for  he  saith,  "  There  is  that  scat- 
tereth,  and  yet  increaseth;  and  there  is  that 
withholdeth  more  than  is  meet,  and  it  tend- 
eth  to  poverty."  Faith's  way  of  gaining  is 
giving.  I  must  try  this  again  and  again;  and 
I  may  expect  that  as  much  of  prosperity  as 
will  be  good  for  me  will  come  to  me  as  a  gra 
cious  reward  for  a  liberal  course  of  action. 

Of  course,  I  may  not  be  sure  of  growing 
rich.  I  shall  be  fat,  but  not  too  fat.  Too 
great  riches  might  make  me  as  unwieldy  as 
corpulent  persons  usually  are,  and  cause  me 
the  dyspepsia  of  worldliness,  and  perhaps 
bring  on  a  fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart. 
No,  if  I  am  fat  enough  to  be  healthy,  I  may 
well  be  satisfied ;  and  if  the  Lord  grants  me  a 
competence,  I  may  be  thoroughly  content. 

But  there  is  mental  and  spiritual  fatness 
which  I  would  greatly  covet;  and  these 
come  as  the  result  of  generous  thoughts  to 
wards  my  God,  his  church,  and  my  fellow- 
men.  Let  me  not  stint,  lest  I  starve  my 
heart.  Let  me  be  bountiful,  and  liberal;  for 
so  shall  I  be  like  my  Lord.  He  gave  himself 
for  me:  shall  I  grudge  him  anything? 


io  _  jfaitb'g  Cbegue  JBooft, 

JANUARY  io. 

"He  that  water  eth  shall  be  watered  also 
himself."  —  Prov.  xi.  25. 


+tfFF  I  carefully  consider  others,  God  will 
j  consider  me;  and  in  some  way  or  other 
he  will  recompense  me.  Let  me  con 
sider  the  poor,  and  the  Lord  will  consider  me. 
Let  me  look  after  little  children,  and  the  Lord 
will  treat  me  as  his  child.  Let  me  feed  his 
flock,  and  he  will  feed  me.  Let  me  water  his 
garden,  and  he  will  make  a  watered  garden  of 
my  soul.  This  is  the  Lord's  own  promise  ;  be 
it  mine  to  fulfil  the  condition,  and  then  to  ex 
pect  its  fulfilment. 

I  may  care  about  myself  till  I  grow  morbid; 
I  may  watch  over  my  own  feelings  till  I  feel 
nothing;  and  I  may  lament  my  own  weakness 
till  I  grow  almost  too  weak  to  lament.  It 
will  be  far  more  profitable  for  me  to  become 
unselfish,  and  out  of  love  to  my  Lord  Jesus 
begin  to  care  for  the  souls  of  those  around 
me.  My  tank  is  getting  very  low;  no  fresh 
rain  comes  to  fill  it;  what  shall  I  do?  I  will 
pull  up  the  plug,  and  let  its  contents  run  out 
to  water  the  withering  plants  around  me. 
What  do  I  see?  My  cistern  seems  to  fill  as  it 
flows.  A  secret  spring  is  at  work.  While 
all  was  stagnant,  the  fresh  spring  was  sealed; 
but  as  my  stock  flows  out  to  water  others  the 
Lord  thinketh  upon  me.  Hallelujah! 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  11 

JANUARY  n. 

"And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  a 
cloud  over  the  earth,  that  the  bow  shall  be 
seen  in  the  cloud!'  —  Gen.  ix.  14. 


now  clouds  are  plentiful  enough,  but 
we  are  not  afraid  that  the  world  will  be 
destroyed  by  a  deluge.  We  see  the  rain 
bow  often  enough  to  prevent  our  having  any 
such  fears.  The  covenant  which  the  Lord 
made  with  Noah  stands  fast,  and  we  have  no 
doubts  about  it.  Why,  then,  should  we  think 
that  the  clouds  of  trouble,  which  now  darken 
our  sky,  will  end  in  our  destruction?  Let  us 
dismiss  such  groundless  and  dishonouring 
fears. 

Faith  always  sees  the  bow  of  covenant 
promise  whenever  sense  sees  the  cloud  of  af 
fliction.  God  has  a  bow  with  which  he  might 
shoot  out  his  arrows  of  destruction;  but  see! 
it  is  turned  upward.  It  is  a  bow  without  an 
arrow  or  a  string;  it  is  a  bow  hung  out  for 
show,  no  longer  used  for  war.  It  is  a  bow  of 
many  colours,  expressing  joy  and  delight, 
and  not  a  bow  blood-red  with  slaughter,  or 
black  with  anger.  Let  us  be  of  good  cour 
age.  Never  does  God  so  darken  our  sky  as 
to  leave  his  covenant  without  a  witness;  and 
even  if  he  did,  we  would  trust  him,  since  he 
cannot  change,  or  lie,  or  in  any  other  way  fail 
to  keep  his  covenant  of  peace.  Until  the 
waters  go  over  the  earth  again,  we  shall  have 
no  reason  for  doubting  our  God. 


i2  _  ffaitb'g  Cbcgue  ffoofe. 

JANUARY  12. 

"For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever" 
Lament,  iii.  31. 


ME  may  cast  away  for  a  season,  but  not  for 
ever.  A  woman  may  leave  off  her  orna 
ments  for  a  few  days,  but  she  will  not 
forget  them,  nor  throw  them  upon  the  dung 
hill.  It  is  not  like  the  Lord  to  cast  off  those 
whom  he  loves  :  for,  "  having  loved  his  own 
which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto 
the  end."  Some  talk  of  our  being  in  grace  and 
out  of  it,  as  if  we  were  like  rabbits  that  run 
in  and  out  of  their  burrows:  but,  indeed,  it  is 
not  so.  The  Lord's  love  is  a  far  more  serious 
and  abiding  matter  than  this. 

He  chose  us  from  eternity,  and  he  will  love 
us  throughout  eternity.  He  loved  us  so  as  to 
die  for  us,  and  we  may  therefore  be  sure  that 
his  love  will  never  die.  His  honour  is  so 
wrapt  up  in  the  salvation  of  the  believer,  that 
he  can  no  more  cast  him  off  than  he  can  cast 
off  his  own  robes  of  office  as  King  of  glory. 
No,  no!  The  Lord  Jesus,  as  a  Head,  never 
casts  off  his  members  ;  as  a  Husband,  he  never 
casts  off  his  bride. 

Did  you  think  you  were  cast  off?  Why 
did  you  think  so  evil  of  the  Lord  who  has 
betrothed  you  to  himself?  Cast  off  such 
thoughts,  and  never  let  them  lodge  in  your 
soul  again.  "  The  Lord  hath  not  cast  away 
his  people  which  he  foreknew"  (Rom.  xi.  2). 
"  He  hateth  putting  away"  (Mai.  ii.  16)., 


ffaitb's  Cbeaue  ffioofc,  13 

JANUARY  13. 

"Hvm   that  cometh   to   me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out."  —  John  vi.  37. 


^ere  any  instance  of  our  Lord's  casting 
out  a  coming  one?  If  there  be  so,  we 
would  like  to  know  it  ;  but  there  has  been 
none,  and  there  never  will  be.  Among  the 
lost  souls  in  hell  there  is  not  one  that  can  say, 
"  I  went  to  Jesus,  and  he  refused  me."  It 
is  not  possible  that  you  or  I  should  be  the  first 
to  whom  Jesus  shall  break  his  word.  Let  us 
not  entertain  so  dark  a  suspicion. 

Suppose  we  go  to  Jesus  now  about  the  evils 
of  to-day.  Of  this  we  may  be  sure  —  he  will 
not  refuse  us  audience,  or  cast  us  out.  Those 
of  us  who  have  often  been,  and  those  who 
have  never  gone  before  —  let  us  go  together, 
and  we  shall  see  that  he  will  not  shut  the  door 
of  his  grace  in  the  face  of  any  one  of  us. 

"This  man  receiveth  sinners,"  but  he  re 
pulses  none.  We  come  to  him  in  weakness 
and  sin,  with  trembling  faith,  and  small 
knowledge,  and  slender  hope;  but  he  does  not 
cast  us  out.  We  come  by  prayer,  and  that 
prayer  broken;  with  confession,  and  that  con 
fession  faulty;  with  praise,  and  that  praise  far 
short  of  his  merits;  but  yet  he  receives  us. 
We>  come  diseased,  polluted,  worn  out,  and 
worthless  ;  but  he  doth  in  no  wise  cast  us  out. 
Let  us  come  again  to-day  to  him  who  never 
casts  us  out. 


14  3Faftb'a  Cbcque  JSoofc. 

JANUARY  14. 

"Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
Matt.  xi.  28. 


ME  who  are  saved  find  rest  in  Jesus. 
Those  who  are  not  saved  will  receive 
rest  if  they  come  to  him,  for  here  he 
promises  to  "  give  "  it.  Nothing  can  be  freer 
than  a  gift;  let  us  gladly  accept  what  he 
gladly  gives.  You  are  not  to  buy  it,  nor  to 
borrow  it;  but  to  receive  it  as  a  gift.  You  la 
bour  under  the  lash  of  ambition,  covetousness, 
lust,  or  anxiety:  he  will  set  you  free  from  this 
iron  bondage,  and  give  you  rest.  You  are 
"  laden  "  —  yes,  "  heavy  laden  "  with  sin,  fear, 
care,  remorse,  fear  of  death;  but  if  you  come 
to  him,  he  will  unload  you.  He  carried  the 
crushing  mass  of  our  sin,  that  we  might  no 
longer  carry  it.  He  made  himself  the  great 
Burden-bearer,  that  every  heavy  laden  one 
might  cease  from  bowing  down  under  the 
enormous  pressure. 

Jesus  gives  rest.  It  is  so.  Will  you  be 
lieve  it?  Will  you  put  it  to  the  test?  Will 
you  do  so  at  once?  Come  to  Jesus,  by  quit 
ting  every  other  hope,  by  thinking  of  him,  be 
lieving  God's  testimony  about  him,  and  trust 
ing  everything  with  him.  If  you  thus  come 
to  him,  the  rest  which  he  will  give  you  will  be 
deep,  safe,  holy,  and  everlasting.  He  gives  a 
rest  which  develops  into  heaven,  and  he  gives 
it  this  day  to  all  who  come  to  him. 


Jfattb's  Cbeque  3Boofc.  15 

JANUARY  15. 

"For  the  needy  shall  not  alway  be  for 
gotten:  the  expectation  of  the  poor  shall  not 
perish  for  ever."  —  Ps.  ix.  18. 


OVERTY  is  a  hard  heritage;  but  those 
who  trust  in  the  Lord  are  made  rich  by 
faith.  They  know  that  they  are  not  for 
gotten  of  God;  and  though  it  may  seem  that 
they  are  overlooked  in  his  providential  distri 
bution  of  good  things,  they  look  for  a  time 
when  all  this  shall  be  righted.  Lazarus  will 
not  always  lie  among  the  dogs  at  the  rich 
man's  gate,  but  he  will  have  his  recompense 
in  Abraham's  bosom. 

Even  now  the  Lord  remembers  his  poor 
but  precious  sons.  "  I  am  poor  and  needy  ; 
yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me,"  said  one  of 
old;  and  it  is  even  so.  The  godly  poor  have 
great  expectations.  They  expect  the  Lord  to 
provide  them  all  things  necessary  for  this  life 
and  godliness;  they  expect  to  see  all  things 
working  for  their  good;  they  expect  to  have 
all  the  closer  fellowship  with  their  Lord,  who 
had  not  where  to  lay  his  head;  they  expect 
his  Second  Advent,  and  to  share  its  glory. 
This  expectation  cannot  perish,  for  it  is  laid 
up  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  liveth  for  ever;  and 
because  he  lives,  it  shall  live  also.  The  poor 
saint  singeth  many  a  song  which  the  rich  sin 
ner  cannot  understand.  Wherefore,  let  us, 
when  we  have  short  commons  below,  think  of 
the  royal  table  above. 


16  3Fattb's  Cbequc  JSoofc* 

JANUARY  16. 

"And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whoso- 
ever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  delivered."  —  Joel  ii.  32. 


MHY  do  I  not  call  on  his  name?  Why 
do  I  run  to  this  neighbour  and  that, 
when  God  is  so  near  and  will  hear  my 
faintest  call?  Why  do  I  sit  down,  and  de 
vise  schemes,  and  invent  plans?  Why  not  at 
once  roll  myself  and  my  burden  upon  the 
Lord?  Straightforward  is  the  best  runner  — 
why  do  I  not  run  at  once  to  the  living  God? 
In  vain  shall  I  look  for  deliverance  anywhere 
else;  but  with  God  I  shall  find  it;  for  here  I 
have  his  royal  shall  to  make  it  sure. 

I  need  not  ask  whether  I  may  call  on  him 
or  not,  for  that  word  "  Whosoever  "  is  a  very 
wide  and  comprehensive  one.  Whosoever 
means  me,  for  it  means  anybody  and  every 
body  who  calls  upon  God.  I  will  therefore 
follow  the  leading  of  the  text,  and  at  once  call 
upon  the  glorious  Lord  who  has  made  so 
large  a  promise. 

My  case  is  urgent,  and  I  do  not  see  how  I 
am  to  be  delivered;  but  this  is  no  business  of 
mine.  He  who  makes  the  promise  will  find 
out  ways  and  means  of  keeping  it.  It  is  mine 
to  obey  his  commands;  it  is  not  mine  to  di 
rect  his  counsels.  I  am  his  servant,  not  his 
solicitor.  I  call  upon  him,  and  he  will  deliver 
me. 


_  ffattb'g  Cbegue  38oofe«  17 

JANUARY  17. 

"And  he  said,  Certainly  I  will  be  with 
thee"  —  Ex.  iii.  12. 


course,  if  the  Lord  sent  Moses  on  an 
errand,  he  would  not  let  him  go  alone. 
The  tremendous  risk  which  it  would  in 
volve,  and  the  great  power  it  would  require, 
would  render  it  ridiculous  for  God  to  send  a 
poor  lone  Hebrew  to  confront  the  mightiest 
king  in  all  the  world,  and  then  leave  him  to 
Jiimself.  It  could  not  be  imagined  that  a 
wise  God  would  match  poor  Moses  with 
Pharaoh  and  the  enormous  forces  of  Egypt. 
Hence  he  says,  "  Certainly  I  will  be  with 
thee,"  as  if  it  were  out  of  the  question  that  he 
would  send  him  alone. 

In  my  case,  also,  the  same  rule  will  hold 
good.  If  I  go  upon  the  Lord's  errand,  with 
a  simple  reliance  upon  his  power,  and  a  sin 
gle  eye  to  his  glory,  it  is  certain  that  he  will 
be  with  me.  His  sending  me  binds  him  to 
back  me  up.  Is  not  this  enough?  What 
more  can  I  want?  If  all  the  angels  and  arch 
angels  were  with  me,  I  might  fail;  but  if  HE 
is  with  me,  I  must  succeed.  Only  let  me  take 
care  that  I  act  worthily  towards  this  promise. 
Let  me  not  go  timidly,  half-heartedly,  care 
lessly,  presumptuously.  What  manner  of 
person  ought  he  to  be  who  has  God  with  him  ! 
In  such  company  it  behooveth  me  to  play  the 
man,  and  like  Moses  go  in  unto  Pharaoh 
without  fear. 
2 


i8  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3S6ooft« 

JANUARY  18. 

"When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offer 
ing  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed." 
Isa.  liii.  10. 


JJ'R  Lord  Jesus  has  not  died  in  vain. 
His  death  was  sacrificial:  he  died  as 
our  substitute,  because  death  was  the 
penalty  of  our  sins;  and  because  his  substitu 
tion  was  accepted  of  God,  he  has  saved  those 
for  whom  he  made  his  soul  a  sacrifice.  By 
death  he  became  like  the  corn  of  wheat  which 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit.  There  must  be  a 
succession  of  children  unto  Jesus  ;  he  is,  "  the 
Father  of  the  everlasting  age.'*  He  shall  say, 
"  Behold,  I  and  the  children  whom  thou  hast 
given  me." 

A  man  is  honoured  in  his  sons,  and  Jesus 
hath  his  quiver  full  of  these  arrows  of  the 
mighty.  A  man  is  represented  in  his  chil 
dren,  and  so  is  the  Christ  in  Christians.  In 
his  seed  a  man's  life  seems  to  be  prolonged 
and  extended;  and  so  is  the  life  of  Jesus  con 
tinued  in  believers. 

Jesus  lives,  for  he  sees  his  seed.  He  fixes 
his  eye  on  us,  he  delights  in  us,  he  recognizes 
us  as  the  fruit  of  his  soul  travail.  Let  us  be 
glad  that  our  Lord  does  not  fail  to  enjoy  the 
result  of  his  dread  sacrifice,  and  that  he  will 
never  cease  to  feast  his  eyes  upon  the  harvest 
of  his  death.  Those  eyes  which  once  wept 
for  us,  are  now  viewing  us  with  pleasure. 
Yes,  he  looks  upon  those  who  are  looking 
unto  him.  Our  eyes  meet  !  What  joy  is  this  ! 


Jfaftb's  Cbeque  3Booft.  19 

JANUARY  19. 

"If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  KJ 
that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead, 
thou  shalt  be  saved."  —  Rom.  x.  9. 


must  be  confession  with  the 
mouth.  Have  I  made  it?  Have  I 
openly  avowed  my  faith  in  Jesus  as  the 
Saviour  whom  God  has  raised  from  the  dead, 
and  have  I  done  it  in  God's  way?  Let  me 
honestly  answer  this  question. 

There  must  also  be  belief  with  the  heart. 
Do  I  sincerely  believe  in  the  risen  Lord 
Jesus?  Do  I  trust  in  Him  as  my  sole  hope 
of  salvation?  Is  this  trust  from  my  heart? 
Let  me  answer  as  before  God. 

If  I  can  truly  claim  that  I  have  both  con 
fessed  Christ  and  believed  in  him,  then  I  am 
saved.  The  text  does  not  say  it  may  be 
so,  but  it  is  plain  as  a  pikestaff,  and  clear  as 
the  sun  in  the  heavens  :  "  Thou  shalt  be 
saved."  As  a  believer  and  a  confessor,  I  may 
lay  my  hand  on  this  promise,  and  plead  it  be 
fore  the  Lord  God  at  this  moment,  and 
throughout  life,  and  in  the  hour  of  death,  and 
at  the  day  of  judgment. 

I  must  be  saved  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  the 
power  of  sin,  the  punishment  of  sin,  and  ulti 
mately  from  the  very  being  of  sin.  God  hath 
said  it  —  "  Thou  shalt  be  saved."  I  believe  it. 
I  shall  be  saved:  I  am  saved.  Glory  be  to 
God  for  ever  and  ever! 


20  ffaftb'a  Cbecjue 


JANUARY  20. 

"To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to 
eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  midst 
of  the  paradise  of  God." — Rev.  ii.  7. 
,* 

mO  man  may  turn  his  back  in  the  day  of 
battle,  or  refuse  to  go  to  the  holy  war. 
We  must  fight  if  we  would  reign,  and 
we  must  carry  on  the  warfare  till  we  over 
come  every  enemy,  or  else  this  promise  is  not 
for  us,  since  it  is  only  for  "  him  that  over 
cometh."  We  are  to  overcome  the  false 
prophets  who  have  come  into  the  world,  and 
all  the  evils  which  accompany  their  teaching. 
We  are  to  overcome  our  own  faintness  of 
heart,  and  tendency  to  decline  from  our  first 
love.  Read  the  whole  of  the  Spirit's  word  to 
the  church  at  Ephesus. 

If  by  grace  we  win  the  day,  as  we  shall  if 
we  truly  follow  our  conquering  Leader,  then 
we  shall  be  admitted  to  the  very  centre  of  the 
paradise  of  God,  and  shall  be  permitted  to 
pass  by  the  cherub  and  his  flaming  sword,  and 
come  to  that  guarded  tree,  whereof  if  a  man 
eat,  he  shall  live  for  ever.  We  shall  thus 
escape  that  endless  death  which  is  the  doom 
of  sin,  and  gain  that  everlasting  life  which  is 
the  seal  of  innocence,  the  outgrowth  of  im 
mortal  principles  of  God-like  holiness. 
Come,  my  heart,  pluck  up  courage!  To  flee 
the  conflict  will  be  to  lose  the  joys  of  the  new 
and  better  Eden;  to  fight  unto  victory  is  to 
walk  with  God  in  Paradise. 


jfaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  21 

JANUARY  21. 

"The  Egyptians  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord."  —  Ex.  vii.  5. 

Jl 


ungodly  world  is  hard  to  teach. 
Egypt  does  not  know  Jehovah,  and 
therefore  dares  to  set  up  his  idols,  and 
even  ventures  to  ask  —  "Who  is  the  Lord?" 
Yet  the  Lord  means  to  break  proud  hearts, 
whether  they  will  or  not.  When  his  judg 
ments  thunder  over  their  heads,  darken  their 
skies,  destroy  their  harvests,  and  slay  their 
sons,  they  begin  to  discern  somewhat  of  Je 
hovah's  power.  There  will  yet  be  such 
things  done  in  the  earth  as  shall  bring  scep 
tics  to  their  knees.  Let  us  not  be  dismayed 
because  of  their  blasphemies,  for  the  Lord  can 
take  care  of  his  own  name,  and  he  will  do  so 
in  a  very  effectual  manner. 

The  salvation  of  his  own  people  was  an 
other  potent  means  of  making  Egypt  know 
that  the  God  of  Israel  was  Jehovah,  the  living 
and  true  God.  No  Israelite  died  by  any  one 
of  the  ten  plagues.  None  of  the  chosen  seed 
were  drowned  in  the  Red  Sea.  Even  so,  the 
salvation  of  the  elect,  and  the  sure  glorification 
of  all  true  believers,  will  make  the  most  obsti 
nate  of  God's  enemies  acknowledge  that  Je 
hovah  he  is  the  God. 

Oh,  that  his  convincing  power  would  go 
forth  by  his  Holy  Spirit  in  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  till  all  nations  shall  bow  at  the 
name  of  Jesus,  and  call  him  Lord! 


22 


JANUARY  22. 

"Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor: 
the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  trou 
ble"—?^  xli.  i. 


think  about  the  poor  and  let  them  lie 
on  our  hearts  is  a  Christian  man's  duty; 
for  Jesus  put  them  with  us  and  near  us 
when  he  said,  "  The  poor  ye  have  always  with 
you." 

Many  give  their  money  to  the  poor  in  a 
hurry,  without  thought;  and  many  more  give 
nothing  at  all.  This  precious  promise  be 
longs  to  those  who  "  consider  "  the  poor,  look 
into  their  case,  devise  plans  for  their  benefit, 
and  considerately  carry  them  out.  We  can 
do  more  by  care  than  by  cash,  and  most  with 
the  two  together.  To  those  who  consider  the 
poor  the  Lord  promises  his  own  consideration 
in  times  of  distress.  He  will  bring  us  out 
of  trouble  if  we  help  others  when  they  are 
in  trouble.  We  shall  receive  very  singular 
providential  help  if  the  Lord  sees  that  we  try 
to  provide  for  others.  We  shall  have  a  time 
of  trouble,  however  generous  we  may  be; 
but  if  we  are  charitable,  we  may  put  in  a 
claim  for  peculiar  deliverance,  and  the  Lord 
will  not  deny  his  own  word  and  bond. 
Miserly  curmudgeons  may  help  themselves, 
but  considerate  and  generous  believers  the 
Lord  will  help.  As  you  have  done  unto  oth 
ers,  so  will  the  Lord  do  unto  you.  Empty 
your  pockets. 


23 


JANUARY  23. 

"And  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head 
of  the  burnt  offering;  and  it  shall  be  accepted 
for  him  to  make  atonement  for  him."  — 
Lev.  i.  4. 

& 

+ff"F  by  that  laying  on  of  his  hand  the  bul 
lock  became  the  offerer's  sacrifice,  how 
much  more  shall  Jesus  become  ours  by 
the  laying  on  of  the  hand  of  faith? 
"My  faith  doth  lay  her  hand 

On  that  dear  head  of  thine, 
While  like  a  penitent  I  stand, 
And  there  confess  my  sin." 

If  a  bullock  could  be  accepted  for  him  to 
make  atonement  for  him,  how  much  more 
shall  the  Lord  Jesus  be  our  full  and  all-suffi 
cient  propitiation?  Some  quarrel  with  the 
great  truth  of  substitution;  but  as  for  us,  it  is 
our  hope,  our  joy,  our  boast,  our  all.  Jesus  is 
accepted  for  us  to  make  atonement  for  us,  and 
we  are  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 

Let  the  reader  take  care  at  once  to  lay  his 
hand  on  the  Lord's  completed  sacrifice,  that 
by  accepting  it  he  may  obtain  the  benefit  of 
it.  If  he  has  done  so  once,  let  him  do  it 
again.  If  he  has  never  done  so,  let  him  put 
out  his  hand  without  a  moment's  delay. 
Jesus  is  yours  now  if  you  will  have  him. 
Lean  on  him;  lean  hard  on  him;  and  he  is 
yours  beyond  all  question;  you  are  reconciled 
to  God,  your  sins  are  blotted  out,  and  you  are 
the  Lord's. 


24  3faftb'0  Cbeque 


JANUARY  24. 

"He  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  saints.* 
I  Sam.  ii.  9. 


way  is  slippery,  and  our  feet  are  fee- 
ble,  but  the  Lord  will  keep  our  feet.  If 
we  give  ourselves  up  by  obedient  faith 
to  be  his  holy  ones,  he  will  himself  be  our 
guardian.  Not  only  will  he  charge  his  angels 
to  keep  us,  but  he  himself  will  preserve  our 
goings. 

He  will  keep  our  feet  from  falling,  so  that 
we  do  not  defile  our  garments,  wound  our 
souls,  and  cause  the  enemy  to  blaspheme. 

He  will  keep  our  feet  from  wandering,  so 
that  we  do  not  go  into  paths  of  error,  or  ways 
of  folly,  or  courses  of  the  world's  custom. 

He  will  keep  our  feet  from  swelling 
through  weariness,  or  blistering  because  of 
the  roughness  and  length  of  the  way. 

He  will  keep  our  feet  from  wounding:  our 
shoes  shall  be  iron  and  brass,  so  that  even 
though  we  tread  on  the  edge  of  the  sword,  or 
on  deadly  serpents,  we  shall  not  bleed,  or  be 
poisoned. 

He  will  also  pluck  our  feet  out  of  the  net. 
We  shall  not  be  entangled  by  the  deceit  of 
our  malicious  and  crafty  foes. 

With  such  a  promise  as  this,  let  us  run 
without  weariness,  and  walk  without  fear. 
He  who  keeps  our  feet  will  do  it  effectually. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3S3ooft»  _  25 

JANUARY  25. 

"He  looketh  upon  men,  and  if  any  say,  I 
have  sinned,  and  perverted  that  which  was 
right,  and  it  profited  me  not;  he  will  deliver 
his  soul  from  going  into  the  'pit,  and  his  life 
shall  see  the  light.''  —  Job.  xxxiii.  27,  28. 


is  a  word  of  truth,  gathered  from 
the  experience  of  a  man  of  God,  and  it 
is  tantamount  to  a  promise.  What  the 
Lord  has  done,  and  is  doing,  he  will  continue 
to  do  while  the  world  standeth.  The  Lord 
will  receive  into  his  bosom  all  who  come  to 
him  with  a  sincere  confession  of  their  sin. 

Can  we  not  endorse  the  language  here 
used?  Have  we  not  sinned,  sinned  person 
ally  so  as  to  say,  "I  have  sinned"?  Sinned 
wilfully,  having  perverted  that  which  is 
right?  Sinned  so  as  to  discover  that  there  is 
no  profit  in  it,  but  an  eternal  loss?  Let  us, 
then,  go  to  God  with  this  honest  acknowl 
edgment.  He  asks  no  more.  We  can  do  no 
less. 

Let  us  plead  his  promise  in  the  name  of 
Jesus.  He  will  deliver  us  from  the  pit  of  hell 
which  yawns  for  us;  he  will  grant  us  life 
and  light.  Why  should  we  despair?  Why 
should  we  even  doubt?  The  Lord  does  not 
mock  humble  souls.  He  means  what  he  says. 
The  guilty  can  be  forgiven.  Those  who  de 
serve  execution  can  receive  free  pardon. 
Lord,  we  confess,  and  we  pray  thee  to  for 
give! 


26 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3Boofe. 

JANUARY  26. 

"Surely  there  is  no  enchantment  against 
Jacob,  neither  is  there  any  divination  against 
Israel." —  Num.  xxiii.  23. 

Jl 

MOW  this  should  cut  up  root  and  branch 
all  silly,   superstitious   fears!     Even  if 
there  were  any  truth  in  witchcraft  and 
omens,  they  could  not  affect  the  people  of  the 
Lord.    Those  whom  God  blesses  devils  can 
not  curse. 

Ungodly  men,  like  Balaam,  may  cunningly 
plot  the  overthrow  of  the  Lord's  Israel;  but 
with  all  their  secrecy  and  policy  they  are 
doomed  to  fail.  Their  powder  is  damp,  the 
edge  of  their  sword  is  blunted.  They  gather 
together;  but  as  the  Lord  is  not  with  them, 
they  gather  together  in  vain.  We  may  sit 
still,  and  let  them  weave  their  nets,  for  we 
shall  not  be  taken  in  them.  Though  they  call 
in  the  aid  of  Beelzebub,  and  employ  all  his 
serpentine  craft,  it  will  avail  them  nothing: 
the  spells  will  not  work,  the  divination  will 
deceive  them.  What  a  blessing  this  is! 
How  it  quiets  the  heart!  God's  Jacobs  wres 
tle  with  God,  but  none  shall  wrestle  with 
them  and  prevail.  God's  Israels  have  power 
with  God  and  prevail,  but  none  shall  have 
power  to  prevail  against  them.  We  need  not 
fear  the  fiend  himself,  nor  any  of  those  secret 
enemies  whose  words  are  full  of  deceit,  and 
whose  plans  are  deep  and  unfathomable. 
They  cannot  hurt  those  who  trust  in  God. 
We  defy  the  devil  and  all  his  legions. 


jfaftb's  Cbeque  J3ooft»  27 

JANUARY  27. 

"And  there  shall  ye  remember  your  ways, 
and  all  your  doings,  wherein  ye  have  been 
defiled;  and  ye  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your 
own  sight  for  all  your  evils  that  ye  have  com 
mitted." —  Ez.  xx.  43. 
Ji 

HEN  we  are  accepted  of  the  Lord, 
and  are  standing  in  the  place  of  fa 
vour,  and  peace,  and  safety,  then  we 
are  led  to  repent  of  all  our  failures  and  mis 
carriages  towards  our  gracious  God.  So 
precious  is  repentance,  that  we  may  call  it  a 
diamond  of  the  first  water,  and  this  is  sweetly 
promised  to  the  people  of  God  as  one  most 
sanctifying  result  of  salvation.  He  who  ac 
cepts  repentance,  also  gives  repentance;  and 
he  gives  it  not  out  of  "  the  bitter  box,"  but 
from  among  those  "  wafers  made  with  honey  " 
on  which  he  feeds  his  people.  A  sense  of 
blood-bought  pardon  and  of  undeserved 
mercy,  is  the  best  means  of  dissolving  a  heart 
of  stone.  Are  we  feeling  hard?  Let  us  think 
of  covenant  love,  and  then  we  shall  leave  sin, 
lament  sin,  and  loathe  sin ;  yea,  we  shall  loathe 
ourselves  for  sinning  against  such  infinite 
love.  Let  us  come  to  God  with  this  promise 
of  penitence,  and  ask  him  to  help  us  to  re 
member,  and  repent,  and  regret,  and  return. 
Oh,  that  we  could  enjoy  the  meltings  of  holy 
sorrow!  What  a  relief  would  a  flood  of  tears 
be!  Lord,  smite  the  rock,  or  speak  to  the 
rock,  and  cause  the  waters  to  flow! 


28 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

JANUARY  28. 

"  And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from 
their  eyes." — Rev.  xxi.  4. 


\  p4ES,  we  shall  come  to  this  if  we  are  be- 
[Jy  lievers.  Sorrow  shall  cease,  and  tears 
^-^  shall  be  wiped  away.  This  is  the  world 
of  weeping,  but  it  passes  away.  There  shall 
be  a  new  heaven,  and  a  new  earth,  so  says  the 
verse  of  this  chapter;  and  therefore  there  will 
be  nothing  to  weep  over  concerning  the  fall 
and  its  consequent  miseries.  Read  the  sec 
ond  verse,  and  note  how  it  speaks  of  the  bride 
and  her  marriage.  The  Lamb's  wedding  is  a 
time  for  boundless  pleasure,  and  tears  would 
be  out  of  place.  The  third  verse  says  that 
God  himself  will  dwell  among  men ;  and  surely 
at  his  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  ever 
more,  and  tears  can  no  longer  flow. 

What  will  our  state  be  when  there  will  be 
no  more  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there 
be  any  more  pain?  This  will  be  more  glorious 
than  we  can  as  yet  imagine.  O  eyes  that  are 
red  with  weeping,  cease  your  scalding  flow, 
for  in  a  little  while  ye  shall  know  no  more 
tears!  None  can  wipe  tears  away  like  the 
God  of  love,  but  he  is  coming  to  do  it. 
"  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy 
cometh  in  the  morning."  Come,  Lord,  and 
tarry  not ;  for  now  both  men  and  women  must 
weep! 


ffaitb's  flbeque  JBooft.  _  29 

JANUARY  29. 

"  Observe  and  hear  all  these  words  which 
I  command  thee,  that  it  may  go  well  with 
thee,  and  with  thy  children  after  thee  for 
ever,  when  thou  doest  that  which  is  good 
and  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  thy  God" 

Deut.  xii.  28. 


HOUGH  salvation  is  not  by  the  works 
of  the  law,  yet  the  blessings  which  are 
promised  to  obedience  are  not  denied  to 
the  faithful  servants  of  God.  The  curses  our 
Lord  took  away  when  he  was  made  a  curse 
for  us,  but  no  clause  of  blessing  has  been 
abrogated. 

We  are  to  note  and  listen  to  the  revealed 
will  of  the  Lord,  giving  our  attention  not  to 
portions  of  it,  but  to  "  all  these  words." 
There  must  be  no  picking  and  choosing,  but 
an  impartial  respect  to  all  that  God  has  com 
manded.  This  is  the  road  of  blessedness  for 
the  father  and  for  his  children.  The  Lord's 
blessing  is  upon  his  chosen  to  the  third  and 
fourth  generation.  If  they  walk  uprightly  be 
fore  him,  he  will  make  all  men  know  that  they 
are  a  seed  which  the  Lord  has  blessed. 

No  blessing  can  come  to  us  or  ours  through 
dishonesty  or  double  dealing.  The  ways  of 
worldly  conformity  and  unholiness  cannot 
bring  good  to  us  or  ours.  It  will  go  well 
with  us  when  we  go  well  before  God.  If  in 
tegrity  does  not  make  us  prosper,  knavery 
will  not.  That  which  gives  pleasure  to  God 
will  bring  pleasure  to  us. 


30  ffaftb's  Gbcque 


JANUARY  30. 

"And,  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will 
keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest." 
Gen.  xxviii.  15. 


we  need  journeying  mercies?  Here 
are  choice  ones  —  God's  presence  and 
preservation.  In  all  places  we  need 
both  of  these,  and  in  all  places  we  shall  have 
them  if  we  go  at  the  call  of  duty,  and  not 
merely  according  to  our  own  fancy.  Why 
should  we  look  upon  removal  to  another 
country  as  a  sorrowful  necessity  when  it  is 
laid  upon  us  by  the  divine  will?  In  all  lands 
the  believer  is  equally  a  pilgrim  and  a  stran 
ger;  and  yet  in  every  region  the  Lord  is  his 
dwelling-place,  even  as  he  has  been  to  his 
saints  in  all  generations.  We  may  miss  the 
protection  of  an  earthly  monarch,  but  when 
God  says,  "  I  will  keep  thee,"  we  are  in  no 
real  danger.  This  is  a  blessed  passport  for  a 
traveller,  and  a  heavenly  escort  for  an  emi 
grant. 

Jacob  had  never  left  his  father's  room  be 
fore:  he  had  been  a  mother's  boy,  and  not  an 
adventurer  like  his  brother.  Yet  he  went 
abroad,  and  God  went  with  him.  He  had  lit 
tle  luggage,  and  no  attendants;  yet  no  prince 
ever  journeyed  with  a  nobler  bodyguard. 
Even  while  he  slept  in  the  open  field,  angels 
watched  over  him,  and  the  Lord  God  spoke 
to  him.  If  the  Lord  bids  us  go,  let  us  say 
with  our  Lord  Jesus,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 


ffaftb'g  Cbeque  JBooft,  _  31 

JANUARY  31. 
"  My  God  will  hear  me."  —  Micah  vii.  7. 


may  be  unfaithful,  but  the 
Lord  will  not  turn  away  from  the  gra- 
cious  soul;  on  the  contrary,  he  will  hear 
all  its  desires.  The  prophet  says,  "  Keep  the 
doors  of  thy  mouth  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy 
bosom.  A  man's  enemies  are  the  men  of  his 
own  house."  This  is  a  wretched  state  of  af 
fairs  ;  but  even  in  such  a  case  the  Best  Friend 
remains  true,  and  we  may  tell  him  all  our 
grief. 

Our  wisdom  is  to  look  unto  the  Lord,  and 
not  to  quarrel  with  men  or  women.  If  our 
loving  appeals  are  disregarded  by  our  own 
relatives,  let  us  wait  upon  the  God  of  our  sal 
vation,  for  he  will  hear  us.  He  will  hear  us 
all  the  more  because  of  the  unkindness  and 
oppression  of  others,  and  we  shall  soon  have 
reason  to  cry,  "  Rejoice  not  against  me,  O 
mine  enemy  !  " 

Because  God  is  the  living  God,  he  can  hear; 
because  he  is  a  loving  God,  he  will  hear;  be 
cause  he  is  our  covenant  God,  he  has  bound 
himself  to  hear  us.  If  we  can  each  one  speak 
of  him  as  "  My  God,"  we  may  with  absolute 
certainty  say,  "  My  God  will  hear  me." 
Come,  then,  O  bleeding  heart,  and  let  thy  sor 
rows  tell  themselves  out  to  the  Lord  thy  God  ! 
I  will  bow  the  knee  in  secret,  and  inwardly 
whisper,  "  My  God  will  hear  me/' 


32 ffaitb'g  Cheque  JSooft, 

FEBRUARY  i. 

"But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall 
the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise  with  healing 
in  his  wings" —  Mai.  iv.  2. 


j^ULFILLED  once  in  the  first  advent  of 
||  our  glorious  Lord,  and  yet  to  have  a. 
***  fuller  accomplishment  in  his  second  ad 
vent,  this  gracious  word  is  also  for  daily  use. 
Is  it  dark  with  the  reader?  Does  the  night 
deepen  into  a  denser  blackness?  Still  let  us 
not  despair:  the  sun  will  yet  rise.  When  the 
night  is  darkest,  dawn  is  nearest. 

The  sun  which  will  arise  is  of  no  common 
sort.  It  is  the  sun  —  the  Sun  of  Righteous 
ness,  whose  every  ray  is  holiness.  He  who 
comes  to  cheer  us,  comes  in  the  way  of  justice 
as  well  as  of  mercy,  comes  to  violate  no  law 
even  to  save  us.  Jesus  as  much  displays  the 
holiness  of  God  as  his  love.  Our  deliverance, 
when  it  comes,  will  be  safe  because  righteous. 

Our  one  point  of  inquiry  should  be  — "  Do 
we  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord?  Do  we  rever 
ence  the  living  God,  and  walk  in  his  ways?  " 
Then  for  us  the  night  must  be  short;  and 
when  the  morning  cometh,  all  the  sickness 
and  sorrow  of  our  soul  will  be  over  for  ever. 
Light,  warmth,  joy,  and  clearness  of  vision 
will  come,  and  healing  of  every  disease  and 
distress  will  follow  after. 

Has  Jesus  risen  upon  us?  Let  us  sit  in  the 
sun.  Has  he  hidden  his  face?  Let  us  wait 
for  his  rising.  He  will  shine  forth  as  surely 
as  the  sun. 


jfaftb's  Cheque  JBoofc.  33 

FEBRUARY  2. 

"And  ye  shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as 
calves  of  the  stall." —  Mai.  iv.  2. 


ES,  when  the  sun  shines,  the  sick  quit 
their  chambers,  and  walk  abroad  to 
breathe  the  fresh  air.  When  the  sun 
brings  spring  and  summer  the  cattle  quit  their 
stalls,  and  seek  pasture  on  the  higher  Alps. 
Even  thus,  when  we  have  conscious  fellow 
ship  with  our  Lord,  we  leave  the  stall  of  de 
spondency,  and  walk  abroad  in  the  fields  of 
holy  confidence.  We  ascend  to  the  moun 
tains  of  joy,  and  feed  on  sweet  pasturage 
which  grows  nearer  heaven  than  the  proven 
der  of  carnal  men. 

To  "  go  forth  "  and  to  "  grow  up  "  is  a  dou 
ble  promise.  O  my  soul,  be  thou  eager  to 
enjoy  both  blessings!  Why  shouldst  thou  be 
a  prisoner?  Arise,  and  walk  at  liberty.  Jesus 
saith  that  his  sheep  shall  go  in  and  out  and 
find  pasture;  go  forth,  then,  and  feed  in  the 
rich  meadows  of  boundless  love. 

Why  remain  a  babe  in  grace?  Grow  up. 
Young  calves  grow  fast,  especially  if  they  are 
stall-fed ;  and  thou  hast  the  choice  care  of  thy 
Redeemer.  Grow,  then,  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  thy  Lord  and  Saviour.  Be 
neither  straitened  nor  stunted.  The  Sun  of 
Righteousness  has  risen  upon  thee.  Answer 
to  his  beams,  as  the  buds  to  the  natural  sun. 
Open  thine  heart,  expand  and  grow  up  into 
him  in  all  things. 
3 


34  _  ffaitb'g  gbeque  JBooft, 

FEBRUARY  3. 

"He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  de 
livered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things!"' 
Rom.  viii.  32. 


this  is  not  a  promise  in  form,  it  is  in 
fact.  Indeed,  it  is  more  than  one  prom 
ise,  it  is  a  conglomerate  of  promises. 
It  is  a  mass  of  rubies,  and  emeralds,  and 
diamonds,  with  a  nugget  of  gold  for  their  set 
ting.  It  is  a  question  which  can  never  be  an 
swered  so  as  to  cause  us  any  anxiety  of  heart. 
What  can  the  Lord  deny  us  after  giving  us 
Jesus?  If  we  need  all  things  in  heaven  and 
earth,  he  will  grant  them  to  us:  for  if  there 
had  been  a  limit  anywhere,  he  would  have 
kept  back  his  own  Son. 

What  do  I  want  to-day?  I  have  only  to 
ask  for  it.  I  may  seek  earnestly,  but  not  as 
if  I  had  to  use  pressure,  and  extort  an  un 
willing  gift  from  the  Lord's  hand;  for  he  will 
give  freely.  Of  his  own  will,  he  gave  us  his 
own  Son.  Certainly  no  one  would  have  pro 
posed  such  a  gift  to  him.  No  one  would  have 
ventured  to  ask  for  it.  It  would  have  been 
too  presumptuous.  He  freely  gave  his  Only- 
begotten;  and,  O  my  soul,  canst  thou  not 
trust  thy  heavenly  Father  to  give  thee  any 
thing,  to  give  thee  everything?  Thy  poor 
prayer  would  have  no  force  with  Omnipotence 
if  force  were  needed;  but  his  love,  like  a 
spring,  rises  of  itself,  and  overflows  for  the 
supply  of  all  thy  needs. 


ffattb's  Cbeque  JSoofe 


FEBRUARY  4. 

"I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless:  I  will 
come  to  you."  —  John  xiv.  18. 
Jl 

left  us,  and  yet  we  are  not  left  or- 
phans.  He  is  our  comfort,  and  he  is 
gone  ;  but  we  are  not  comfortless.  Our 
comfort  is  that  he  will  come  to  us,  and  this 
is  consolation  enough  to  sustain  us  through 
his  prolonged  absence.  Jesus  is  already  on 
his  way  :  he  says,  "  I  come  quickly  "  :  he  rides 
post-haste  towards  us.  He  says,  "  I  will 
come  "  :  and  none  can  prevent  his  coming,  or 
put  it  back  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  He  spe 
cially  says,  "  I  will  come  to  you  "  ;  and  so  he 
will.  His  coming  is  specially  to  and  for  his 
own  people.  This  is  meant  to  be  their  pres 
ent  comfort  while  they  mourn  that  the  Bride 
groom  doth  not  yet  appear. 

When  we  lose  the  joyful  sense  of  his  pres 
ence  we  mourn;  but  we  may  not  sorrow  as  if 
there  were  no  hope.  Our  Lord  in  a  little 
wrath  has  hid  himself  from  us  for  a  moment; 
but  he  will  return  in  full  favour.  He  leaves 
us  in  a  sense,  but  only  in  a  sense.  When  he 
withdraws,  he  leaves  a  pledge  behind  that  he 
will  return.  O  Lord,  come  quickly!  There 
is  no  life  in  this  earthly  existence  if  thou  be 
gone.  We  sigh  for  the  return  of  thy  sweet 
smile.  When  wilt  thou  come  unto  us?  We 
are  sure  thou  wilt  appear;  but  be  thou  like  a 
roe,  or  a  young  hart.  Make  no  tarrying,  O 
our  God! 


36  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  38ooft»  _ 

FEBRUARY  5. 

"When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over 
you."  —  Ex.  xii.  13. 


own  sight  of  the  precious  blood  is 
for  my  comfort;  but  it  is  the  Lord's 
sight  of  it  which  secures  my  safety. 
Even  when  I  am  unable  to  behold  it,  the  Lord 
looks  at  it,  and  passes  over  me  because  of  it. 
If  I  am  not  so  much  at  ease  as  I  ought  to  be, 
because  my  faith  is  dim,  yet  I  am  equally  safe, 
because  the  Lord's  eye  is  not  dim,  and  he  sees 
the  blood  of  the  great  Sacrifice  with  steady 
gaze.  What  a  joy  is  this! 

The  Lord  sees  the  deep  inner  meaning,  the 
infinite  fulness  of  all  that  is  meant  by  the 
death  of  his  dear  Son.  He  sees  it  with  rest 
ful  memory  of  justice  satisfied,  and  all  his 
matchless  attributes  glorified.  He  beheld 
creation  in  its  progress,  and  said,  "  It  is  very 
good  "  ;  but  what  does  he  say  of  redemption 
in  its  completeness?  What  does  he  say  of 
the  obedience  even  unto  death  of  his  Well- 
beloved  Son?  None  can  tell  his  delight  in 
Jesus,  his  rest  in  the  sweet  savour  which  Jesus 
presented  when  he  offered  himself  without 
spot  unto  God. 

Now  rest  we  in  calm  security.  We  have 
God's  Sacrifice  and  God's  Word  to  create  in 
us  a  sense  of  perfect  security.  He  will,  he 
must,  pass  over  us,  because  he  spared  not  our 
glorious  Substitute.  Justice  joins  hands  with 
love  to  provide  everlasting  salvation  for  all 
the  blood-besprinkled  ones. 


ffaltb's  Cheque  JBooft*  _  37 

FEBRUARY  6. 

"If  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the  voice  of 
the  Lord  thy  God,  blessed  shalt  thou  be  in 
the  city."  —  Deut.  xxviii.  2,  3. 


city  is  full  of  care,  and  he  who  has 
to  go  there  from  day  to  day  finds  it  to 
be  a  place  of  great  wear  and  tear.  It 
is  full  of  noise,  and  stir,  and  bustle,  and  sore 
travail:  many  are  its  temptations,  losses,  and 
worries.  But  to  go  there  with  the  divine 
blessing  takes  off  the  edge  of  its  difficulty; 
to  remain  there  with  that  blessing  is  to  find 
pleasure  in  its  duties,  and  strength  equal  to 
its  demands. 

A  blessing  in  the  city  may  not  make  us 
great,  but  it  will  keep  us  good;  it  may  not 
make  us  rich,  but  it  will  preserve  us  honest. 
Whether  we  are  porters,  or  clerks,  or  man 
agers,  or  merchants,  or  magistrates,  the  city 
will  afford  us  opportunities  for  usefulness.  It 
is  good  fishing  where  there  are  shoals  of  fish, 
and  it  is  hopeful  to  work  for  our  Lord  amid 
the  thronging  crowds.  We  might  prefer  the 
quiet  of  a  country  life;  but  if  called  to  town, 
we  may  certainly  prefer  it  because  there  is 
room  for  our  energies. 

To-day  let  us  expect  good  things  because 
of  this  promise,  and  let  our  care  be  to  have 
an  open  ear  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  a 
ready  hand  to  execute  his  bidding.  Obedi 
ence  brings  the  blessing.  "  In  keeping  his 
commandments  there  is  great  reward." 


38  3fattb's  GbeQue  ;fi3oofc. 

FEBRUARY  7. 

"If   thou  return    to   the  Almighty,   thou 
shalt  be  built  up."  —  Job  xxii.  23. 


£LIPHAZ,  in  this  utterance,  spoke  a 
great  truth,  which  is  the  summary  of 
many  an  inspired  Scripture.  Reader, 
has  sin  pulled  you  down?  Have  you  become 
like  a  ruin?  Has  the  hand  of  the  Lord  gone 
out  against  you,  so  that  in  estate  you  are  im 
poverished,  and  in  spirit  you  are  broken 
down?  Was  it  your  own  folly  which  brought 
upon  you  all  this  dilapidation?  Then  the 
first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  return  to  the  Lord. 
With  deep  repentance  and  sincere  faith  find 
your  way  back  from  your  backsliding.  It  is 
your  duty,  for  you  have  turned  away  from 
him  whom  you  professed  to  serve.  It  is  your 
wisdom,  for  you  cannot  strive  against  him 
and  prosper.  It  is  your  immediate  necessity, 
for  what  he  has  done  is  nothing  compared  to 
what  he  may  do  in  the  way  of  chastisement, 
since  he  is  Almighty  to  punish. 

See  what  a  promise  invites  you!  You  shall 
be  "built  up."  None  but  the  Almighty  can 
set  up  the  fallen  pillars,  and  restore  the  tot 
tering  walls  of  your  condition;  but  he  can  and 
he  will  do  it  if  you  return  to  him.  Do  not  de 
lay.  Your  crushed  mind  may  quite  fail  you  if 
you  go  on  to  rebel  ;  but  hearty  confession  will 
ease  you,  and  humble  faith  will  console  you. 
Do  this,  and  all  will  be  well. 


ffaftb'a  Cbeque  3Booft.  39 

FEBRUARY  8. 

"I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of 
my  righteousness." — Isa.  xli.  10. 


of  falling  is  wholesome.  To  be 
venturesome  is  no  sign  of  wisdom. 
Times  come  to  us  when  we  feel  that  we 
must  go  down  unless  we  have  very  special 
support.  Here  we  have  it.  God's  right  hand 
is  a  grand  thing  to  lean  upon.  Mind,  it  is 
not  only  his  hand,  though  it  keepeth  heaven 
and  earth  in  their  places,  but  his  right  hand: 
his  power  united  with  skill,  his  power  where 
it  is  most  dexterous.  Nay,  this  is  not  all, 
it  is  written,  "  I  will  uphold  thee  with  the 
right  hand  of  my  righteousness."  That  hand 
which  he  uses  to  maintain  his  holiness,  and  to 
execute  his  royal  sentences  —  this  shall  be 
stretched  out  to  hold  up  his  trusting  ones. 
Fearful  is  our  danger,  but  joyful  is  our  secur 
ity.  The  man  whom  God  upholds,  devils  can 
not  throw  down. 

Weak  may  be  our  feet,  but  almighty  is 
God's  right  hand.  Rough  may  be  the  road, 
but  Omnipotence  is  our  upholding.  We  may 
boldly  go  forward.  We  shall  not  fall.  Let 
us  lean  continually  where  all  things  lean. 
God  will  not  withdraw  his  strength,  for  his 
righteousness  is  there  as  well :  he  will  be  faith 
ful  to  his  promise,  and  faithful  to  his  Son,  and 
therefore  faithful  to  us.  How  happy  we 
ought  to  be!  Are  we  not  so? 


40  jfaftb'6  Gbeque  ;*Booft. 

FEBRUARY  9. 

"And  I  will  bring  the  third  part  through 
the  fire,  and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  re 
fined,  and  will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried:  they 
shall  call  on  my  name,  and  I  will  hear  them: 
I  will  sayf  It  is  my  people:  and  they  shall 
sayt  The  Lord  is  my  God." — Zech.  xiii.  9. 
Ji 

;RACE  transmutes  us  into  precious 
metal,  and  then  the  fire  and  the  furnace 
follow  as  a  necessary  consequence.  Do 
we  start  at  this?  Would  we  sooner  be  ac 
counted  worthless,  that  we  might  enjoy  re 
pose,  like  the  stones  of  the  field?  This  would 
be  to  choose  the  viler  part:  like  Esau,  to  take 
the  pottage,  and  give  up  the  covenant  portion. 
No,  Lord;  we  will  gladly  be  cast  into  the 
furnace  rather  than  be  cast  out  from  thy  pres 
ence! 

The  fire  only  refines,  it  does  not  destroy. 
We  are  to  be  brought  through  the  fire,  not 
left  in  it.  The  Lord  values  his  people  as  sil 
ver,  and  therefore  he  is  at  pains  to  purge 
away  their  dross.  If  we  are  wise,  we  shall 
rather  welcome  the  refining  process  than  de 
cline  it.  Our  prayer  will  be  that  our  alloy 
may  be  taken  from  us  rather  than  that  we 
should  be  withdrawn  from  the  crucible. 

O  Lord,  thou  triest  us  indeed!  We  are 
ready  to  melt  under  the  fierceness  of  the  flame. 
Still,  this  is  thy  way,  and  thy  way  is  the  best. 
Sustain  us  under  the  trial,  and  complete  the 
process  of  our  purifying,  and  we  will  be  thine 
for  ever  and  ever. 


ffaftb's  Cbcque  ;fiSoofc»  41 

FEBRUARY  10. 

"For  thou  shalt  be  his  witness  unto  all 
men  of  what  thou  hast  seen  and  heard." 
Acts  xxii.  15. 


<||V  AUL  was  chosen  to  see  and  hear  the 
||v  Lord  speaking  to  him  out  of  heaven. 
*••  This  divine  election  was  a  high  privilege 
for  himself;  but  it  was  not  intended  to  end 
with  him,  it  was  meant  to  have  an  influence 
upon  others  ;  yea,  upon  all  men.  It  is  to  Paul 
that  Europe  owes  the  gospel  at  this  hour. 

It  is  ours  in  our  measure  to  be  witnesses  of 
that  which  the  Lord  has  revealed  to  us,  and  it 
is  at  our  peril  that  we  hide  the  precious  reve 
lation.  First,  we  must  see  and  hear,  or  we 
shall  have  nothing  to  tell;  but  when  we  have 
done  so,  we  must  be  eager  to  bear  our  testi 
mony.  It  must  be  personal  :  "  Thou  shalt 
be."  It  must  be  for  Christ:  "Thou  shalt  be 
his  witness."  It  must  be  constant  and  all  ab 
sorbing;  we  are  to  be  this  above  all  other 
things,  and  to  the  exclusion  of  many  other 
matters.  Our  witness  must  not  be  to  a  select 
few  who  will  cheerfully  receive  us  ;  but  to  "  all 
men  "  —  to  all  whom  we  can  reach,  young  or 
old,  rich  or  poor,  good  or  bad.  We  must 
never  be  silent  like  those  who  are  possessed 
by  a  dumb  spirit;  for  the  text  before  us  is  a 
command,  and  a  promise,  and  we  must  not 
miss  it  —  "  Thou  shalt  be  his  witness."  "  Ye 
are  my  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord." 

Lord,  fulfil  this  word  to  me  also! 


42  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  ffiooft. 

FEBRUARY  n. 

"I  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and 
my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring" 
Isa.  xliv.  3. 


kUR  dear  children  have  not  the  Spirit  of 
God  by  nature,  as  we  plainly  see.  We 
see  much  in  them  which  makes  us  fear 
as  to  their  future,  and  this  drives  us  to  agon 
izing  prayer.  When  a  son  becomes  specially 
perverse,  we  cry  with  Abraham,  "  Oh,  that 
Ishmael  might  live  before  thee  !  "  We  would 
sooner  see  our  daughters  Hannahs  than  em 
presses.  This  verse  should  greatly  encourage 
us.  It  follows  upon  the  words,  "  Fear  not,  O 
Jacob,  my  servant,"  and  it  may  well  banish 
our  fears. 

The  Lord  will  give  his  Spirit;  will  give  it 
plentifully,  pouring  it  out;  will  give  it  effectu 
ally,  so  that  it  shall  be  a  real  and  eternal 
blessing.  Under  this  divine  outpouring  our 
children  shall  come  forward,  and  "  one  shall 
say,  I  am  the  Lord's;  and  another  shall  call 
himself  by  .the  name  of  Jacob." 

This  is  one  of  those  promises  concerning 
which  the  Lord  will  be  enquired  of.  Should 
we  not,  at  set  times,  in  a  distinct  manner,  pray 
for  our  offspring?  We  cannot  give  them  new 
hearts,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  can;  and  he  is 
easily  to  be  entreated  of.  The  great  Father 
takes  pleasure  in  the  prayers  of  fathers  and 
mothers.  Have  we  any  dear  ones  outside  of 
the  ark?  Let  us  not  rest  till  they  are  shut 
in  with  us  by  the  Lord's  own  hand. 


jpaitb'g  Cbegue  JBooFu  _  43 

FEBRUARY  12. 

"And  the  Lord  said  unto  'Abram,  after 
that  Lot  was  separated  from  him,  Lift  u'p 
now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the  place 
where  thou  art  northward,  and  southward, 
and  eastward,  and  westward:  for  all  the  land 
which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and 
to  thy  seed  for  ever!'  —  Gen.  xiii.  14,  15. 


H  SPECIAL  blessing  for  a  memorable  oc 
casion.  Abram  had  settled  a  family 
dispute.  He  had  said,  "  Let  there  be 
no  strife,  I  pray  thee,  between  thee  and  me, 
for  we  be  brethren";  and  hence  he  received 
the  blessing  which  belongs  to  peacemakers. 
The  Lord  and  giver  of  peace  delights  to  mani 
fest  his  grace  to  those  who  seek  peace  and 
pursue  it.  If  we  desire  closer  communion 
with  God,  we  must  keep  closer  to  the  ways  of 
peace. 

Abram  had  behaved  very  generously  to  his 
kinsman,  giving  him  his  choice  of  the  land. 
If  we  deny  ourselves  for  peace  sake,  the  Lord 
will  more  than  make  it  up  to  us.  As  far  as 
the  patriarch  can  see,  he  can  claim,  and  we 
may  do  the  like  by  faith.  Abram  had  to  wait 
for  the  actual  possession,  but  the  Lord  en 
tailed  the  land  upon  him  and  his  posterity. 
Boundless  blessings  belong  to  us  by  covenant 
gift.  All  things  are  ours.  When  we  please 
the  Lord,  he  makes  us  to  look  everywhere, 
and  see  all  things  our  own,  whether  things 
present,  or  things  to  come:  all  are  ours,  and 
we  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's. 


44  ffaitb's  Gbeque 


FEBRUARY  13. 

"Blessed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  field." 
Deut.  xxviii.  3. 
jl 

SO  was  Isaac  blessed  when  he  walked 
therein  at  eventide  to  meditate.  How 
often  has  the  Lord  met  us  when  we  have 
been  alone!  The  hedges  and  the  trees  can 
bear  witness  to  our  joy.  We  look  for  such 
blessedness  again. 

So  was  Boaz  blessed  when  he  reaped  his 
harvest,  and  his  workmen  met  him  with  bene 
dictions.  May  the  Lord  prosper  all  who 
drive  the  plough!  Every  farmer  may  urge 
this  promise  with  God,  if  indeed  he  obeys  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  God. 

We  go  to  the  field  to  labour  as  father  Adam 
did;  and  since  the  curse  fell  on  the  soil 
through  the  sin  of  Adam  the  first,  it  is  a  great 
comfort  to  find  a  blessing  through  Adam  the 
second. 

We  go  to  the  field  for  exercise,  and  we  are 
happy  in  the  belief  that  the  Lord  will  bless 
that  exercise,  and  give  us  health,  which  we 
will  use  to  his  glory. 

We  go  to  the  field  to  study  nature,  and 
there  is  nothing  in  a  knowledge  of  the  visible 
creation  which  may  not  be  sanctified  to  the 
highest  uses  by  the  divine  benediction. 

We  have  at  last  to  go  to  the  field  to  bury 
our  dead;  yea,  others  will  in  their  turn  take 
us  to  God's  acre  in  the  field:  but  we  are 
blessed,  whether  weeping  at  the  tomb,  or 
sleeping  in  it. 


3fattb'0  Cbcque  Booft.  45 

FEBRUARY  14. 

"He  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  mercy  shall 
compass  him  about." — Ps.  xxxii.  10. 


FAIR  reward  of  trust!  My  Lord, 
grant  it  me  to  the  full!  The  truster 
above  all  men  feels  himself  to  be  a  sin 
ner;  and  lo,  mercy  is  prepared  for  him:  he 
knows  himself  to  have  no  deservings,  but 
mercy  comes  in,  and  keeps  house  for  him  on 
a  liberal  scale.  O  Lord,  give  me  this  mercy, 
even  as  I  trust  in  thee! 

Observe,  my  soul,  what  a  body-guard  thou 
hast!  As  a  prince  is  compassed  about  with 
soldiery,  so  art  thou  compassed  about  with 
mercy.  Before  and  behind,  and  on  all  sides, 
ride  these  mounted  guards  of  grace.  We 
dwell  in  the  centre  of  the  system  of  mercy, 
for  we  dwell  in  Christ  Jesus. 

O  my  soul,  what  an  atmosphere  dost  thou 
breathe!  As  the  air  surrounds  thee,  even  so 
does  the  mercy  of  thy  Lord.  To  the  wicked 
there  are  many  sorrows,  but  to  thee  there  are 
so  many  mercies  that  thy  sorrows  are  not 
worth  mentioning.  David  says,  "  Be  glad  in 
the  Lord,  and  rejoice,  ye  righteous;  and  shout 
for  joy,  all  ye  that  are  upright  in  heart."  In 
obedience  to  this  precept  my  heart  shall  tri 
umph  in  God,  and  I  will  tell  out  my  gladness. 
As  thou  hast  compassed  me  with  mercy,  I 
will  also  compass  thine  altars,  O  my  God,  with 
songs  of  thanksgiving! 


46  _  ffaitb'g  Cbegue  3Booft> 

FEBRUARY  15. 

"The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us:  he 
bless  us."  —  Ps.  cxv.  12. 


CAN  set  my  seal  to  that  first  sentence. 
Cannot  you?  Yes,  Jehovah  has 
thought  of  us,  provided  for  us,  com 
forted  us,  delivered  us,  and  guided  us.  In  all 
the  movements  of  his  providence  he  has  been 
mindful  of  us,  never  overlooking  our  mean  af 
fairs.  His  mind  has  been  full  of  us  —  that  is 
the  other  form  of  the  word  "  mindful."  This 
has  been  the  case  all  along,  and  without  a  sin 
gle  break.  At  special  times,  however,  we 
have  more  distinctly  seen  this  mindfulness, 
and  we  would  recall  them  at  this  hour  with 
overflowing  gratitude.  Yes,  yes,  "the  Lord 
hath  been  mindful  of  us." 

The  next  sentence  is  a  logical  inference 
from  the  former  one.  Since  God  is  unchange 
able,  he  will  continue  to  be  mindful  of  us  in 
the  future  as  he  has  been  in  the  past;  and  his 
mindfulness  is  tantamount  to  blessing  us. 
But  we  have  here,  not  only  the  conclusion 
of  reason  but  the  declaration  of  inspiration: 
we  have  it  on  the  Holy  Ghost's  authority  — 
"  He  will  bless  us."  This  means  great 
things  and  unsearchable.  The  very  indis 
tinctness  of  the  promise  indicates  its  infinite 
reach.  He  will  bless  us  after  his  own  divine 
manner,  and  that  for  ever  and  ever.  There 
fore,  let  us  each  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul!" 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe« 47 

FEBRUARY  16. 

"I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine 
anger,  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim: 
for  I  am  God,  and  not  man." — Hos.  xi.  9. 


Lord  thus  makes  known  his  spar- 
ing  mercies.  It  may  be  that  the  reader 
is  now  under  heavy  displeasure,  and 
everything  threatens  his  speedy  doom.  Let 
the  text  hold  him  up  from  despair.  The  Lord 
now  invites  you  to  consider  your  ways,  and 
confess  your  sins.  If  he  had  been  man,  he 
would  long  ago  have  cut  you  off.  If  he  were 
now  to  act  after  the  manner  of  men,  it  would 
be  a  word  and  a  blow,  and  then  there  would 
be  an  end  of  you :  but  it  is  not  so,  for  "  as 
high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so 
high  are  his  ways  above  your  ways." 

You  rightly  judge  that  he  is  angry,  but  he 
keepeth  not  his  anger  for  ever:  if  you  turn 
from  sin  to  Jesus,  God  will  turn  from  wrath. 
Because  God  is  God,  and  not  man,  there  is 
still  forgiveness  for  you,  even  though  you 
may  be  steeped  up  to  your  throat  in  iniquity. 
You  have  a  God  to  deal  with,  and  not  a  hard 
man,  nor  even  a  merely  just  man.  No  hu 
man  being  could  have  patience  with  you:  you 
would  have  wearied  out  an  angel,  as  you  have 
wearied  your  sorrowing  father;  but  God  is 
longsuffering.  Come  and  try  him  at  once. 
Confess,  believe,  and  turn  from  your  evil  way, 
and  you  shall  be  saved. 


48  tfaitb's  Cbeque 


FEBRUARY  17. 

"Be  ye  strong  therefore,  and  let  not  your 
hands  be  weak:  for  your  work  shall  be  re 
warded!'  —  2  Chron.  xv.  7. 


OD  had  done  great  things  for  King  Asa 
and  Judah,  but  yet  they  were  a  feeble 
folk.  Their  feet  were  very  tottering  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  their  hearts  very 
hesitating,  so  that  they  had  to  be  warned  that 
the  Lord  would  be  with  them  while  they  were 
with  him,  but  that  if  they  forsook  him  he 
would  leave  them.  They  were  also  reminded 
of  the  sister  kingdom,  how  ill  it  fared  in  its 
rebellion,  and  how  the  Lord  was  gracious  to 
it  when  repentance  was  shown.  The  Lord's 
design  was  to  confirm  them  in  his  way,  and 
make  them  strong  in  righteousness.  So 
ought  it  to  be  with  us.  God  deserves  to  be 
served  with  all  the  energy  of  which  we  are 
capable. 

If  the  service  of  God  is  worth  anything,  it 
is  worth  everything.  We  shall  find  our  best 
reward  in  the  Lord's  work  if  we  do  it  with 
determined  diligence.  Our  labour  is  not  in 
vain  in  the  Lord,  and  we  know  it.  Half 
hearted  work  will  bring  no  reward  ;  but,  when 
we  throw  our  whole  soul  into  the  cause,  we 
shall  see  prosperity.  This  text  was  sent  to 
the  author  of  these  notes  in  a  day  of  terrible 
storm,  and  it  suggested  to  him  to  put  on  all 
steam,  with  the  assurance  of  reaching  port  in 
safety  with  a  glorious  freight. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofu  _  49 

FEBRUARY  18. 

"He  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear 
him:  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  will  save 
them."  —  Ps.  cxlv.  19. 


MIS  own  Spirit  has  wrought  this  desire  in 
us,  and  therefore  he  will  answer  it.  It 
is  his  own  life  within  which  prompts 
the  cry,  and  therefore  he  will  hear  it.  Those 
who  fear  him  are  men  under  the  holiest  in 
fluence,  and,  therefore,  their  desire  is  to  glo 
rify  God,  and  enjoy  him  for  ever.  Like  Dan 
iel,  they  are  men  of  desires,  and  the  Lord  will 
cause  them  to  realize  their  aspirations. 

Holy  desires  are  grace  in  the  blade,  and  the 
heavenly  Husbandman  will  cultivate  them  till 
they  come  to  the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  God 
fearing  men  desire  to  be  holy,  to  be  useful, 
to  be  a  blessing  to  others,  and  so  to  honour 
their  Lord.  They  desire  supplies  for  their 
need,  help  under  burdens,  guidance  in  per 
plexity,  deliverance  in  distress;  and  some 
times  this  desire  is  so  strong,  and  their  case 
so  pressing,  that  they  cry  out  in  agony,  like 
little  children  in  pain,  and  then  the  Lord 
works  most  comprehensively,  and  does  all 
that  is  needful  —  "  and  will  save  them." 

Yes,  if  we  fear  God,  we  have  nothing  else 
to  fear;  if  we  cry  to  the  Lord,  our  salvation 
is  certain. 

Let  the  reader  lay  this  text  on  his  tongue, 
and  keep  it  in  his  mouth  all  the  day,  and  it 
will  be  to  him  as  "  a  wafer  made  with  honey." 
4 


50  _  jfaitb'g  Cheque  JBoofu 

FEBRUARY  19. 

"Though  I  have  afflicted  thee,  I  will  afflict 
thee  no  more."  —  Nahum  i.  12. 


is  a  limit  to  affliction.  God 
sends  it,  and  God  removes  it.  Do  you 
sigh,  and  say,  "When  will  the  end 
be?"  Remember  that  our  griefs  will  surely 
and  finally  end  when  this  poor  earthly  life 
is  over.  Let  us  quietly  wait,  and  patiently 
endure  the  will  of  the  Lord  till  he  cometh. 
Meanwhile,  our  Father  in  heaven  takes 
away  the  rod  when  his  design  in  using  it  is 
fully  served.  When  he  has  whipped  away 
our  folly,  there  will  be  no  more  strokes. 
Or,  if  the  affliction  is  sent  for  testing  us, 
that  our  graces  may  glorify  God,  it  will  end 
when  the  Lord  has  made  us  bear  witness 
to  his  praise.  We  would  not  wish  the  afflic 
tion  to  depart  till  God  has  gotten  out  of  us 
all  the  honour  which  we  can  yield  him. 

There  may  to-day  be  "  a  great  calm."  Who 
knows  how  soon  those  raging  billows  will 
give  place  to  a  sea  of  glass,  and  the  sea 
birds  sit  on  the  gentle  waves?  After  long 
tribulation  the  flail  is  hung  up,  and  the 
wheat  rests  in  the  garner.  We  may,  before 
many  hours  are  past,  be  just  as  happy  as 
now  we  are  sorrowful.  It  is  not  hard  for 
the  Lord  to  turn  night  into  day.  He  that 
sends  the  clouds  can  as  easily  clear  the  skies. 
Let  us  be  of  good  cheer.  It  is  better  on 
before.  Let  us  sing  Hallelujah  by  anticipa 
tion. 


Cbeque  JBooft,  51 


FEBRUARY  20. 

"The  Lord  shall  guide  thee  continually.". 
Isa.  Iviii.  II. 


MHAT  aileth  thee?  Hast  thou  lost  thy 
way?  Art  thou  entangled  in  a  dark 
wood,  and  canst  thou  not  find  thy 
paths?  Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of 
God.  He  knows  the  way,  and  he  will  direct 
thee  in  it  if  thou  cry  unto  him. 

Every  day  brings  its  own  perplexity.  How 
sweet  to  feel  that  the  guidance  of  the  Lord 
is  continual!  If  we  choose  our  own  way, 
or  consult  with  flesh  and  blood,  we  cast  off 
the  Lord's  guidance;  but  if  we  abstain  from 
self-will,  then  he  will  direct  every  step  of 
our  road,  every  hour  of  the  day,  and  every 
day  of  the  year,  and  every  year  of  our  life. 
If  we  will  commit  our  way  unto  the  Lord, 
he  will  direct  our  course  so  that  we  shall  not 
lose  ourselves. 

But  note  to  whom  this  promise  is  made. 
Read  the  previous  verse :  "  If  thou  draw  out 
thy  soul  to  the  hungry."  We  must  feel  for 
others,  and  give  them,  not  a  few  dry  crusts, 
but  such  things  as  we  ourselves  would  wish 
to  receive.  If  we  show  a  tender  care  for  our 
fellow-creatures  in  the  hour  of  their  need, 
then  will  the  Lord  attend  to  our  necessities, 
and  make  himself  our  continual  Guide.  Je 
sus  is  the  Leader,  not  of  misers,  nor  of  those 
who  oppress  the  poor,  but  of  the  kind  and 
tender-hearted.  Such  persons  are  pilgrims, 
who  shall  never  miss  their  way. 


52  3fattb'8  Cbeque  SSoofc. 

FEBRUARY  21. 

"He  will  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord, 
both  small  and  great."  —  Ps.  cxv.  13. 


is  a  word  of  cheer  to  those  who  are 
of  humble  station  and  mean  estate.  Our 
God  has  a  very  gracious  consideration 
for  those  of  small  property,  small  talent, 
small  influence,  small  weight.  God  careth  for 
the  small  things  in  creation,  and  even  regards 
sparrows  in  their  lighting  upon  the  ground. 
Nothing  is  small  to  God,  for  he  makes  use 
of  insignificant  agents  for  the  accomplish 
ment  of  his  purposes.  Let  the  least  among 
men  seek  of  God  a  blessing  upon  his  little 
ness,  and  he  shall  find  his  contracted  sphere 
to  be  a  happy  one. 

Among  those  who  fear  the  Lord  there  are 
little  and  great.  Some  are  babes,  and  others 
are  giants.  But  these  are  all  blessed.  Lit 
tle  faith  is  blessed  faith.  Trembling  hope  is 
blessed  hope.  Every  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
even  though  it  be  only  in  the  bud,  bears  a 
blessing  within  it.  Moreover,  the  Lord  Jesus 
bought  both  the  small  and  the  great  with  the 
same  precious  blood,  and  he  has  engaged  to 
preserve  the  lambs  as  well  as  the  full-grown 
sheep.  No  mother  overlooks  her  child  because 
it  is  little;  nay,  the  smaller  it  is,  the  more 
tenderly  does  she  nurse  it.  If  there  be  any 
preference  with  the  Lord,  he  does  not  arrange 
them  as  "  great  and  small,"  but  as  "  small 
and  great." 


ffaftb'6  Cbeaue  JBoofc.  53 

FEBRUARY  22. 

"David  said  moreover,  The  Lord  that  de 
livered  me  out  of  the  paw  of  the  lion,  and 
out  of  the  paw  of  the  bear,  he  will  deliver  me 
out  of  the  hand  of  this  Philistine." 
I  Sam.  xvii.  37. 
Jl 


is  not  a  promise  if  we  consider  only 
the  words,  but  it  is  truly  so  as  to  its 
sense  ;  for  David  spoke  a  word  which  the 
Lord  endorsed  by  making  it  true.  He  argued 
from  past  deliverances  that  he  should  receive 
help  in  a  new  danger.  In  Jesus  all  the  prom 
ises  are  Yea  and  Amen  to  the  glory  of  God 
by  us,  and  so  the  Lord's  former  dealings  with 
his  believing  people  will  be  repeated. 

Come,  then,  let  us  recall  the  Lord's  former 
loving-kindnesses.  We  could  not  have  hoped 
to  be  delivered  aforetime  by  our  own  strength  ; 
yet  the  Lord  delivered  us.  Will  he  not  again 
save  us?  We  are  sure  he  will.  As  David  ran 
to  meet  his  foe,  so  will  we.  The  Lord  has  been 
with  us,  he  is  with  us,  and  he  has  said,  "  I 
will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  Why 
do  we  tremble?  Was  the  past  a  dream? 
Think  of  the  dead  bear  arid  lion.  Who  is  this 
Philistine?  True,  he  is  not  quite  the  same, 
and  is  neither  bear  nor  lion;  but  then  God 
is  the  same,  and  his  honour  is  as  much  con 
cerned  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  He 
did  not  save  us  from  the  beasts  of  the  forest 
to  let  a  giant  kill  us.  Let  us  be  of  good 
courage. 


54 ffattb'g  Cbegue  JBooft, 

FEBRUARY  23. 

"If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in 
you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  you" — John  xv.  7. 


necessity  we  must  be  in  Christ  to  live 
unto  him,  and  we  must  abide  in  him  to 
be  able  to  claim  the  largesse  of  this 
promise  from  him.  To  abide  in  Jesus  is 
never  to  quit  him  for  another  love,  or  another 
object,  but  to  remain  in  living,  loving,  con 
scious,  willing  union  with  him.  The  branch 
is  not  only  ever  near  the  stem,  but  ever  re 
ceiving  life  and  fruitfulness  from  it.  All  true 
believers  abide  in  Christ  in  a  sense;  but  there 
is  a  higher  meaning,  and  this  we  must  know 
before  we  can  gain  unlimited  power  at  the 
throne.  "  Ask  what  ye  will "  is  for  Enochs 
who  walk  with  God,  for  Johns  who  lie  in  the 
Lord's  bosom,  for  those  whose  union  with 
Christ  leads  to  constant  communion. 

The  heart  must  remain  in  love,  the  mind 
must  be  rooted  in  faith,  the  hope  must  be 
cemented  to  the  Word,  the  whole  man  must 
be  joined  unto  the  Lord,  or  else  it  would  be 
dangerous  to  trust  us  with  power  in  prayer. 
The  carte  blanche  can  only  be  given  to  one 
whose  very  life  is,  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth 
in  me."  O  you  who  break  your  fellowship, 
what  power  you  lose!  If  you  would  be 
mighty  in  your  pleadings,  the  Lord  himself 
must  abide  in  you,  and  you  in  him. 


ffaftb's  Cbeaue  $oofc*  55 

FEBRUARY  24. 

"//  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in 
you,  ye  shall  ask  zvhat  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be 
done  unto  you/'  —  John  xv.  7. 


mOTE  well,  that  we  must  hear  Jesus  speak 
if  we  expect  him  to  hear  us  speak.  If 
we  have  no  ear  for  Christ,  he  will  have 
no  ear  for  us.  In  proportion  as  we  hear  we 
shall  be  heard. 

Moreover,  what  is  heard  must  remain,  must 
live  in  us,  and  must  abide  in  our  character  as 
a  force  and  a  power.  We  must  receive  the 
truths  which  Jesus  taught,  the  precepts  which 
he  issued,  and  the  movements  of  his  Spirit 
within  us;  or  we  shall  have  no  power  at  the 
mercy-seat. 

Suppose  our  Lord's  words  to  be  received, 
and  to  abide  in  us,  what  a  boundless  field  of 
privilege  is  opened  up  to  us!  We  are  to  have 
our  will  in  prayer,  because  we  have  already 
surrendered  our  will  to  the  Lord's  command. 
Thus  are  Elijahs  trained  to  handle  the  keys 
of  heaven,  and  lock  or  loose  the  clouds.  One 
such  man  is  worth  a  thousand  common  Chris 
tians.  Do  we  humbly  desire  to  be  interces 
sors  for  the  church  and  the  world,  and  like 
Luther  to  be  able  to  have  what  we  will  of 
the  Lord?  Then  we  must  bow  our  ear  to  the 
voice  of  the  Well-beloved,  and  treasure  up 
his  words,  and  carefully  obey  them.  He  had 
need  "  hearken  diligently  "  who  would  pray 
effectually. 


56  _  ffaitb'e  Cbeque  JBooft, 

FEBRUARY  25. 

"Ye  shall  be  named  the  priests  of  the  Lord." 
Isa.  Ixi.  6. 

jl 


literal  promise  to  Israel  belongs  spir- 
itually  to  the  seed  after  the  Spirit, 
namely,  to  all  believers.  If  we  live  up 
to  our  pi&vileges,  we  shall  live  unto  God  so 
clearly  and  distinctly  that  men  shall  see  that 
we  are  set  apart  for  holy  service,  and  shall 
name  us  the  priests  of  the  Lord.  We  may 
work,  or  trade,  as  others  do,  and  yet  we  may 
be  solely  and  wholly  the  ministering  servants 
of  God.  Our  one  occupation  shall  be  to  pre 
sent  the  perpetual  sacrifice  of  prayer,  and 
praise,  and  testimony,  and  self-consecration, 
to  the  living  God  by  Jesus  Christ. 

This  being  our  one  aim,  we  may  leave  dis 
tracting  concerns  to  those  who  have  no  higher 
calling.  "  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead."  It 
is  written,  "  Strangers  shall  stand  and  feed 
your  flocks,  and  the  sons  of  the  alien  shall 
be  your  plowmen  and  your  vine-dressers." 
They  may  manage  politics,  puzzle  out  financial 
problems,  discuss  science,  and  settle  the  last 
new  quibbles  of  criticism;  but  we  will  give 
ourselves  unto  such  service  as  becomes  those 
who,  like  the  Lord  Jesus,  are  ordained  to  a 
perpetual  priesthood. 

Accepting  this  honourable  promise  as  in 
volving  a  sacred  duty,  let  us  put  on  the  vest 
ments  of  holiness,  and  minister  before  the 
Lord  all  day  long. 


Jfaitb's  Cbeque  tfoofc.  57 

FEBRUARY  26. 

"The  lip  of  truth  shall  be  established  for 
ever;  but  a  lying  tongue  is  but  for  a  mo 
ment."  —  Prov.  xii.  19. 


RUTH  wears  well.  Time  tests  it,  but  it 
right  well  endures  the  trial.  If,  then,  I 
have  spoken  the  truth,  and  have  for  the 
present  to  suffer  for  it,  I  must  be  content  to 
wait.  If  also  I  believe  the  truth  of  God,  and 
endeavour  to  declare  it,  I  may  meet  with  much 
opposition,  but  I  need  not  fear,  for  ultimately 
the  truth  must  prevail. 

What  a  poor  thing  is  the  temporary  triumph 
of  falsehood  !  "  A  lying  lip  is  but  for  a  mo 
ment  !  "  It  is  a  mere  gourd,  which  comes  up 
in  a  night,  and  perishes  in  a  night;  and  the 
greater  its  development  the  more  manifest  its 
decay.  On  the  other  hand,  how  worthy  of  an 
immortal  being  is  the  avowal  and  defence  of 
that  truth  which  can  never  change;  the  ever 
lasting  gospel,  which  is  established  in  the  im 
mutable  truth  of  an  unchanging  God!  An 
old  proverb  saith,  "  He  that  speaks  truth 
shames  the  devil."  Assuredly  he  that  speaks 
the  truth  of  God  will  put  to  shame  all  the 
devils  in  hell,  and  confound  all  the  seed  of 
the  serpent  which  now  hiss  out  their  false 
hoods. 

O  my  heart,  take  care  that  thou  be  in  all 
things  on  the  side  of  truth,  both  in  small 
things  and  great;  but,  specially,  on  the  side 
of  him  by  whom  grace  and  truth  have  come 
among  men! 


58  _  ffattb's  Cbeque  ffiooft* 

FEBRUARY  27. 

"He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings:  his 
heart  is  -fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord." 
Ps.  cxii.  7. 


SUSPENSE  is  dreadful.     When  we  have 
no  news  from  home  we  are  apt  to  grow 
anxious,  and  we  cannot  be  persuaded  that 
"  no  news  is  good  news."     Faith  is  the  cure 
for  this  condition  of  sadness:  the  Lord  by  his 
Spirit  settles  the  mind  in  holy  serenity,  and 
all  fear  is  gone  as  to  the  future  as  well  as 
the  present. 

The  fixedness  of  heart  spoken  of  by  the 
Psalmist  is  to  be  diligently  sought  after.  It 
is  not  believing  this  or  that  promise  of  the 
Lord,  but  the  general  condition  of  unstag- 
gering  trustfulness  in  our  God,  the  confidence 
which  we  have  in  him  that  he  will  neither 
do  us  ill  himself,  nor  suffer  anyone  else  to 
harm  us.  This  constant  confidence  meets  the 
unknown  as  well  as  the  known  of  life.  Let 
the  morrow  be  what  it  may,  our  God  is  the 
God  of  to-morrow.  Whatever  events  may 
have  happened  which  to  us  are  unknown,  our 
Jehovah  is  God  of  the  unknown  as  well  as 
of  the  known.  We  are  determined  to  trust 
the  Lord,  come  what  may.  If  the  very  worst 
should  happen,  our  God  is  still  the  greatest 
and  best.  Therefore  will  we  not  fear  though 
the  postman's  knock  should  startle  us,  or  a 
telegram  wake  us  at  midnight.  The  Lord 
liveth,  and  what  can  his  children  fear? 


ffattb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  59 

FEBRUARY  28. 

"Knowing  in  yourselves  that  ye  have  in 
heaven  a  better  and  an  enduring  substance." 
Heb.  x.  34. 

Jl 


is  well.  Our  substance  here  is  very 
unsubstantial  ;  there  is  no  substance  in  it. 
But  God  has  given  us  a  promise  of  real 
estate  in  the  glory-land,  and  that  promise 
comes  to  our  hearts  with  such  full  assurance 
of  its  certainty,  that  we  know  in  ourselves  that 
we  have  an  enduring  substance  there.  Yes, 
"  we  have  "  it  even  now.  They  say,  "  A  bird 
in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush  "  ;  but 
we  have  our  bird  in  the  bush  and  in  the  hand 
too.  Heaven  is  even  now  our  own.  We  have 
the  title-deeds  of  it,  we  have  the  earnest  of 
it,  we  have  the  first-fruits  of  it.  We  have 
heaven  in  price,  in  promise,  and  in  principle: 
this  we  know  not  only  by  the  hearing  of  the 
ear,  but  "  in  ourselves." 

Should  not  the  thought  of  the  better  sub 
stance  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  reconcile 
us  to  present  losses?  Our  spending-money 
we  may  lose,  but  our  treasure  is  safe.  We 
have  lost  the  shadows,  but  the  substance  re 
mains,  for  our  Saviour  lives,  and  the  place 
which  he  has  prepared  for  us  abides.  There 
is  a  better  land,  a  better  substance,  a  better 
promise;  and  all  this  comes  to  us  by  a  better 
covenant  ;  wherefore,  let  us  be  in  better  spirits, 
and  say  to  the  Lord,  "  Every  day  will  I  bless 
thee;  and  praise  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever." 


6o  ffattb'g  Cbegue 


FEBRUARY  29. 

"Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow 
me  all  the  days  of  my  life''  —  Ps.  xxiii.  6. 


DEVOUT  poet  sings  — 

"Lord,  when  thou 
Puttest  in  my  time  a  day,  as  thou  dost  now, 
Unknown  in  other  years,  grant,  I  entreat, 
Such  grace  illume  it,  that  whate'er  its  phase, 
It  add  to  holiness,  and  lengthen  praise ! " 

This  day  comes  but  once  in  four  years. 
Oh,  that  we  could  win  a  fourfold  blessing 
upon  it!  Up  till  now  goodness  and  mercy, 
like  two  guards,  have  followed  us  from  day 
to  day,  bringing  up  the  rear,  even  as  grace 
leads  the  van;  and  as  this  out-of-the-way  day 
is  one  of  the  days  of  our  life,  the  two  guardian 
angels  will  be  with  us  to-day  also.  Good 
ness  to  supply  our  needs,  and  mercy  to  blot 
out  our  sins  —  these  twain  shall  attend  our 
every  step  this  day,  and  every  day  till  days 
shall  be  no  more.  Wherefore,  let  us  serve 
the  Lord  on  this  peculiar  day  with  special 
consecration  of  heart,  and  sing  his  praises 
with  more  zest  and  sweetness  than  ever. 
Could  we  not  to-day  make  an  unusual  offer 
ing  to  the  cause  of  God,  or  to  the  poor?  By 
inventiveness  of  love  let  us  make  this  twenty- 
ninth  of  February  a  day  to  be  remembered 
for  ever. 


jpaitb'g  flbeque  JSooft*  _  61 

MARCH  i. 

"Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  that  trem 
ble  at  his  word:  Your  brethren  that  hated 
you,  that  cast  you  out  for  my  name's  sake, 
said,  Let  the  Lord  be  glorified:  but  he  shall 
appear  to  your  joy,  and  they  shall  be 
ashamed."  —  Isa.  Ixvi.  5. 
Jl 


this  text  may  not  apply  to  one 
in  a  thousand  of  the  readers  of  this  little 
book  of  promises;  but  the  Lord  cheers 
that  one  in  such  words  as  these.  Let  us  pray 
for  all  such  as  are  cast  out  wrongfully  from 
the  society  which  they  love.  May  the  Lord 
appear  to  their  joy! 

The  text  applies  to  truly  gracious  men  who 
tremble  at  the  word  of  the  Lord.  These  were 
hated  of  their  brethren,  and  at  length  cast 
out  because  of  their  fidelity  and  their  holiness. 
This  must  have  been  very  bitter  to  them;  and 
all  the  more  so  because  their  casting  out  was 
done  in  the  name  of  religion,  and  professedly 
with  the  view  of  glorifying  God.  How  much 
is  done  for  the  devil  in  the  name  of  God! 
The  use  of  the  name  of  Jehovah  to  add  venom 
to  the  bite  of  the  old  serpent  is  an  instance 
of  his  subtilty. 

The  appearing  of  the  Lord  for  them  is  the 
hope  of  his  persecuted  people.  He  appears 
as  the  advocate  and  defender  of  his  elect;  and 
when  he  does  so,  it  means  a  clear  deliverance 
for  the  God-fearing  and  shame  for  their  op 
pressors.  O  Lord,  fulfil  this  word  to  those 
whom  men  are  deriding! 


62  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

MARCH  2. 

"But  when  thou  doest  alms,  let  not  thy 
left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand  doeth: 
that  thine  alms  may  be  in  secret:  and  thy 
Father  which  seeth  in  secret  himself  shall 
reward  thee  openly/'  —  Matt.  vi.  3,  4. 


mO  promise  is  made  to  those  who  give  to 
the  poor  to  be  seen  of  men.  They  have 
their  reward  at  once,  and  cannot  expect 
to  be  paid  twice. 

Let  us  hide  away  our  charity;  —  yes,  hide 
it  even  from  ourselves.  Give  so  often  and 
so  much  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  you  no 
more  take  note  that  you  have  helped  the  poor 
than  that  you  have  eaten  your  regular  meals. 
Do  your  alms  without  even  whispering  to 
yourself,  "How  generous  I  am!"  Do  not 
thus  attempt  to  reward  yourself.  Leave  the 
matter  with  God,  who  never  fails  to  see,  to 
record,  and  to  reward.  Blessed  is  the  man 
who  is  busy  in  secret  with  his  kindness:  he 
finds  a  special  joy  in  his  unknown  benevo 
lences.  This  is  the  bread,  which  eaten  by 
stealth,  is  sweeter  than  the  banquets  of  kings. 
How  can  I  indulge  myself  to-day  with  this 
delightful  luxury?  Let  me  have  a  real  feast 
of  tenderness  and  flow  of  soul. 

Here  and  hereafter  the  Lord,  himself,  will 
personally  see  to  the  rewarding  of  the  secret 
giver  of  alms.  This  will  be  in  his  own  way 
and  time;  and  he  will  choose  the  very  best. 
How  much  this  promise  means  it  will  need 
eternity  to  reveal. 


ffaitb'g  Cbegue  JBooft  _  63 

MARCH  3. 

"For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell; 
neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to 
see  corruption/'  —  Ps.  xvi.  10. 


word  has  its  proper  fulfilment  in  the 
Lord  Jesus;  but  it  applies  also,  with  a 
variation,  to  all  who  are  in  him.  Our 
soul  shall  not  be  left  in  the  separate  state, 
and  our  body,  though  it  see  corruption,  shall 
rise  again.  The  general  meaning,  rather  than 
the  specific  application,  is  that  to  which  we 
would  call  our  readers*  thoughts  at  this  par 
ticular  time. 

We  may  descend  in  spirit  very  low  till  we 
seem  to  be  plunged  in  the  abyss  of  hell;  but 
we  shall  not  be  left  there.  We  may  appear 
to  be  at  death's  door  in  heart,  and  soul,  and 
consciousness;  but  we  cannot  remain  there. 
Our  inward  death  as  to  joy  and  hope  may  pro 
ceed  very  far;  but  it  cannot  run  on  to  its  full 
consequences,  so  as  to  reach  the  utter  corrup 
tion  of  black  despair.  We  may  go  very  low, 
but  not  lower  than  the  Lord  permits  ;  we  may 
stay  in  the  lowest  dungeon  of  doubt  for  a 
while,  but  we  shall  not  perish  there.  The  star 
of  hope  is  still  in  the  sky  when  the  night  is 
blackest.  The  Lord  will  not  forget  us  and 
hand  us  over  to  the  enemy.  Let  us  rest  in 
hope.  We  have  to  deal  with  one  whose  mercy 
endureth  for  ever.  Surely,  out  of  death,  and 
darkness,  and  despair  we  shall  yet  arise  to  life, 
light,  and  liberty. 


64  afaftb's  Gbeaue 


MARCH  4. 

"Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour" 
I  Sam.  ii.  30. 

Jl 

I  make  the  honour  of  God  the  great 
object  of  my  life  and  the  rule  of  my  con 
duct?  If  so,  he  will  honour  me.  I  may 
for  a  while  receive  no  honour  from  man,  but 
God  will  himself  put  honour  upon  me  in  the 
most  effectual  manner.  In  the  end  it  will 
be  found  the  surest  way  to  honour  to  be  will 
ing  to  be  put  to  shame  for  conscience  sake. 

Eli  had  not  honoured  the  Lord  by  ruling 
his  household  well,  and  his  sons  had  not  hon 
oured  the  Lord  by  behaviour  worthy  of  their 
sacred  office,  and  therefore  the  Lord  did  not 
honour  them,  but  took  the  high-priesthood 
out  of  their  family,  and  made  young  Samuel 
to  be  ruler  in  the  land  instead  of  any  of  their 
line.  If  I  would  have  my  family  ennobled, 
I  must  honour  the  Lord  in  all  things.  God 
may  allow  the  wicked  to  win  worldly  honours  ; 
but  the  dignity  which  he  himself  gives,  even 
glory,  honour,  and  immortality,  he  reserves 
for  those  who  by  holy  obedience  take  care  to 
honour  him. 

What  can  I  do  this  day  to  honour  the  Lord? 
I  will  promote  his  glory  by  my  spoken  testi 
mony,  and  by  my  practical  obedience.  I  will 
also  honour  him  with  my  substance,  and  by 
offering  to  him  some  special  service.  Let  me 
sit  down  and  think  how  I  can  honour  him, 
since  he  will  honour  me. 


ffattb's  Cbeque  JBooft 65 

MARCH  5. 

"He  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just." 
Prov.  iii.  33. 


ME  fears  the  Lord,  and  therefore  he  comes 
under  the  divine  protection  even  as  to 
the  roof  which  covers  himself  and  his 
family.  His  home  is  an  abode  of  love,  a 
school  of  holy  training,  and  a  place  of  heavenly 
light.  In  it  there  is  a  family  altar  where  the 
name  of  the  Lord  is  daily  had  in  reverence. 
Therefore  the  Lord  blesses  his  habitation.  It 
may  be  a  humble  cottage  or  a  lordly  man 
sion;  but  the  Lord's  blessing  comes  because 
of  the  character  of  the  inhabitant,  and  not  be 
cause  of  the  size  of  the  dwelling. 

That  house  is  most  blest  in  which  the  master 
and  mistress  are  God-fearing  people;  but  a 
son  or  daughter  or  even  a  servant  may  bring 
a  blessing  on  a  whole  household.  The  Lord 
often  preserves,  prospers,  and  provides  for  a 
family  for  the  sake  of  one  or  two  in  it,  who 
are  "  just "  persons  in  his  esteem,  because  his 
grace  has  made  them  so.  Beloved,  let  us  have 
Jesus  for  our  constant  guest,  even  as  the  sis 
ters  of  Bethany  had,  and  then  we  shall  be 
blessed  indeed. 

Let  us  look  to  it  that  in  all  things  we  are 
just  —  in  our  trade,  in  our  judgment  of  oth 
ers,  in  our  treatment  of  neighbours,  and  in  our 
own  personal  character.  A  just  God  cannot 
bless  unjust  transactions, 

5 


66  _  ffaitb'a  Cbeque  JBoofe, 

MARCH  6. 

"In  thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy." 
Hosea  xiv.  3. 


is  an  excellent  reason  for  casting 
away  all  other  confidences  and  relying 
upon  the  Lord  alone.  When  a  child  is 
left  without  its  natural  protector,  our  God 
steps  in  and  becomes  his  guardian:  so  also 
when  a  man  has  lost  every  object  of  depend 
ence,  he  may  cast  himself  upon  the  living  God 
and  find  in  him  all  that  he  needs.  Orphans 
are  cast  upon  the  fatherhood  of  God,  and  he 
provides  for  them.  The  writer  of  these  pages 
knows  what  it  is  to  hang  on  the  bare  arm  of 
God,  and  he  bears  his  willing  witness  that  no 
trust  is  so  well  warranted  by  facts,  or  so  sure 
to  be  rewarded  by  results,  as  trust  in  the  in 
visible  but  ever-living  God. 

Some  children  who  have  fathers  are  not 
much  the  better  off  because  of  them,  but  the 
fatherless  with  God  are  rich.  Better  have 
God  and  no  other  friend  than  all  the  patrons 
on  the  earth  and  no  God.  To  be  bereaved  of 
the  creature  is  painful,  but  so  long  as  the  Lord 
remains  the  fountain  of  mercy  to  us,  we  are 
not  truly  orphaned.  Let  fatherless  children 
plead  the  gracious  word  for  this  morning,  and 
let  all  who  have  been  bereaved  of  visible  sup 
port  do  the  same.  Lord,  let  me  find  mercy  in 
thee!  The  more  needy  and  helpless  I  am, 
the  more  confidently  do  I  appeal  to  thy  lov 
ing  heart. 


jfaitb's  Cbegue  JBooft.  _  67 

MARCH  7. 

he  Lord  looseth  the  prisoners." 
Ps.  cxlvi.  7. 


ME  has  done  it.  Remember  Joseph,  Is 
rael  in  Egypt,  Manasseh,  Jeremiah, 
Peter,  and  many  others.  He  can  do  it 
still.  He  breaks  the  bars  of  brass  with  a 
word,  and  snaps  the  fetters  of  iron  with  a 
look.  He  is  doing  it.  In  a  thousand  places 
troubled  ones  are  coming  forth  to  light  and 
enlargement.  Jesus  still  proclaims  the  open 
ing  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound.  At 
this  moment  doors  are  flying  back  and  fetters 
are  dropping  to  the  ground. 

He  will  delight  to  set  you  free,  dear  friend, 
if  at  this  time  you  are  mourning  because  of 
sorrow,  doubt,  and  fear.  It  will  be  a  joy  to 
Jesus  to  give  you  liberty.  It  will  give  him  as 
great  a  pleasure  to  loose  you  as  it  will  be  a 
pleasure  to  you  to  be  loosed.  No,  you  have 
not  to  snap  the  iron  band:  the  Lord  himself 
will  do  it.  Only  trust  him,  and  he  will  be 
your  Emancipator.  Believe  in  him  in  spite 
of  the  stone  walls,  or  the  manacles  of  iron. 
Satan  cannot  hold  you,  sin  cannot  enchain 
you,  even  despair  cannot  bind  you,  if  you  will 
now  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  the  free- 
ness  of  his  grace,  and  in  the  fulness  of  his 
power  to  save. 

Defy  the  enemy,  and  let  the  word  now  be 
fore  you  be  your  song  of  deliverance  :  "  Je 
hovah  looseth  the  prisoners." 


68 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooE. 

MARCH  8. 

"Blessed   shall    be    thy    basket    and    thy 
store." — Deut.  xxviii.   5. 

jl 

BEDIENCE  brings  a  blessing  on  all  the 
provisions  which  our  industry  earns  for 
us.  That  which  comes  in  and  goes  out 
at  once,  like  fruit  in  the  basket  which  is  for 
immediate  use,  shall  be  blest;  and  that  which 
is  laid  by  with  us  for  a  longer  season  shall 
equally  receive  a  blessing.  Perhaps  ours  is 
a  hand-basket  portion.  We  have  a  little  for 
breakfast,  and  a  scanty  bite  for  dinner  in  a 
basket  when  we  go  out  to  our  work  in  the 
morning.  This  is  well,  for  the  blessing  of 
God  is  promised  to  the  basket.  If  we  live 
from  hand  to  mouth,  getting  each  day's  supply 
in  the  day,  we  are  as  well  off  as  Israel;  for 
when  the  Lord  entertained  his  favoured  peo 
ple  he  only  gave  them  a  day's  manna  at  a 
time.  What  more  did  they  need?  What 
more  do  we  need? 

But  if  we  have  a  store,  how  much  we  need 
the  Lord  to  bless  it!  For  there  is  the  care 
of  getting,  the  care  of  keeping,  the  care  of 
managing,  the  care  of  using;  and,  unless  the 
Lord  bless  it,  these  cares  will  eat  into  our 
hearts,  till  our  goods  become  our  gods,  and  our 
cares  prove  cankers. 

O  Lord,  bless  our  substance.  Enable  us 
to  use  it  for  thy  glory.  Help  us  to  keep 
worldly  things  in  their  proper  places,  and 
never  may  our  savings  endanger  the  saving 
of  our  souls. 


tfaitb's  Cheque  JSooft.  69 

MARCH  9. 

"And  seek  the  peace  of  the  city  thither 
I  have  caused  you  to  be  carried  aucay  cap 
tives,  and  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  it:  for  in 
the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace." 
Jer.  xxix.  7. 
ji 


principle  involved  in  this  text  would 
suggest  to  all  of  us  who  are  the  Lord's 
strangers  and  foreigners  that  we  should 
be  desirous  to  promote  the  peace  and  pros 
perity  of  the  people  among  whom  we  dwell. 
Specially  should  our  nation  and  our  city  be 
blest  by  our  constant  intercession.  An  earn 
est  prayer  for  his  country  is  well  becoming 
in  the  mouth  of  every  believer. 

Eagerly  let  us  pray  for  the  great  boon  of 
peace,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  If  strife 
should  cause  bloodshed  in  our  streets,  or  if 
foreign  battle  should  slay  our  brave  soldiers, 
we  should  all  bewail  the  calamity;  let  us 
therefore  pray  for  peace,  and  diligently  pro 
mote  those  principles  by  which  the  classes  at 
home  and  the  races  abroad  may  be  bound  to 
gether  in  bonds  of  amity. 

We  ourselves  are  promised  quiet  in  connec 
tion  with  the  peace  of  the  nation,  and  this  is 
most  desirable;  for  thus  we  can  bring  up  our 
families  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  also 
preach  the  gospel  without  let  or  hindrance. 
To-day  let  us  be  much  in  prayer  for  our  coun 
try,  confessing  national  sins,  and  asking  for 
national  pardon  and  blessing,  for  Jesus'  sake. 


TO ffaftb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

MARCH    10. 

"I  am  come  a  light  into  the  world,  that 
whosoever  believeth  on  me  should  not  abide 
in  darkness." — John  xii.  46. 


world  is  dark  as  midnight;  Jesus  has 
come  that  by  faith  we  may  have  light, 
and  may  no  longer  sit  in  the  gloom  which 
covers  all  the  rest  of  mankind. 

Whosoever  is  a  very  wide  term:  it  means 
you  and  me.  If  we  trust  in  Jesus  we  shall 
no  more  sit  in  the  dark  shadow  of  death,  but 
shall  enter  into  the  warm  light  of  a  day  which 
shall  never  end.  Why  do  we  not  come  out 
into  the  light  at  once? 

A  cloud  may  sometimes  hover  over  us,  but 
we  shall  not  abide  in  darkness  if  we  believe 
in  Jesus.  He  has  come  to  give  us  broad  day 
light.  Shall  he  come  in  vain?  If  we  have 
faith  we  have  the  privilege  of  sunlight:  let  us 
enjoy  it.  From  the  night  of  natural  depravity, 
of  ignorance,  of  doubt,  of  despair,  of  sin,  of 
dread,  Jesus  has  come  to  set  us  free;  and  all 
believers  shall  know  that  he  no  more  comes 
in  vain  than  the  sun  rises  and  fails  to  scatter 
his  heat  and  light. 

Shake  off  thy  depression,  dear  brother. 
Abide  not  in  the  dark,  but  abide  in  the  light. 
In  Jesus  is  thy  hope,  thy  joy,  thy  heaven. 
Look  to  him,  to  him  only,  and  thou  shalt  re 
joice  as  the  birds  rejoice  at  sunrise,  and  as 
the  angels  rejoice  before  the  throne. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  dBoofc.  71 

MARCH    n. 

"And  all  this  assembly  shall  know  that  the 
Lord  saveth  not  with  sword  and  spear:  for 
the  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and  he  will  give  you 
into  our  hands."  —  i  Sam.  xvii.  47. 


ET  this  point  be  settled,  that  the  battle 
is  the  Lord's  and  we  may  be  quite  sure 
of  the  victory,  and  of  the  victory  in  such 
a  way  as  will  best  of  all  display  the  power  of 
God.  The  Lord  is  too  much  forgotten  by  all 
men,  yea,  even  by  the  assemblies  of  Israel; 
and  when  there  is  an  opportunity  to  make  men 
see  that  the  Great  First  Cause  can  achieve  his 
purposes  without  the  power  of  man,  it  is  a 
priceless  occasion  which  should  be  well  em 
ployed.  Even  Israel  looks  too  much  to  sword 
and  spear.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  have  no 
sword  in  the  hand  of  David,  and  yet  for  David 
to  know  that  his  God  will  overthrow  a  whole 
army  of  aliens. 

If  we  are  indeed  contending  for  truth  and 
righteousness,  let  us  not  tarry  till  we  have 
talent,  or  wealth,  or  any  other  form  of  visible 
power  at  our  disposal;  but  with  such  stones 
as  we  find  in  the  brook,  and  with  our  own 
usual  sling,  let  us  run  to  meet  the  enemy.  If 
it  were  our  own  battle  we  might  not  be  con 
fident;  but  if  we  are  standing  up  for  Jesus, 
and  warring  in  his  strength  alone,  who  can 
withstand  us?  Without  a  trace  of  hesitancy 
let  us  face  the  Philistines;  for  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  is  with  us,  and  who  can  be  against  us? 


72 jfaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft, 

MARCH    12. 

"And  of  Zebulun  he  said,  Rejoice,  Zebu- 
lun,  in  thy  going  out!' — Deut.  xxxiii.    18. 


blessings  of  the  tribes  are  ours;  for 
we  are  the  true  Israel  who  worship  God 
in  the  spirit,  and  have  no  confidence  in 
the  flesh.  Zebulun  is  to  rejoice  because  Je 
hovah  will  bless  his  "  going  out ;"  we  also 
see  a  promise  for  ourselves  lying  latent  in 
this  benediction.  When  we  go  out  we  will 
look  out  for  occasions  of  joy. 

We  go  out  to  travel,  and  the  providence  of 
God  is  our  convoy.  We  go  out  to  emigrate, 
and  the  Lord  is  with  us  both  on  land  and  sea. 
We  go  out  as  missionaries,  and  Jesus  saith, 
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."  We  go  out  day  by  day  to  our  la 
bour,  and  we  may  do  so  with  pleasure,  for 
God  will  be  with  us  from  morn  till  eve. 

A  fear  sometimes  creeps  over  us  when  start 
ing,  for  we  know  not  what  we  may  meet  with ; 
but  this  blessing  may  serve  us  right  well  as  a 
word  of  good  cheer.  As  we  pack  up  for 
moving,  let  us  put  this  verse  into  our  travel 
ling  trunk;  let  us  drop  it  into  our  hearts,  and 
keep  it  there;  yea,  let  us  lay  it  on  our  tongue 
to  make  us  sing.  Let  us  weigh  anchor  with 
a  song,  or  jump  into  the  carriage  with  a  psalm. 
Let  us  belong  to  the  rejoicing  tribe,  and  in  our 
every  movement  praise  the  Lord  with  joyful 
hearts. 


JFattb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  73 

MARCH    13. 

"Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God!  behold,  I 
cannot  speak,  for  I  am  a  child.  But  the 
Lord  said  unto  me,  Say  not,  I  am  a  child: 
for  thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send  thee, 
and  whatsoever  I  command  thee  thou  shalt 
speak." — Jer.  i.  6,  7. 
£ 

EREMIAH  was  young  and  felt  a  natural 
shrinking  when  sent  upon  a  great  errand 
by  the  Lord ;  but  he  who  sent  him  would 
not  have  him  say,  "  I  am  a  child."  What  he 
was  in  himself  must  not  be  mentioned,  but 
lost  in  the  consideration  that  he  was  chosen 
to  speak  for  God.  He  had  not  to  think  out 
and  invent  a  message,  nor  to  choose  an  au 
dience:  he  was  to  speak  what  God  com 
manded,  and  speak  where  God  sent  him,  and 
this  he  would  be  enabled  to  do  in  strength 
not  his  own. 

Is  it  not  so  with  some  young  preacher,  or 
teacher  who  may  read  these  lines?  God 
knows  how  young  you  are,  and  how  slender 
are  your  knowledge  and  experience;  but  if 
he  chooses  to  send  you,  it  is  not  for  you  to 
shrink  from  the  heavenly  call.  God  will  mag 
nify  himself  in  your  feebleness.  If  you  were 
as  old  as  Methuselah,  how  much  would  your 
years  help  you?  If  you  were  as  wise  as  Solo 
mon,  you  might  be  equally  as  wilful  as  he. 
Keep  you  to  your  message  and  it  will  be  your 
wisdom ;  follow  your  marching  orders  and  they 
will  be  your  discretion. 


74 ffattb'6  Cbegue  ffiooft. 

MARCH   14. 

"As  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so 
will  I  comfort  you" — Isa.  Ixvi.  13. 


H MOTHER'S  comfort !     Ah,  this  is  tender 
ness    itself.     How   she   enters   into    her 
child's  grief!     How  she  presses  him  to 
her  bosom,  and  tries  to  take  all  his  sorrow 
into  her  own  heart!     He  can  tell  her  all,  and 
she  will  sympathize  as  nobody  else  can.     Of 
all  comforters  the  child  loves  best  his  mother, 
and  even  full-grown  men  have  found  it  so. 

Does  Jehovah  condescend  to  act  the 
mother's  part?  This  is  goodness  indeed.  We 
readily  perceive  how  he  is  a  father;  but  will 
he  be  as  a  mother  also?  Does  not  this  invite 
us  to  holy  familiarity,  to  unreserved  confi 
dence,  to  sacred  rest?  When  God  himself 
becomes  "  the  Comforter  "  no  anguish  can  long 
abide.  Let  us  tell  out  our  trouble,  even 
though  sobs  and  sighs  should  become  our 
readiest  utterance.  He  will  not  despise  us 
for  our  tears;  our  mother  did  not.  He  will 
consider  our  weakness  as  she  did,  and  he  will 
put  away  our  faults,  only  in  a  surer,  safer  way 
than  our  mother  could  do.  We  will  not  try 
to  bear  our  grief  alone:  that  would  be  unkind 
to  one  so  gentle  and  so  kind.  Let  us  begin 
the  day  with  our  loving  God,  and  wherefore 
should  we  not  finish  it  in  the  same  company, 
since  mothers  weary  not  of  their  children? 


Jfaitb'a  Gbeque  jBoofc.  75 

MARCH   15. 

"Therefore  say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God; 
Although  I  have  cast  them  far  off  among  the 
heathen,  anl  although  I  have  scattered  them 
among  the  countries,  yet  will  I  be  to  them  as 
a  little  sanctuary  in  the  countries  where  they 
shall  come." — Ezek.  xi.  16. 


ANISHED  from  the  public  means  of 
grace,  we  are  not  removed  from  the 
grace  of  the  means.  The  Lord  who 
places  his  people  where  they  feel  as  exiles 
will  himself  be  with  them,  and  be  to  them  all 
that  they  could  have  had  at  home,  in  the 
place  of  their  solemn  assemblies.  Take  this 
to  yourselves,  O  ye  who  are  called  to  wander! 

God  is  to  his  people  a  place  of  refuge.  They 
find  sanctuary  with  him  from  every  adversary. 
He  is  their  place  of  worship  too.  He  is  with 
them  as  with  Jacob  when  he  slept  in  the  open 
field,  and  rising,  said,  "  Surely  God  was  in  this 
place."  To  them  also  he  will  be  a  sanctuary 
of  quiet,  like  the  Holy  of  Holies,  which  was 
the  noiseless  abode  of  the  Eternal.  They 
shall  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil. 

God  himself,  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  the  sanctu 
ary  of  mercy.  The  ark  of  the  covenant  is  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  Aaron's  rod,  the  pot  of 
manna,  the  tables  of  the  law,  all  are  in  Christ 
our  sanctuary.  In  God  we  find  the  shrine  of 
holiness  and  of  communion.  What  more  do 
we  need?  O  Lord,  fulfil  this  promise,  and  be 
ever  to  us  as  a  little  sanctuary! 


?6  _  ffaitb'g  Cheque  ffooft. 

MARCH   16. 

"Those  things  which  ye  have  both  learned, 
and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen  in  me,  do: 
and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you." 

Phil.  iv.  9. 


«fTT  is  well  when  a  man  can  with  advantage 
||    be  so  minutely  copied  as  Paul  might  have 
been.     Oh,  for  grace  to  imitate  him  this 
day  and  every  day! 

Should  we,  through  divine  grace,  carry  into 
practice  the  Pauline  teaching,  we  may  claim 
the  promise  which  is  now  open  before  us; 
and  what  a  promise  it  is!  God,  who  loves 
peace,  makes  peace,  and  breathes  peace,  will 
be  with  us.  "  Peace  be  with  you  "  is  a  sweet 
benediction;  but  for  the  God  of  peace  to  be 
with  us  is  far  more.  Thus  we  have  the  foun 
tain  as  well  as  the  streams,  the  sun  as  well 
as  his  beams.  If  the  God  of  peace  be  with 
us,  we  shall  enjoy  the  peace  of  God  which 
passeth  all  understanding,  even  though  out 
ward  circumstances  should  threaten  to  dis 
turb.  If  men  quarrel,  we  shall  be  sure  to  be 
peace-makers,  if  the  Maker  of  peace  be  with 
us. 

It  is  in  the  way  of  truth  that  real  peace  is 
found.  If  we  quit  the  faith  or  leave  the  path 
of  righteousness  under  the  notion  of  promot 
ing  peace,  we  shall  be  greatly  mistaken.  First 
pure,  then  peaceable,  is  the  order  of  wisdom 
and  of  fact.  Let  us  keep  to  Paul's  line,  and 
we  shall  have  the  God  of  peace  with  us  as 
he  was  with  the  apostle. 


JFattb's  Cbeque  JBooft.  77 

MARCH   17. 

"Be  not  afraid  of  their  faces:  for  I  am 
with  thee  to  deliver  thee,  saith  the  Lord." 
Jer.  i.  8. 
j* 

HENEVER  fear  comes  in  and  makes 
us  falter,  we  are  in  danger  of  falling 
into  sin.  Conceit  is  to  be  dreaded, 
but  so  is  cowardice.  "  Dare  to  be  a  Daniel." 
Our  great  Captain  should  be  served  by  brave 
soldiers. 

What  a  reason  for  bravery  is  here.  God  is 
with  those  who  are  with  him.  God  will  never 
be  away  when  the  hour  of  struggle  comes. 
Do  they  threaten  you?  Who  are  you  that  you 
should  be  afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die?  Will 
you  lose  your  situation?  Your  God  whom 
you  serve  will  find  bread  and  water  for  his 
servants.  Can  you  not  trust  him?  Do  they 
pour  ridicule  upon  you?  Will  this  break  your 
bones  or  your  heart?  Bear  it  for  Christ's 
sake,  and  even  rejoice  because  of  it. 

God  is  with  the  true,  the  just,  the  holy,  to 
deliver  them;  and  he  will  deliver  you.  Re 
member  how  Daniel  came  out  of  the  lions' 
den,  and  the  three  holy  children  out  of  the 
furnace.  Yours  is  not  so  desperate  a  case  as 
theirs;  but  if  it  were,  the  Lord  would  bear 
you  through,  and  make  you  more  than  a  con 
queror.  Fear  to  fear.  Be  afraid  to  be  afraid. 
Your  worst  enemy  is  within  your  own  bosom. 
Get  to  your  knees  and  cry  for  help,  and  then 
rise  up  saying,  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be 
afraid." 


78  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft, 

MARCH   18. 

"The  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight/' 
Prov.  xv.  8. 


is  as  good  as  a  promise,  for  it  de- 
clares  a  present  fact,  which  will  be  the 
same  throughout  all  ages.  God  takes 
great  pleasure  in  the  prayers  of  upright  men; 
he  even  calls  them  his  delight.  Our  first 
concern  is  to  be  upright.  Neither  bending 
this  way  nor  that,  continue  upright:  not 
crooked  with  policy,  nor  prostrate  by  yield 
ing  to  evil,  be  you  upright  in  strict  integrity 
and  straightforwardness.  If  we  begin  to 
shuffle  and  shift,  we  shall  be  left  to  shift  for 
ourselves.  If  we  try  crooked  ways,  we  shall 
find  that  we  cannot  pray,  and  if  we  pretend 
to  do  so,  we  shall  find  our  prayers  shut  out 
of  heaven. 

Are  we  acting  in  a  straight  line  and  thus 
following  out  the  Lord's  revealed  will?  Then 
let  us  pray  much  and  pray  in  faith.  If  our 
prayer  is  God's  delight,  let  us  not  stint  him 
in  that  which  gives  him  pleasure.  He  does 
not  consider  the  grammar  of  it,  nor  the  meta 
physics  of  it,  nor  the  rhetoric  of  it  ;  in  all  these 
men  might  despise  it.  He,  as  a  Father,  takes 
pleasure  in  the  lispings  of  his  own  babes,  the 
stammerings  of  his  new-born  sons  and  daugh 
ters.  Should  we  not  delight  in  prayer  since 
the  Lord  delights  in  it?  Let  us  make  errands 
to  the  throne.  The  Lord  finds  us  enough  rea 
sons  for  prayer,  and  we  ought  to  thank  him 
that  it  is  so. 


3faftb's  Cbecjue  JBooft.  79 

MARCH    19. 

'The  Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory." 
Ps.  Ixxxiv.  ii. 


kRACE  is  what  we  need  just  now,  and  it 
is  to  be  had  freely.  What  can  be  freer 
than  a  gift?  To-day  we  shall  receive 
sustaining,  strengthening,  sanctifying,  satis 
fying  grace.  He  has  given  daily  grace  until 
now,  and  as  for  the  future,  that  grace  is  still 
sufficient.  If  we  have  but  little  grace,  the 
fault  must  lie  in  ourselves;  for  the  Lord  is 
not  straitened,  neither  is  he  slow  to  bestow 
it  in  abundance.  We  may  ask  for  as  much 
as  we  will  and  never  fear  a  refusal.  He  giv- 
eth  liberally  and  upbraideth  not. 

The  Lord  may  not  give  gold,  but  he  will 
give  grace  :  he  may  not  give  gain,  but  he 
will  give  grace.  He  will  certainly  send  us 
trial,  but  he  will  give  grace  in  proportion 
thereto.  We  may  be  called  to  labour,  and  to 
suffer,  but  with  the  call  there  will  come  all 
the  grace  required. 

What  an  and  is  that  in  the  text  —  "  and 
glory  "  !  We  do  not  need  glory  yet,  and  we 
are  not  yet  fit  for  it;  but  we  shall  have  it  in 
due  order.  After  we  have  eaten  the  bread  of 
grace,  we  shall  drink  the  wine  of  glory.  We 
must  go  through  the  holy  —  which  is  grace 
—  to  the  holiest  of  all  —  which  is  glory. 
These  words  "  and  glory  "  are  enough  to  make 
a  man  dance  for  joy.  A  little  while  —  a  lit 
tle  while,  and  then  glory  forever! 


8o ffaitb's  Cheque  3Booft» 

MARCH   20. 

"Wherefore,  if  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of 
the  field,  which  to-day  is,  and  to-morrow  is 
cast  into  the  oven,  shall  he  not  much  more 
clothe  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith?" 
Matt.  vi.  30. 
Jl 

/CLOTHES  are  expensive,  and  poor  be- 
^^  lievers  may  be  led  into  anxiety  as  to 
where  their  next  suit  will  come  from. 
The  soles  are  thin;  how  shall  we  get  new 
shoes?  See  how  our  thoughtful  Lord  has  pro 
vided  against  this  care.  Our  heavenly  Father 
clothes  the  grass  of  the  field  with  a  splendour 
such  as  Solomon  could  not  equal:  will  he  not 
clothe  his  own  children?  We  are  sure  he  will. 
There  may  be  many  a  patch  and  a  darn,  but 
raiment  we  shall  have. 

A  poor  minister  found  his  clothes  nearly 
threadbare,  and  so  far  gone  that  they  would 
hardly  hold  together;  but  as  a  servant  of  the 
Lord  he  expected  his  Master  to  find  him  his 
livery.  It  so  happened  that  the  writer  on  a 
visit  to  a  friend  had  the  loan  of  the  good  man's 
pulpit,  and  it  came  into  his  mind  to  make  a 
collection  for  him,  and  there  was  his  livery. 
Many  other  cases  we  have  seen  in  which  those 
who  have  served  the  Lord  have  found  him 
considerate  of  their  wardrobe.  He  who  made 
man  so  that  when  he  had  sinned  he  needed 
garments,  also  in  mercy  supplied  him  with 
them;  and  those  which  the  Lord  gave  to  our 
first  parents  were  far  better  than  those  they 
made  for  themselves. 


ffaltb's  Cbeque  JBoofr,  _  81 

MARCH  21. 

"Then  shall  thon  walk  in  thy  way  safely, 
and  thy  foot  shall  not  stumble." 
Prov.  iii.  23. 


is  to  say,  if  we  follow  the  ways  of 
wisdom  and  holiness  we  shall  be  pre 
served  in  them.  He  who  travels  by  day 
light  along  the  highway  is  under  the  king's 
protection.  There  is  a  way  for  every  man, 
namely,  his  own  proper  calling  in  life,  and  if 
we  devoutly  walk  therein  in  the  fear  of  God 
he  will  preserve  us  from  evil.  We  may  not 
travel  luxuriously,  but  we  shall  walk  safely. 
We  may  not  be  able  to  run  like  young  men, 
but  we  shall  be  able  to  walk  like  good  men. 

Our  greatest  danger  lies  in  ourselves:  our 
feeble  foot  is  so  sadly  apt  to  stumble.  Let 
us  ask  for  more  moral  strength  that  our  ten 
dency  to  slip  may  be  overcome.  Some  stum 
ble  because  they  do  not  see  the  stone  in  the 
way:  divine  grace  enables  us  to  perceive  sin, 
and  so  to  avoid  it.  Let  us  plead  this  promise, 
and  trust  in  him  who  upholds  his  chosen. 

Alas!  our  worst  peril  is  our  own  careless 
ness,  but  against  this  the  Lord  Jesus  has  put 
us  on  our  guard,  saying,  "  Watch  and  pray." 

Oh  for  grace  to  walk  this  day  without  a  sin 
gle  stumble  !  It  is  not  enough  that  we  do  not 
actually  fall;  our  cry  should  be  that  we  may 
not  make  the  smallest  slip  with  our  feet,  but 
may  at  the  last  adore  him  "  who  is  able  to 
keep  us  from  stumbling." 


82  _  ffaitb's  Cbeque  ffooft. 

MARCH   22. 

"He  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble" 
James  iv.  6. 


MUMBLE  hearts  seek  grace,  and  therefore 
they  get  it.     Humble  hearts  yield  to  the 
sweet  influences  of  grace,  and  so  it  is 
bestowed   on   them   more   and   more   largely. 
Humble    hearts    lie    in    the    valleys    where 
streams  of  grace  are  flowing,  and  hence  they 
drink  of  them.     Humble  hearts  are  grateful 
for  grace  and  give  the  Lord  the  glory  of  it, 
and  hence  it  is  consistent  with  his  honour  to 
give  it  to  them. 

Come,  dear  reader,  take  a  lowly  place.  Be 
little  in  thine  own  esteem,  that  the  Lord  may 
make  much  of  thee.  Perhaps  the  sigh  breaks 
out,  "  I  fear  I  am  not  humble."  It  may  be 
that  this  is  the  language  of  true  humility. 
Some  are  proud  of  being  humble,  and  this  is 
one  of  the  very  worst  sorts  of  pride.  We  are 
needy,  helpless,  undeserving,  hell-deserving 
creatures,  and  if  we  are  not  humble  we  ought 
to  be.  Let  us  humble  ourselves  because  of 
our  sins  against  humility,  and  then  the  Lord 
will  give  us  to  taste  of  his  favour.  It  is  grace 
which  makes  us  humble,  and  grace  which  finds 
in  this  humility  an  opportunity  for  pouring 
in  more  grace.  Let  us  go  down  that  we  may 
rise.  Let  us  be  poor  in  spirit  that  God  may 
make  us  rich.  Let  us  be  humble  that  we 
may  not  need  to  be  humbled,  but  may  be 
exalted  by  the  grace  of  God. 


ffaltb'g  Cbcqu^OQoofr.  _  83 

MARCH   23. 

"/  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they 
knew  not."  —  Isa.  xlii.  16. 


of  the  infinitely  glorious  Jehovah 
acting  as  a  Guide  to  the  blind!  What 
boundless  condescension  does  this  im 
ply!  A  blind  man  cannot  find  a  way  which 
he  does  not  know.  Even  when  he  knows  the 
road,  it  is  hard  for  him  to  traverse  it;  but 
a  road  which  he  has  not  known  is  quite  out 
of  the  question  for  his  unguided  feet.  Now, 
we  are  by  nature  blind  as  to  the  way  of  sal 
vation,  and  yet  the  Lord  leads  us  into  it,  and 
brings  us  to  himself,  and  then  opens  our  eyes, 
As  to  the  future,  we  are  all  of  us  blind,  and 
cannot  see  an  hour  before  us  ;  but  the  Lord  Je 
sus  will  lead  us  even  to  our  journey's  end. 
Blessed  be  his  name! 

We  cannot  guess  in  which  way  deliverance 
can  possibly  come  to  us,  but  the  Lord  knows, 
and  he  will  lead  us  till  we  shall  have  escaped 
every  danger.  Happy  are  those  who  place 
their  hand  in  that  of  the  great  Guide,  and 
leave  their  way  and  themselves  entirely  with 
him.  He  will  bring  them  all  the  way;  and 
when  he  has  brought  them  home  to  glory  and 
has  opened  their  eyes  to  see  the  way  by  which 
he  has  led  them,  what  a  song  of  gratitude 
will  they  sing  unto  their  great  Benefactor! 
Lord,  lead  thy  poor  blind  child  this  day,  for 
I  know  not  my  way! 


84  _  jfaitbVg  Cbeque  3BooE» 

MARCH  24. 

"But  the  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shall  stab- 
lish  you,  and  keep  you  from  evil." 
2  Thess.  iii.  3. 


are  often  as  devoid  of  reason  as  of 
faith.  There  are  with  us  still  "  unrea 
sonable  and  wicked  men."  There  is  no 
use  in  arguing  with  them  or  trying  to  be  at 
peace  with  them:  they  are  false  at  heart,  and 
deceitful  in  speech.  Well,  what  of  this? 
Shall  we  worry  ourselves  with  them?  No; 
let  us  turn  to  the  Lord,  for  he  is  faithful.  No 
promise  from  his  Word  will  ever  be  broken. 
He  is  neither  unreasonable  in  his  demands 
upon  us,  nor  unfaithful  to  our  claims  upon 
him.  We  have  a  faithful  God.  Be  this  our 

joy. 

He  will  stablish  us  so  that  wicked  men 
shall  not  cause  our  downfall,  and  he  will  keep 
us  so  that  none  of  the  evils  which  now  assail 
us  shall  really  do  us  damage.  What  a  bless 
ing  for  us  that  we  need  not  contend  with  men, 
but  are  allowed  to  shelter  ourselves  in  the 
Lord  Jesus,  who  is  in  truest  sympathy  with 
us.  There  is  one  true  heart,  one  faithful 
mind,  one  never-changing  Love;  there  let 
us  repose.  The  Lord  will  fulfil  the  purpose 
of  his  grace  to  us,  his  servants,  and  we  .need 
not  allow  a  shadow  of  a  fear  to  fall  upon  our 
spirits.  Not  all  that  men  or  devils  can  do 
can  hinder  us  of  the  divine  protection  and 
provision.  This  day  let  us  pray  the  Lord  to 
stablish  and  keep  us. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft* 85 

MARCH   25. 

"When  thou  liest  down,  thou  shalt  not  be 
afraid:  yea,  thou  shalt  lie  down,  and  thy 
sleep  shall  be  sweet." — Prov.  iii.  24. 

Jl 

«fTS  the  reader  likely  to  be  confined  for  a 
||  while  to  the  bed  of  sickness?  let  him  go 
upstairs  without  distress  with  this  prom 
ise  upon  his  heart  — "  When  thou  liest  down, 
thou  shalt  not  be  afraid." 

When  we  go  to  bed  at  night,  let  this  word 
smooth  our  pillow.  We  cannot  guard  our 
selves  in  sleep,  but  the  Lord  will  keep  us 
through  the  night.  Those  who  lie  down  un 
der  the  protection  of  the  Lord  are  as  secure 
as  kings  and  queens  in  their  palaces,  and  a 
great  deal  more  so.  If  with  our  lying  down 
there  is  a  laying  down  of  all  cares  and  am 
bitions,  we  shall  get  refreshment  out  of  our 
beds  such  as  the  anxious  and  covetous  never 
find  in  theirs.  Ill  dreams  shall  be  banished, 
or  even  if  they  come,  we  shall  wipe  out  the 
impression  of  them,  knowing  that  they  are 
only  dreams. 

If  we  sleep  thus  we  shall  do  well.  How 
sweetly  Peter  slept  when  even  the  angel's 
light  did  not  wake  him,  and  he  needed  a  hard 
jog  in  the  side  to  wake  him  up.  And  yet  he 
was  sentenced  to  die  on  the  morrow.  Thus 
have  martyrs  slept  before  their  burning.  "  So 
he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep." 

To  have  sweet  sleep  we  must  have  sweet 
lives,  sweet  tempers,  sweet  meditations,  and 
sweet  love. 


86 ffattb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

MARCH  26. 

"The  Lord  will  strengthen  him  upon  the 
bed  of  languishing." — Ps.  xli.  3. 


that  this  is  a  promise  to  the 
man  wk°  considers  the  poor.     Are  you 
one  of  these?     Then  take  home  the  text, 
but  not  else. 

See  how  in  the  hour  of  sickness  the  God  of 
the  poor  will  bless  the  man  who  cares  for 
the  poor!  The  everlasting  arms  shall  stay 
up  his  soul  as  friendly  hands  and  downy  pil 
lows  stay  up  the  body  of  the  sick.  How 
tender  and  sympathizing  is  this  image;  how 
near  it  brings  our  God  to  our  infirmities  and 
sicknesses!  Who  ever  heard  this  of  the  old 
heathen  Jove,  or  of  the  gods  of  India,  or 
China?  This  is  language  peculiar  to  the  God 
of  Israel ;  he  it  is  who  deigns  to  become  nurse 
and  attendant  upon  good  men.  If  he  smites 
with  one  hand,  he  sustains  with  the  other. 
Oh,  it  is  blessed  fainting  when  one  falls  upon 
the  Lord's  own  bosom,  and  is  borne  thereon! 
Grace  is  the  best  of  restoratives;  divine  love 
is  the  safest  stimulant  for  a  languishing  pa 
tient;  it  makes  the  soul  strong  as  a  giant, 
even  when  the  bones  are  breaking  through  the 
skin.  No  physician  like  the  Lord,  no  tonic 
like  his  promise,  no  wine  like  his  love. 

If  the  reader  has  failed  in  his  duty  to  the 
poor,  let  him  see  what  he  is  losing,  and  at  once 
become  their  friend  and  helper. 


jfattb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  87 


MARCH  27. 

"Draw  nigh  to   God,  and  he  will  draw 
nigh  to  you." 


nearer  we  come  to  God,  the  more 
graciously  will  he  reveal  himself  to  us. 
When  the  prodigal  comes  to  his  father, 
his  father  runs  to  meet  him.  When  the  wan 
dering  dove  returns  to  the  ark,  Noah  puts  out 
his  hand  to  pull  her  in  unto  him.  When  the 
tender  wife  seeks  her  husband's  society,  he 
comes  to  her  on  wings  of  love.  Come  then, 
dear  friend,  let  us  draw  nigh  to  God  who  so 
graciously  awaits  us,  yea,  comes  to  meet  us. 

Did  you  ever  notice  that  passage  in  Isaiah 
Iviii.  9?  There  the  Lord  seems  to  put  himself 
at  the  disposal  of  his  people,  saying  to  them, 
"  Here  I  am."  As  much  as  to  say  — "  What 
have  you  to  say  to  me?  What  can  I  do  for 
you?  I  am  waiting  to  bless  you."  How  can 
we  hesitate  to  draw  near?  God  is  nigh  to 
forgive,  to  bless,  to  comfort,  to  help,  to 
quicken,  to  deliver.  Let  it  be  the  main  point 
with  us  to  get  near  to  God.  This  done,  all 
is  done.  If  we  draw  near  to  others,  they  may 
before  long  grow  weary  of  us  and  leave  us; 
but  if  we  seek  the  Lord  alone,  no  change  will 
come  over  his  mind,  but  he  will  continue  to 
come  nearer  and  yet  nearer  to  us  by  fuller  and 
more  joyful  fellowship. 


88  3fattb'0  Cbeque  JBoofc. 

MARCH   28. 

"The  Lord  shall  make  thee  the  head,  and 
not  the  tail" — Deut.  xxviii.  13. 

jt 

*€FF  we  obey  the  Lord,  he  will  compel  our 

adversaries  to  see  that  his  blessing  rests 

upon  us.     Though  this  be  a  promise  of 

the  law,  yet  it  stands  good  to  the  people  of 

God;  for  Jesus  has  removed  the  curse,  but  he 

has  established  the  blessing. 

It  is  for  saints  to  lead  the  way  among  men 
by  holy  influence:  they  are  not  to  be  the  tail, 
to  be  dragged  hither  and  thither  by  others. 
We  must  not  yield  to  the  spirit  of  the  age, 
but  compel  the  age  to  do  homage  to  Christ. 
If  the  Lord  be  with  us,  we  shall  not  crave 
toleration  for  religion,  but  we  shall  seek  to 
seat  it  on  the  throne  of  society.  Has  not  the 
Lord  Jesus  made  his  people  priests?  Surely 
they  are  to  teach,  and  must  not  be  learners 
from  the  philosophies  of  unbelievers.  Are  we 
not  in  Christ  made  kings  to  reign  upon  the 
earth?  How,  then,  can  we  be  the  servants 
of  custom,  the  slaves  of  human  opinion? 

Have  you,  dear  friend,  taken  up  your  true 
position  for  Jesus?  Too  many  are  silent  be 
cause  diffident,  if  not  cowardly.  Should  we 
allow  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  kept 
in  the  background?  Should  our  religion  drag 
along  as  a  tail?  Should  it  not  rather  lead  the 
way  and  be  the  ruling  force  with  ourselves 
and  others? 


89 


MARCH   29. 

"I  am  with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on 
thee  to  hurt  thee.'3  —  Acts  xviii.  10. 

jl 

SO  long  as  the  Lord  had  work  for  Paul  to 
do  in  Corinth,  the  fury  of  the  mob  was 
restrained.  The  Jews  opposed  them 
selves  and  blasphemed  ;  but  they  could  neither 
stop  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  nor  the  con 
version  of  the  hearers.  God  has  power  over 
the  most  violent  minds.  He  makes  the  wrath 
of  man  to  praise  him  when  it  breaks  forth, 
but  he  still  more  displays  his  goodness  when 
he  restrains  it  ;  and  he  can  restrain  it.  "  By 
the  greatness  of  thine  arm  they  shall  be  as 
still  as  a  stone;  till  thy  people  pass  over,  O 
Lord." 

Do  not,  therefore,  feel  any  fear  of  man  when 
you  know  that  you  are  doing  your  duty.  Go 
straight  on,  as  Jesus  would  have  done,  and 
those  who  oppose  shall  be  as  a  bruised  reed 
and  as  smoking  flax.  Many  a  time  men  have 
had  cause  to  fear  because  they  were  them 
selves  afraid;  but  a  dauntless  faith  in  God 
brushes  fear  aside  like  the  cobwebs  in  a  giant's 
path.  No  man  can  harm  us  unless  the  Lord 
permits.  He  who  makes  the  devil  himself  to 
flee  at  a  word,  can  certainly  control  the  devil's 
agents.  May  be  they  are  already  more  afraid 
of  you  than  you  are  of  them.  Therefore,  go 
forward,  and  where  you  look  to  meet  with 
foes  you  will  find  friends. 


go  Jfattb's  Cbequc  JBoofc. 

MARCH   30. 

"Be  careful  for  nothing;  but  in  everything 
by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiv 
ing  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto 
God.  And  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
all  understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus/' 
Phil.  iv.  6,  7. 


mO  care,  but  all  prayer.  No  anxiety,  but 
much  joyful  communion  with  God. 
Carry  your  desires  to  the  Lord  of  your 
life,  the  guardian  of  your  soul.  Go  to  him 
with  two  portions  of  prayer,  and  one  of  fra 
grant  praise.  Do  not  pray  doubtfully,  but 
thankfully.  Consider  that  you  have  your  pe 
titions,  and  therefore  thank  God  for  his  grace. 
He  is  giving  you  grace,  give  him  thanks. 
Hide  nothing.  Allow  no  want  to  lie  rankling 
in  your  bosom  ;  "  make  known  your  requests." 
Run  not  to  man.  Go  only  to  your  God,  the 
Father  of  Jesus,  who  loves  you  in  him. 

This  shall  bring  you  God's  own  peace.  You 
shall  not  be  able  to  understand  the  peace 
which  you  shall  enjoy.  It  will  enfold  you  in 
its  infinite  embrace.  Heart  and  mind  through 
Christ  Jesus  shall  be  steeped  in  a  sea  of  rest. 
Come  life  or  death,  poverty,  pain,  slander,  you 
shall  dwell  in  Jesus  above  every  ruffling  wind 
or  darkening  cloud.  Will  you  not  obey  this 
dear  command? 

Yes,  Lord,  I  do  believe  thee;  but,  I  be 
seech  thee,  help  mine  unbelief. 


3Paitb'0  Cbeque  JBoofe. 91 

MARCH   31. 

"Be  not  afraid  of  sudden  fear,  neither  of 

the  desolation  of  the  wicked,  when  it  com- 

eth.     For  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  confidence, 

and  shall  keep  thy  foot  from  being  taken" 

Prov.  iii.  25,  26. 

Jl 

HEN  God  is  abroad  in  judgments,  he 
would  not  have  his  people  alarmed. 
He  has  not  come  forth  to  harm,  but 
to  defend  the  righteous. 

He  would  have  them  manifest  courage. 
We  who  enjoy  the  presence  of  God  ought  to 
display  presence  of  mind.  Since  the  Lord 
himself  may  suddenly  come,  we  ought  not  to 
be  surprised  at  anything  sudden.  Serenity 
under  the  rush  and  roar  of  unexpected  evils 
is  a  precious  gift  of  divine  love. 

The  Lord  would  have  his  chosen  display  dis 
crimination,  so  that  they  may  see  that  the 
desolation  of  the  wicked  is  not  a  real  calamity 
to  the  universe.  Sin  alone  is  evil;  the  pun 
ishment  which  follows  thereupon  is  as  a 
preserving  salt  to  keep  society  from  putre 
fying.  We  should  be  far  more  shocked  at 
the  sin  which  deserves  hell  than  at  the  hell 
which  comes  out  of  sin. 

So,  too,  should  the  Lord's  people  exhibit 
great  quietness  of  spirit.  Satan  and  his  ser 
pent  seed  are  full  of  all  subtilty;  but  those 
who  walk  with  God  shall  not  be  taken  in 
their  deceitful  snares.  Go  on,  believer  in 
Jesus,  and  let  the  Lord  be  thy  confidence. 


92  Jfattb'0  GbeQue  JBoofc. 

APRIL   i. 

"The  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall 
not  err  therein."  —  Isa.  xxxv.  8. 

Jl 


way  of  holiness  is  so  straight  and 
plain  that  the  simplest  minds  cannot  go 
astray  if  they  constantly  follow  it.  The 
worldly  wise  have  many  twists  and  turns,  and 
yet  they  make  terrible  blunders,  and  generally 
miss  their  end.  Worldly  policy  is  a  poor 
short-sighted  thing,  and  when  men  choose  it 
as  their  road,  it  leads  them  over  dark  moun 
tains.  Gracious  minds  know  no  better  than  to 
do  as  the  Lord  bids  them  ;  but  this  keeps  them 
in  the  king's  highway,  and  under  royal  pro 
tection. 

Let  the  reader  never  for  a  moment  attempt 
to  help  himself  out  of  a  difficulty  by  a  false 
hood,  or  by  a  questionable  act;  but  let  him 
keep  in  the  middle  of  the  high  road  of  truth 
and  integrity,  and  he  will  be  following  the 
best  possible  course.  In  our  lives  we  must 
never  practise  circular  sailing,  nor  dream  of 
shuffling.  Be  just  and  fear  not.  Follow  Je 
sus  and  heed  no  evil  consequences.  If  the 
worst  of  ills  could  be  avoided  by  wrong-doing, 
we  should,  in  the  very  attempt,  have  fallen 
into  an  evil  worse  than  any  other  ill  could  be. 
God's  way  must  be  the  best  way.  Follow  it 
though  men  think  you  a  fool,  and  you  will  be 
truly  wise. 

Lord,  lead  thy  servants  in  a  plain  path  be 
cause  of  their  enemies. 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  93 

APRIL  2. 

"Meditate  upon  these  things;  give  thyself 
wholly  to  them;  that  thy  profiting  may  ap 
pear  to  all."  —  I  Tim.  iv.  15. 


is,  practically,  a  promise  that,  by 
diligent  meditation  and  the  giving  up  of 
our  whole  mind  to  our  work  for  the  Lord, 
we  shall  make  a  progress  which  all  can  see. 
Not  by  hasty  reading,  but  by  deep  medita 
tion,  we  profit  by  the  Word  of  God.  Not  by 
doing  a  great  deal  of  work  in  a  slovenly  man 
ner,  but  by  giving  our  best  thought  to  what 
we  attempt,  we  shall  get  real  profit.  "  In  all 
labour  there  is  profit,"  but  not  in  fuss  and 
hurry  without  true  heart-energy. 

If  we  divide  ourselves  between  God  and 
mammon,  or  Christ  and  self,  we  shall  make  no 
progress.  We  must  give  ourselves  wholly  to 
holy  things,  or  else  we  shall  be  poor  traders 
in  heavenly  business,  and  at  our  stock-taking 
no  profit  will  be  shown. 

Am  I  a  minister?  Let  me  be  a  minister 
wholly,  and  not  spend  my  energies  upon  sec 
ondary  concerns.  What  have  I  to  do  with 
party  politics,  or  vain  amusements?  Am  I  a 
Christian?  Let  me  make  my  service  of  Jesus 
my  occupation,  my  life-work,  my  one  pursuit. 
We  must  be  in-and-in  with  Jesus,  and  then 
out-and-out  for  Jesus,  or  else  we  shall  make 
neither  progress  nor  profit,  and  neither  the 
church  nor  the  world  will  feel  that  forceful  in 
fluence  which  the  Lord  would  have  us  exer 
cise. 


94  ffaftb's  Cbeque  $oofe, 

*•  —  —  —  '  —  •  • 

APRIL  3. 

"Because  thine  heart  was  tender,  and  thou 
hast  humbled  thyself  before  the  Lord,  when 
thou  heardest  what  I  spake  against  this 
place,  and  against  the  inhabitants  thereof, 
that  they  should  become  a  desolation  and  a 
curse,  and  hast  rent  thy  clothes,  and  wept 
before  me;  I  also  have  heard  thee,  saith 
the  Lord."  —  2  Kings  xxii.  19. 
jl 


despise  warning,  and  perish. 
Happy  is  he  who  trembles  at  the  word 
of  the  Lord.  Josiah  did  so,  and  he 
was  spared  the  sight  of  the  evil  which  the 
Lord  determined  to  send  upon  Judah  because 
of  her  great  sins.  Have  you  this  tenderness? 
Do  you  practise  this  self-humiliation?  Then 
you  also  shall  be  spared  in  the  evil  day.  God 
sets  a  mark  upon  the  men  that  sigh  and  cry 
because  of  the  sin  of  the  times.  The  destroy 
ing  angel  is  commanded  to  keep  his  sword 
in  its  sheath  till  the  elect  of  God  are  sheltered  : 
these  are  best  known  by  their  godly  fear,  and 
their  trembling  at  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Are 
the  times  threatening?  Do  Popery  and  In 
fidelity  advance  with  great  strides,  and  do 
you  dread  national  chastisement  upon  this  pol 
luted  nation?  Well  you  may.  Yet  rest  in 
this  promise,  "  Thou  shalt  be  gathered  into  thy 
grave  in  peace  ;  and  thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all 
the  evil  which  I  will  bring  upon  this  place." 
Better  still,  the  Lord  himself  may  come,  and 
then  the  days  of  our  mourning  shall  be  ended. 


3fattb'0  Gbecjue  Boofc.  95 

APRIL  4. 

"And  I  will  send   hornets   before   thee, 
which  shall  drive  out  the  Hivite,  the  Ca- 
naanite,  and  the  Hittite  from  before  thee!' 
Ex.  xxiii.  28. 


MHAT  the  hornets  were  we  need  not 
consider.  They  were  God's  own 
army,  which  he  sent  before  his  people 
to  sting  their  enemies,  and  render  Israel's 
conquest  easy.  Our  God  by  his  own  chosen 
means  will  fight  for  his  people,  and  gall  their 
foes,  before  they  come  into  the  actual  battle. 
Often  he  confounds  the  adversaries  of  truth 
by  methods  in  which  reformers  themselves 
have  no  hand.  The  air  is  full  of  mysterious 
influences  which  harass  Israel's  foes.  We 
read  in  the  Apocalypse  that  "  the  earth  helped 
the  woman." 

Let  us  never  fear.  The  stars  in  their  cour 
ses  fight  against  the  enemies  of  our  souls. 
Oftentimes  when  we  march  to  the  conflict  we 
find  no  host  to  contend  with.  "  The  Lord 
shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your 
peace."  God's  hornets  can  do  more  than  our 
weapons.  We  could  never  dream  of  the  vic 
tory  being  won  by  such  means  as  Jehovah 
will  use.  We  must  obey  our  marching  orders 
and  go  forth  to  the  conquest  of  the  nations 
for  Jesus,  and  we  shall  find  that  the  Lord  has 
gone  before  us,  and  prepared  the  way  ;  so  that 
in  the  end  we  shall  joyfully  confess,  "  His 
own  right  hand,  and  his  holy  arm,  have  gotten 
him  the  victory." 


g6  JFaftb's  Cbeque  3Boofc. 

APRIL   5. 

"Thou  art  my  servant:  0  Israel,  thou  shall 
not  be  forgotten  of  me."  —  Isa.  xliv.  21. 


Jehovah  cannot  so  forget  his  ser 
vants  as  to  cease  to  love  them.  He 
chose  them  not  for  a  time,  but  for  ever. 
He  knew  what  they  would  be  when  he  called 
them  into  the  divine  family.  He  blots  out 
their  sins  like  a  cloud;  and  we  may  be  sure 
that  he  will  not  turn  them  out  of  doors  for 
iniquities  which  he  has  blotted  out.  It  would 
be  blasphemy  to  imagine  such  a  thing. 

He  will  not  forget  them  so  as  to  cease  to 
think  of  them.  One  forgetful  moment  on  the 
part  of  our  God  would  be  our  ruin.  There 
fore  he  says  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten 
of  me."  Men  forget  us  :  those  whom  we  have 
benefited  turn  against  us:  we  have  no  abiding 
place  in  the  fickle  hearts  of  men  ;  but  God  will 
never  forget  one  of  his  true  servants.  He 
binds  himself  to  us  not  by  what  we  do  for 
him,  but  by  what  he  has  done  for  us.  We 
have  been  loved  too  long  and  bought  at  too 
great  a  price  to  be  now  forgotten.  Jesus  sees 
in  us  his  soul's  travail,  and  that  he  never  can 
forget.  The  Father  sees  in  us  the  spouse  of 
his  Son,  and  the  Spirit  sees  in  us  his  own  ef 
fectual  work.  The  Lord  thinketh  upon  us. 
This  day  we  shall  be  succoured  and  sustained. 
Oh,  that  the  Lord  may  never  be  forgotten  of 
us! 


ffaftb's  Cbcaue  JBooft.  97 

APRIL  6. 

"And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the 
earth:  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord, 
and  his  name  one." — Zech.  xiv.  9. 


prospect!  This  is  no  dream  of 
an  enthusiast,  but  the  declaration  of  the 
infallible  Word.  Jehovah  shall  be 
known  among  all  people,  and  his  gracious 
sway  shall  be,  acknowledged  by  every  tribe 
of  man.  To-day  it  is  far  from  being  so. 
Where  do  any  bow  before  the  Great  King? 
How  much  there  is  of  rebellion!  What  lords 
many,  and  gods  many,  there  are  on  the  earth! 
Even  among  professed  Christians  what  diver 
sities  of  ideas  there  are  about  him  and  his 
gospel !  One  day  there  shall  be  one  King,  one 
Jehovah,  and  one  name  for  the  living  Gid.  O 
Lord,  hasten  it!  We  daily  cry,  Thy  kingdom 
come. 

We  will  not  discuss  the  question  as  to 
when  this  shall  be,  lest  we  lose  the  comfort 
of  the  certainty  that  it  shall  be.  So  surely  as 
the  Holy  Ghost  spake  by  his  prophets,  so 
surely  shall  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  the 
glory  of  the  Lord.  Jesus  did  not  die  in  vain. 
The  Spirit  of  God  worketh  not  in  vain.  The 
Father's  eternal  purposes  shall  not  be  frus 
trated.  Here,  where  Satan  triumphed,  Jesus 
shall  be  crowned,  and  the  Lord  God  Omnip 
otent  shall  reign.  Let  us  go  our  way  to  our 
daily  work  and  warfare  made  strong  in  faith. 


g8  ffaitb's  Cbegue 


APRIL  7. 

"And  all  people  of  the  earth  shall  see  that 
thou  art  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord; 
and  they  shall  be  afraid  of  thee" 
Deut.  xxviii.  10. 


we  can  have  no  reason  to  be  afraid 
of  them.  This  would  show  a  mean 
spirit,  and  be  a  token  of  unbelief  rather 
than  of  faith.  God  can  make  us  so  like  him 
self,  that  men  shall  be  forced  to  see  that  we 
rightly  bear  his  name,  and  truly  belong  to 
the  Holy  Jehovah.  Oh,  that  we  may  obtain 
this  grace,  which  the  Lord  waits  to  bestow  ! 

Be  assured  that  ungodly  men  have  a  fear 
of  true  saints.  They  hate  them,  but  they  also 
fear  them.  Haman  trembled  because  of  Mor- 
decai,  even  when  he  sought  the  good  man's 
destruction.  In  fact,  their  hate  often  arises 
out  of  a  dread  which  they  are  too  proud  to 
confess.  Let  us  pursue  the  path  of  truth  and 
uprightness  without  the  slightest  tremor. 
Fear  is  not  for  us,  but  for  those  who  do  ill 
and  fight  against  the  Lord  of  hosts.  If  in 
deed  the  name  of  the  Eternal  God  is  named 
upon  us,  we  are  secure;  for,  as  of  old,  a  Ro 
man  had  but  to  say,  Romanes  sttm,  I  am  a  Ro 
man,  and  he  could  claim  the  protection  of  all 
the  legions  of  the  vast  empire,  so  every  one 
who  is  a  man  of  God  has  omnipotence  as  his 
guardian,  and  God  will  sooner  empty  heaven 
of  angels  than  leave  a  saint  without  defence. 
Be  braver  than  lions  for  the  right,  for  God 
is  with  you. 


3f  aitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe.  _  99 

APRIL  8. 

"The  Lord  stood  by  him,  and  said,  Be  of 
good  cheer,  Paul:  for  as  thou  hast  testified 
of  me  in  Jerusalem,  so  must  thou  bear  wit 
ness  also  at  Rome^'^-Acts  xxiii.  n. 


HRE  you  a  witness  for  the  Lord,  and  are 
you  just  now  in  danger?  Then  remem 
ber  that  you  are  immortal  till  your  work 
is  done.  If  the  Lord  has  more  witness  for 
you  to  bear,  you  will  live  to  bear  it.  Who  is 
he  that  can  break  the  vessel  which  the  Lord 
intends  again  to  use? 

If  there  is  no  more  work  for  you  to  do  for 
your  Master,  it  cannot  distress  you  that  he 
is  about  to  take  you  home,  and  put  you  where 
you  will  be  beyond  the  reach  of  adversaries. 
Your  witness-bearing  for  Jesus  is  your  chief 
concern,  and  you  cannot  be  stopped  in  it  till 
it  is  finished:  therefore  be  at  peace.  Cruel 
slander,  wicked  misrepresentation,  desertion 
of  friends,  betrayal  by  the  most  trusted  one, 
and  whatever  else  may  come,  cannot  hinder 
the  Lord's  purpose  concerning  you.  The 
Lord  stands  by  you  in  the  night  of  your  sor 
row,  and  he  says,  "Thou  must  yet  bear  wit 
ness  for  me."  Be  calm,  be  filled  with  joy  in 
the  Lord. 

If  you  do  not  need  this  promise  just  now, 
you  may  very  soon.  Treasure  it  up.  Re 
member  also  to  pray  for  missionaries,  and  all 
persecuted  ones,  that  the  Lord  would  preserve 
them  even  to  the  completion  of  their  life 
work. 


ioo  _  ffaltb'0  Cbeque  333ooft> 

APRIL  9. 

"Great  peace  have   they  which  love  thy 
law:  and  nothing  shall  offend  them." 
Ps.  cxix.  165. 


S,  a  true  love  for  the  great  Book  will 
bring  us  great  peace  from  the  great  God, 
and  be  a  great  protection  to  us.  Let  us 
live  constantly  in  the  society  of  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  and  it  will  breed  in  our  hearts  a 
restfulness  such  as  nothing  else  can.  The 
Holy  Spirit  acts  as  a  Comforter  through  the 
Word,  and  sheds  abroad  those  benign  influ 
ences  which  calm  the  tempests  of  the  soul. 

Nothing  is  a  stumbling-block  to  the  man 
who  has  the  Word  of  God  dwelling  in  him 
richly.  He  takes  up  his  daily  cross  and  it 
becomes  a  delight.  For  the  fiery  trial  he  is 
prepared,  and  counts  it  not  strange,  so  as  to 
be  utterly  cast  down  by  it.  He  is  neither 
stumbled  by  prosperity,  as  so  many  are,  nor 
crushed  by  adversity,  as  others  have  been; 
for  he  lives  beyond  the  changing  circum 
stances  of  external  life.  When  his  Lord  puts 
before  him  some  great  mystery  of  the  faith 
which  makes  others  cry,  "  This  is  an  hard 
saying;  who  can  hear  it?  "  the  believer  accepts 
it  without  question;  for  his  intellectual  diffi 
culties  are  overcome  by  his  reverent  awe  of 
the  law  of  the  Lord,  which  is  to  him  the  su 
preme  authority  to  which  he  joyfully  bows. 
Lord,  work  in  us  this  love,  this  peace,  this  rest, 
this  day. 


jfaftb's  Cheque  JBoofc.  101 

APRIL  10. 

"And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Make 

thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  a  pole: 

and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  everyone  that 

is  bitten,  when  he  lookcth  upon  it,  shall  live." 

Num.  xxi.  8. 


is  a  glorious  gospel  type.  Jesus, 
numbered  with  the  transgressors,  hangs 
before  us  on  the  cross.  A  look  to  him 
will  heal  us  of  the  serpent-bite  of  sin;  will 
heal  us  at  once  —  "  When  he  looketh  upon  it, 
he  shall  live."  Let  the  reader  who  is  mourn 
ing  his  sinfulness  note  the  words  —  "  Every 
one  that  looketh  upon  it  shall  live."  Every 
looker  will  find  this  true.  I  have  found  it  so. 
I  looked  to  Jesus  and  lived  at  once.  I  know 
I  did.  Reader,  if  you  look  to  Jesus  you  will 
live  too.  True,  you  are  swelling  with  the 
venom,  and  you  see  no  hope.  True,  also,  there 
is  no  hope  but  this  one.  But  this  is  no  doubt 
ful  cure  —  "  Everyone  that  is  bitten,  when  he 
looketh  upon  it,  shall  live." 

The  brazen  serpent  was  not  lifted  up  as  a 
curiosity  to  be  gazed  upon  by  the  healthy; 
but  its  special  purpose  was  for  those  who  were 
"  bitten."  Jesus  died  as  a  real  Saviour  for 
real  sinners.  Whether  the  bite  has  made  you 
a  drunkard,  or  a  thief,  or  an  unchaste  or  a 
profane  person,  a  look  at  the  Great  Saviour 
will  heal  you  of  these  diseases,  and  make  you 
live  in  holiness  and  communion  with  God. 
Look  and  live. 


io2  tfaitb's  Cbeaue  JSoofc. 

APRIL  ii. 

"And  they  shall  teach  no  more  every  man 
his  neighbour,  and  every  man  his  brother, 
saying,  Know  the  Lord:  for  they  shall  all 
know  me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the 
greatest  of  them,  saith  the  Lord."  —  Jer. 
xxxi.  34. 


,  whatever  else  we  do  not  know, 
we  know  the  Lord.  This  day  is  this 
promise  true  in  our  experience,  and  it  is 
not  a  little  one.  The  least  believer  among  us 
knows  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Not  as  fully  as 
we  desire;  but  yet  truly  and  really  we  know 
the  Lord.  We  not  only  know  doctrines  about 
him,  but  we  know  him.  He  is  our  Father 
and  our  Friend.  We  are  acquainted  with  him 
personally.  We  can  say,  "  My  Lord,  and  my 
God."  We  are  on  terms  of  close  fellowship 
with  God,  and  many  a  happy  season  do  we 
spend  in  his  holy  company.  We  are  no  more 
strangers  to  our  God,  but  the  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  with  us. 

This  is  more  than  nature  could  have  taught 
us.  Flesh  and  blood  has  not  revealed  God 
to  us.  Christ  Jesus  has  made  known  the 
Father  to  our  hearts.  If,  then,  the  Lord  has 
made  us  know  himself,  is  not  this  the  foun 
tain  of  all  saving  knowledge?  To  know  God 
is  eternal  life.  So  soon  as  we  come  to  ac 
quaintance  with  God  we  have  the  evidence  of 
being  quickened  into  newness  of  life.  O  my 
soul,  rejoice  in  this  knowledge,  and  bless  thy 
God  all  this  day! 


ffaftb's  Cbeaue  jBooft.  103 

APRIL  12. 

"For  I  will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  I 
will  remember  their  sin  no  more." 
Jer.  xxxi.  34. 


HEN  we  know  the  Lord,  we  receive 
the  forgiveness  of  sins.  We  know 
him  as  the  God  of  Grace,  passing  by 
our  transgressions.  What  a  joyful  discovery 
is  this! 

But  how  divinely  is  this  promise  worded: 
the  Lord  promises  no  more  to  remember  our 
sins!  Can  God  forget?  He  says  he  will,  and 
he  means  what  he  says.  He  will  regard  us  as 
though  we  had  never  sinned.  The  great 
atonement  so  effectually  removed  all  sin,  that 
it  is  to  the  mind  of  God  no  more  in  existence. 
The  believer  is  now  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  ac 
cepted  as  Adam  in  his  innocence;  yea,  more 
so,  for  he  wears  a  divine  righteousness,  and 
that  of  Adam  was  but  human. 

The  Great  Lord  will  not  remember  our 
sins  so  as  to  punish  them,  or  so  as  to  love  us 
one  atom  the  less  because  of  them.  As  a 
debt  when  paid  ceases  to  be  a  debt,  even  so 
doth  the  Lord  make  a  complete  obliteration 
of  the  iniquity  of  his  people. 

When  we  are  mourning  over  our  trans 
gressions  and  shortcomings,  and  this  is  our 
duty  as  long  as  we  live,  let  us  at  the  same 
time  rejoice  that  they  will  never  be  mentioned 
against  us.  This  makes  us  hate  sin.  God's 
free  pardon  makes  us  anxious  never  again  to 
grieve  him  by  disobedience. 


104  ffaftb's  Cbeaue  JBoofc. 

APRIL  13. 

"Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it 
may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious 
body/' — Phil.  iii.  21. 


kFTEN  when  we  are  racked  with  pain, 
and  unable  to  think  of  worship,  we  feel 
that  this  indeed  is  "  the  body  of  our  hu 
miliation";  and  when  we  are  tempted  by  the 
passions  which  rise  from  the  flesh  we  do  not 
think  the  word  "vile"  at  all  too  vigorous  a 
translation.  Our  bodies  humble  us;  and  that 
is  about  the  best  thing  they  do  for  us.  Oh, 
that  we  were  duly  lowly,  because  our  bodies 
ally  us  with  animals,  and  even  link  us  with 
the  dust! 

But  our  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus,  shall 
change  all  this.  We  shall  be  fashioned  like 
his  own  body  of  glory.  This  will  take  place 
in  all  who  believe  in  Jesus.  By  faith  their 
souls  have  been  transformed,  and  their  bodies 
will  undergo  such  a  renewal  as  shall  fit  them 
for  their  regenerated  spirits.  How  soon  this 
grand  transformation  will  happen  we  cannot 
tell;  but  the  thought  of  it  should  help  us  to 
bear  the  trials  of  to-day,  and  all  the  woes  of 
the  flesh.  In  a  little  while  we  shall  be  as 
Jesus  now  is.  No  more  aching  brows,  no 
more  swollen  limbs,  no  more  dim  eyes,  no 
more  fainting  hearts.  The  old  man  shall  be 
no  more  a  bundle  of  infirmities,  nor  the  sick 
man  a  mass  of  agony.  "  Like  unto  his  glo 
rious  body."  What  an  expression !  Our  flesh 
shall  rest  in  hope  of  such  a  resurrection! 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBooft. 105 

APRIL  14. 

"He  shall  choose  our  inheritance  for  us." 
Ps.  xlvii.  4. 


,UR  enemies  would  allot  us  a  very  dreary 
portion,  but  we  are  not  left  in  their 
hands.  The  Lord  will  cause  us  to  stand 
in  our  lot,  and  our  place  is  appointed  by  his 
infinite  wisdom.  A  wiser  mind  than  our  own 
arranges  our  destiny.  The  oraaining  of  all 
things  is  with  God,  and  we  are  glad  to  have 
it  so;  we  choose  that  God  should  choose  for 
us.  If  we  might  have  our  own  way  we  would 
wish  to  let  all  things  go  in  God's  way. 

Being  conscious  of  our  own  folly,  we  would 
not  desire  to  rule  our  own  destinies.  We 
feel  safer  and  more  at  ease  when  the  Lord 
steers  our  vessel  than  we  could  possibly  be 
if  we  could  direct  it  according  to  our  own 
judgment.  Joyfully  we  leave  the  painful  pres 
ent  and  the  unknown  future  with  our  Father, 
our  Saviour,  our  Comforter. 

O  my  soul,  this  day  lay  down  thy  wishes  at 
Jesus'  feet!  If  thou  hast  of  late  been  some 
what  wayward  and  wilful,  eager  to  be  and  to 
do  after  thine  own  mind,  now  dismiss  thy 
foolish  self,  and  place  the  reins  in  the  Lord's 
hands.  Say,  "  He  shall  choose."  If  others 
dispute  the  sovereignty  of  the  Lord,  and  glory 
in  the  freewill  of  man,  do  thou  answer  them, 
"  He  shall  choose  for  me."  It  is  my  freest 
choice  to  let  him  choose.  As  a  free  agent,  I 
elect  that  he  should  have  absolute  sway. 


106  Jfaltb's  Cbeque  3Booft. 

APRIL  15. 

"The    desire    of   the   righteous   shall    be 
granted."  —  Prov.  x.  24. 


it  is  a  righteous  desire  it  is  safe 
for  God  to  grant  it.  It  would  be  neither 
good  for  the  man  himself,  nor  for  so 
ciety  at  large,  that  such  a  promise  should  be 
made  to  the  unrighteous.  Let  us  keep  the 
Lord's  commands,^  and  he  will  rightfully  have 
respect  to  our  desires. 

When  righteous  men  are  left  to  desire  un 
righteous  desires,  they  will  not  be  granted 
to  them.  But  then  these  are  not  their  real 
desires;  they  are  their  wanderings  or  blun 
ders;  and  it  is  well  that  they  should  be  re 
fused.  Their  gracious  desires  shall  come  be 
fore  the  Lord,  and  he  will  not  say  them  nay. 

Does  the  Lord  deny  us  our  requests  for  a 
time?  Let  the  promise  for  to-day  encourage 
us  to  ask  again.  Has  he  denied  us  altogether? 
We  will  thank  him  still,  for  it  always  was  our 
desire  that  he  should  deny  us  if  he  judged  a 
denial  to  be  best. 

As  to  some  things,  we  ask  very  boldly.  Our 
chief  desires  are  for  holiness,  usefulness,  like 
ness  to  Christ,  preparedness  for  heaven. 
These  are  the  desires  of  grace  rather  than  of 
nature  —  the  desires  of  the  righteous  man 
rather  than  of  the  mere  man.  God  will  not 
stint  us  in  these  things,  but  will  do  for  us 
exceeding  abundantly.  "  Delight  thyself  also 
in  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires 
of  thine  heart." 


ffaitb's  Cbegue  JBooft, 107 

APRIL  16. 

"In  that  day  shall  there  be  upon  the  bells 
of  the  horses,  HOLINESS  UNTO  THE  LORD." 
Zech.  xiv.  20. 


MAPPY  day  when  all  things  shall  be  con 
secrated,  and  the  horses'  bells  shall  ring 
out  holiness  to  the  Lord !  That  day  has 
come  to  me.  Do  I  not  make  all  things  holy 
to  God?  These  garments,  when  I  put  them 
on  or  take  them  off,  shall  they  not  remind  me 
of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  Jesus,  my  Lord? 
Shall  not  my  work  be  done  as  unto  the  Lord? 
Oh,  that  to-day  my  clothes  may  be  vestments, 
my  meals  sacraments,  my  house  a  temple,  my 
table  an  altar,  my  speech  incense,  and  myself 
a  priest!  Lord,  fulfil  thy  promise,  and  let 
nothing  be  to  me  common  or  unclean. 

Let  me  in  faith  expect  this.  Believing  it 
to  be  so,  I  shall  be  helped  to  make  it  so.  As 
I  myself  am  the  property  of  Jesus,  my  Lord 
may  take  an  inventory  of  all  I  have,  for  it  is 
altogether  his  own;  and  I  resolve  to  prove  it 
to  be  so  by  the  use  to  which  I  put  it  this 
day.  From  morning  till  evening  I  would  or 
der  all  things  by  a  happy  and  holy  rule.  My 
bells  shall  ring  —  why  should  they  not?  Even 
my  horses  shall  have  bells  —  who  has  such  a 
right  to  music  as  the  saints  have?  But  all  my 
bells,  my  music,  my  mirth,  shall  be  turned  to 
holiness,  and  shall  ring  out  the  name  of  "  The 
Happy  God." 


io8  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3Boofe. 

APRIL  17. 

"When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 
maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with 
him."  —  Prov.  xvi.  7. 


MUST  see  that  my  ways  please  the  Lord. 
Even  then  I  shall  have  enemies;  and, 
perhaps,  all  the  more  certainly  because 
I  endeavour  to  do  that  which  is  right.  But 
what  a  promise  this  is!  The  Lord  will  make 
the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him,  and  abate  it 
so  that  it  shall  not  distress  me. 

He  can  constrain  an  enemy  to  desist  from 
harming  me,  even  though  he  has  a  mind  to  do 
so.  This  he  did  with  Laban,  who  pursued 
Jacob,  but  did  not  dare  to  touch  him.  Or  he 
can  subdue  the  wrath  of  the  enemy,  and  make 
him  friendly,  as  he  did  with  Esau,  who  met 
Jacob  in  a  brotherly  manner,  though  Jacob 
had  dreaded  that  he  would  smite  him  and  his 
family  with  the  sword.  The  Lord  can  also 
convert  a  furious  adversary  into  a  brother  in 
Christ,  and  a  fellow-worker,  as  he  did  with 
Saul  of  Tarsus.  Oh,  that  he  would  do  this  in 
every  case  where  a  persecuting  spirit  appears! 

Happy  is  the  man  whose  enemies  are  made 
to  be  to  him  what  the  lions  were  to  Daniel 
in  the  den,  quiet  and  companionable!  When 
I  meet  death,  who  is  called  the  last  enemy, 
I  pray  that  I  may  be  at  peace.  Only  let  my 
great  care  be  to  please  the  Lord  in  all  things. 
Oh,  for  faith  and  holiness;  for  these  are  a 
pleasure  unto  the  Most  High! 


ffaitb'6  Cbeque  JBoofe. 109 

APRIL  18. 

"I  will  be  with  thee:  I  will  not  fail  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee." — Josh.  i.  5. 
# 

HIS  word  to  Joshua  is  often  quoted ;  it  is 
the  basis  of  that  New  Testament  word, 
"  He  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee." 

Beloved,  a  life  of  warfare  is  before  us,  but 
the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  with  us.  Are  we  called 
to  lead  a  great  but  fickle  people?  This  prom 
ise  guarantees' us  all  the  wisdom  and  prudence 
that  we  shall  need.  Have  we  to  contend  with 
cunning  and  powerful  enemies?  Here  is 
strength  and  valour,  prowess  and  victory. 
Have  we  a  vast  heritage  to  win?  By  this 
sign  we  shall  achieve  our  purpose;  the  Lord 
himself  is  with  us. 

It  would  be  woe  to  us  indeed  if  Jehovah 
could  fail  us;  but,  as  this  can  never  be,  the 
winds  of  disquietude  are  laid  to  sleep  in  the 
caverns  of  divine  faithfulness.  On  no  one  oc 
casion  will  the  Lord  desert  us.  Happen  what 
may,  he  will  be  at  our  side.  Friends  drop 
from  us,  their  help  is  but  an  April  shower; 
but  God  is  faithful,  Jesus  is  the  same  for  ever, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  abideth  in  us. 

Come,  my  heart,  be  calm  and  hopeful  to 
day.  Clouds  may  gather,  but  the  Lord  can 
blow  them  away.  Since  God  will  not  fail  me, 
my  faith  shall  not  fail;  and,  as  he  will  not 
forsake  me,  neither  will  I  forsake  him.  Oh 
for  a  restful  faith! 


iio  _  ffaitb'g  Cheque  ffooft. 

APRIL  19. 

"For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God:  Behold,  I, 
even  I,  will  both  search  my  sheep,  and  seek 
them  out."  —  Ez.  xxxiv.  n. 


he  does  at  the  first  when  his  elect 
are  like  wandering  sheep  that  know  not 
the  shepherd  or  the  fold.  How  wonder 
fully  doth  the  Lord  find  out  his  chosen!  Je 
sus  is  great  as  a  seeking  shepherd  as  well  as 
a  saving  shepherd.  Though  many  of  those 
his  Father  gave  him  have  gone  as  near  to 
hell-gate  as  they  well  can,  yet  the  Lord  by 
searching  and  seeking  discovers  them,  and 
draws  nigh  to  them  in  grace.  He  has  sought 
out  us:  let  us  have  good  hope  for  those  who 
are  laid  upon  our  hearts  in  prayer,  for  he  will 
find  them  out  also. 

The  Lord  repeats  this  process  when  any  of 
his  flock  stray  from  the  pastures  of  truth  and 
holiness.  They  may  fall  into  gross  error,  sad 
sin,  and  grievous  hardness;  but  yet  the  Lord, 
who  has  become  a  surety  for  them  to  his  Father, 
will  not  suffer  one  of  them  to  go  so  far  as  to 
perish.  He  will  by  providence  and  grace  pur 
sue  them  into  foreign  lands,  into  abodes  of 
poverty,  into  dens  of  obscurity,  into  deeps  of 
despair;  he  will  not  lose  one  of  all  that  the 
Father  has  given  him.  It  is  a  point  of  honour 
with  Jesus  to  seek  and  to  save  all  the  flock, 
without  a  single  exception.  What  a  promise 
to  plead,  if  at  this  hour  I  am  compelled  to  cry, 
"  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep  !  " 


Cbcque  JSooft.  m 


APRIL  20. 
The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  —  Rom.  i.  17. 


*€F  SHALL  not  die.  I  can,  I  do  believe  in 
the  Lord  my  God,  and  this  faith  will 
keep  me  alive.  I  would  be  numbered 
among  those  who  in  their  lives  are  just;  but 
even  if  I  were  perfect  I  would  not  try  to  live 
by  my  righteousness;  I  would  cling  to  the 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  still  live  by  faith 
in  him  and  by  nothing  else.  If  I  were  able 
to  give  my  body  to  be  burned  for  my  Lord 
Jesus,  yet  I  would  not  trust  in  my  own  cour 
age  and  constancy,  but  still  would  live  by 
faith. 

"Were  I  a  martyr  at  the  stake 
I'd  plead  my  Saviour's  name; 
Intreat  a  pardon  for  his  sake, 
And  urge  no  other  claim." 

To  live  by  faith  is  a  far  surer  and  happier 
thing  than  to  live  by  feelings  or  by  works. 
The  branch,  by  living  in  the  vine,  lives  a  bet 
ter  life  than  it  would  live  by  itself,  even  if  it 
were  possible  for  it  to  live  at  all  apart  from 
the  stem.  To  live  by  clinging  to  Jesus,  by 
deriving  all  from  him,  is  a  sweet  and  sacred 
thing.  If  even  the  most  just  must  live  in  this 
fashion,  how  much  more  must  I  who  am  a 
poor  sinner!  Lord,  I  believe.  I  must  trust 
thee  wholly.  What  else  can  I  do?  Trusting 
thee  is  my  life.  I  feel  it  to  be  so.  I  will  abide 
by  this  even  to  the  end. 


Cbeque 


APRIL  21. 

"He  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poor  lendeth 
unto  the  Lord;  and  that  which  he  hath  given 
will  he  pay  him  again."  —  Prov.  xix.  17. 
<£ 

ME  are  to  give  to  the  poor  out  of  pity. 
Not  to  be  seen  and  applauded,  much 
less  to  get  influence  over  them;  but 
out  of  pure  sympathy  and  compassion  we 
must  give  them  help. 

We  must  not  expect  to  get  anything  back 
from  the  poor,  not  even  gratitude;  but  we 
should  regard  what  we  have  done  as  a  loan  to 
the  Lord.  He  undertakes  the  obligation,  and, 
if  we  look  to  him  in  the  matter,  we  must  not 
look  to  the  second  party.  What  an  honour 
the  Lord  bestows  upon  us  when  he  conde 
scends  to  borrow  of  us!  That  merchant  is 
greatly  favoured  who  has  the  Lord  on  his 
books.  It  would  seem  a  pity  to  have  such  a 
name  down  for  a  paltry  pittance  ;  let  us  make 
it  a  heavy  amount.  The  next  needy  man 
that  comes  this  way,  let  us  help  him. 

As  for  re-payment,  we  can  hardly  think  of 
it,  and  yet  here  is  the  Lord's  note  of  hand. 
Blessed  be  his  name,  his  promise  to  pay  is 
better  than  gold  and  silver.  Are  we  run 
ning  a  little  short  through  the  depression  of 
the  times?  We  may  venture  humbly  to  pre 
sent  this  bill  at  the  Bank  of  Faith.  Has  any 
one  of  our  readers  been  a  bit  of  a  screw  to 
the  poor?  Poor  soul.  May  the  Lord  for 
give  him. 


Jfaitb'0  Cbeque  JBoofc.  113 

APRIL  22. 

"The  Lord  openeth  the  eyes  of  the  blind: 
the  Lord  raiseth  them  that  are  bowed  down." 
Ps.  cxlvi.  8. 

Jl 

HM  I  bowed  down?  Then  let  me  urge 
this  word  of  grace  before  the  Lord.  It 
is  his  way,  his  custom,  his  promise,  his 
delight,  to  raise  up  them  that  are  bowed 
down.  Is  it  a  sense  of  sin,  and  a  consequent 
depression  of  spirit,  which  now  distresses 
me?  Then  the  work  of  Jesus  is,  in  this  case, 
made  and  provided  to  raise  me  up  into  rest. 
O  Lord,  raise  me,  for  thy  mercy's  sake! 

Is  it  a  sad  bereavement,  or  a  great  fall  in 
circumstances?  Here  again  the  Comforter 
has  undertaken  to  console.  What  a  mercy 
for  us  that  one  person  of  the  Sacred  Trinity 
should  become  the  Comforter!  This  work 
will  be  well  done,  since  such  a  glorious  One 
has  made  it  his  peculiar  care. 

Some  are  so  bowed  down  that  only  Jesus 
can  loose  them  from  their  infirmity,  but  he 
can,  and  he  will,  do  it.  He  can  raise  us  up 
to  health,  to  hope,  to  happiness.  He  has 
often  done  so  under  former  trials,  and  he  is 
the  same  Saviour,  and  will  repeat  his  deeds 
of  loving-kindness.  We  who  are  to-day  bowed 
down  and  sorrowful,  shall  yet  be  set  on  high, 
and  those  who  now  mock  at  us  shall  be  greatly 
ashamed.  What  an  honour  to  be  raised  up 
by  the  Lord!  It  is  worth  while  to  be  bowed 
down  that  we  may  experience  his  upraising. 
8 


ii4  _  ffattb'g  dbeque  JBooft. 

APRIL  23. 

"He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what 
the  Spirit  saith  unto  the  churches:  He  that 
overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  second 
death"—  Rev.  ii.  11. 


first  death  we  must  endure  unless 
the  Lord  should  suddenly  come  to  his 
temple.  For  this  let  us  abide  in  readi 
ness,  awaiting  it  without  fear,  since  Jesus  has 
transformed  death  from  a  dreary  cavern  into 
a  passage  leading  to  glory. 

The  thing  to  be  feared  is  not  the  first,  but 
the  second  death  ;  not  the  parting  of  the  soul 
from  the  body,  but  the  final  separation  of  the 
entire  man  from  God.  This  is  death  indeed. 
This  death  kills  all  peace,  joy,  happiness,  hope. 
When  God  is  gone  all  is  gone.  Such  a  death 
is  far  worse  than  ceasing  to  be  :  it  is  existence 
without  the  life  which  makes  existence  worth 
the  having. 

Now,  if  by  God's  grace  we  fight  on  to  the 
end,  and  conquer  in  the  glorious  war,  no 
second  death  can  lay  its  chill  finger  upon  us. 
We  shall  have  no  fear  of  death  and  hell,  for 
we  shall  receive  a  crown  of  life  which  fadeth 
not  away.  How  this  nerves  us  for  the  fight! 
Eternal  life  is  worth  a  life's  battle.  To  es 
cape  the  hurt  of  the  second  death  is  a  thing 
worth  struggling  for  throughout  a  lifetime. 

Lord,  give  us  faith,  so  that  we  may  over 
come,  and  then  grant  us  grace  to  remain  un 
harmed  though  sin  and  Satan  dog  our  heels! 


ffaitb's  Cbcque  JBoofc.  115 

APRIL  24. 

"Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse, 
that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house,  and 
tyrove  me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows  of 
heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,  that 
there  shall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it." 
Mai.  iii.  10. 


read  and  plead  this  promise  with- 
out  noticing  the  condition  upon  which 
the  blessing  is  promised.  We  cannot 
expect  heaven  to  be  opened  or  blessing  poured 
out  unless  we  pay  our  dues  unto  the  Lord  our 
God  and  to  his  cause.  There  would  be  no 
lack  of  funds  for  holy  purposes  if  all  pro 
fessing  Christians  paid  their  fair  share. 

Many  are  poor  because  they  rob  God. 
Many  churches,  also,  miss  the  visitations  of 
the  Spirit  because  they  starve  their  minis 
ters.  If  there  is  no  temporal  meat  for  God's 
servants,  we  need  not  wonder  if  their  ministry 
has  but  little  food  in  it  for  our  souls.  When 
missions  pine  for  means,  and  the  work  of  the 
Lord  is  hindered  by  an  empty  treasury,  how 
can  v/e  look  for  a  large  amount  of  soul-pros 
perity? 

Come,  come!  What  have  I  given  of  late? 
Have  I  been  mean  to  my  God?  Have  I 
stinted  my  Saviour?  This  will  never  do. 
Let  me  give  my  Lord  Jesus  his  tithe  by  help 
ing  the  poor,  and  aiding  his  work,  and  then  I 
shall  prove  his  power  to  bless  me  on  a  large 
scale. 


ffattb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe, 


APRIL  25. 

"The  just  man  walketh  in  his  integrity: 
his  children  are  blessed  after  him." 
Prov.  xx.  7. 


HNXIETY  about  our  family  is  natural, 
but  we  shall  be  wise  if  we  turn  it  into 
care  about  our  own  character.  If  we 
walk  before  the  Lord  in  integrity,  we  shall 
do  more  to  bless  our  descendants  than  if  we 
bequeathed  them  large  estates.  A  father's 
holy  life  is  a  rich  legacy  for  his  sons. 

The  upright  man  leaves  his  heirs  his  ex 
ample,  and  this  in  itself  will  be  a  mine  of 
true  wealth.  How  many  men  may  trace  their 
success  in  life  to  the  example  of  their  parents  ! 

He  leaves  them  also  his  repute  !  Men  think 
all  the  better  of  us  as  the  sons  of  a  man  who 
could  be  trusted,  the  successors  of  a  trades 
man  of  excellent  repute.  Oh,  that  all  young 
men  were  anxious  to  keep  up  the  family  name  ! 

Above  all,  he  leaves  his  children  his  prayers 
and  the  blessing  of  a  prayer-hearing  God,  and 
these  make  our  offspring  to  be  favoured  among 
the  sons  of  men.  God  will  save  them  even 
after  we  are  dead.  Oh,  that  they  might  be 
saved  at  once! 

Our  integrity  may  be  God's  means  of  saving 
our  sons  and  daughters.  If  they  see  the  truth 
of  our  religion  proved  by  our  lives,  it  may  be 
that  they  will  believe  in  Jesus  for  themselves. 
Lord,  fulfil  this  word  to  my  household. 


Jfaftb'0  Cbeque  asooft*  117 

APRIL  26. 

"And  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in 
all  that  thou  dost!' — Deut.  xv.  18. 


HN  Israelitish  master  was  to  give  his 
bond-servant  liberty  in  due  time,  and 
when  he  left  his  service  he  was  to  start 
him  in  life  with  a  liberal  portion.  This  was 
to  be  done  heartily  and  cheerfully,  and  then 
the  Lord  promised  to  bless  the  generous  act. 
The  spirit  of  this  precept,  and,  indeed,  the 
whole  law  of  Christ,  binds  us  to  treat  work 
people  well.  We  ought  to  remember  how  the 
Lord  has  dealt  with  us,  and  that  this  renders 
it  absolutely  needful  that  we  should  deal  gra 
ciously  with  others.  It  becomes  those  to  be 
generous  who  are  the  children  of  a  gracious 
God.  How  can  we  expect  our  great  Master 
to  bless  us  in  our  business  if  we  oppress  those 
who  serve  us? 

What  a  benediction  is  here  set  before  the 
liberal  mind!  To  be  blessed  in  all  that  we 
do  is  to  be  blessed  indeed.  The  Lord  will 
send  us  this  partly  in  prosperity,  partly  in 
content  of  mind,  and  partly  in  a  sense  of  his 
favour,  which  is  the  best  of  all  blessings.  He 
can  make  us  feel  that  we  are  under  his  special 
care,  and  are  surrounded  by  his  peculiar  love. 
This  makes  this  earthly  life  a  joyous  prelude 
to  the  life  to  come.  God's  blessing  is  more 
than  a  fortune.  It  maketh  rich,  and  addeth 
no  sorrow  therewith. 


ii8  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

APRIL  27. 

"The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  con- 
cerneth  me!'  —  Ps.  cxxxviii.  8. 


ME  who  has  begun  will  carry  on  the  work 
which  is  being  wrought  within  my  soul. 
The  Lord  is  concerned  about  everything 
that  concerns  me.  All  that  is  now  good,  but 
not  perfect,  the  Lord  will  watch  over,  and  pre 
serve,  and  carry  out  to  completion.  This  is  a 
great  comfort.  I  could  not  perfect  the  work 
of  grace  myself.  Of  that  I  am  quite  sure,  for 
I  fail  every  day,  and  have  only  held  on  so 
long  as  I  have  because  the  Lord  has  helped 
me.  If  the  Lord  were  to  leave  me,  all  my 
past  experience  would  go  for  nothing,  and 
I  should  perish  from  the  way.  But  the  Lord 
will  continue  to  bless  me.  He  will  perfect 
my  faith,  my  love,  my  character,  my  life-work. 
He  will  do  this  because  he  has  begun  a  work 
in  me.  He  gave  me  the  concern  I  feel,  and, 
in  a  measure,  he  has  fulfilled  my  gracious  aspi 
rations.  He  never  leaves  a  work  unfinished; 
this  would  not  be  for  his  glory,  nor  would  it 
be  like  him.  He  knows  how  to  accomplish 
his  gracious  design,  and  though  my  own  evil 
nature,  and  the  world,  and  the  devil,  all  con 
spire  to  hinder  him,  I  do  not  doubt  his  prom 
ise.  He  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth 
me,  and  I  will  praise  him  for  ever.  Lord,  let 
thy  gracious  work  make  some  advance  this 
day! 


3Fattb'6  Gbeque  JBoofc.  ng 

APRIL  28. 

"I  will  duo  ell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them; 
and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be 
my  people/' — 2  Cor.  vi.  16. 


HERE  is  a  mutual  interest.  Each  belongs 
to  each.  God  is  the  portion  of  his  peo 
ple,  and  the  chosen  people  are  the  por 
tion  of  their  God.  The  saints  find  in  God 
their  chief  possession,  and  he  reckons  them 
to  be  his  peculiar  treasure.  What  a  mine  of 
comfort  lies  in  this  fact  for  each  believer! 

This  happy  condition  of  mutual  interest 
leads  to  mutual  consideration.  God  will  al 
ways  think  of  his  own  people,  and  they  will 
always  think  of  him.  This  day  my  God  will 
perform  all  things  for  me;  what  can  I  do 
for  him?  My  thoughts  ought  to  run  towards 
him,  for  he  thinketh  upon  me.  Let  me  make 
sure  that  it  is  so,  and  not  be  content  with 
merely  admitting  that  so  it  ought  to  be. 

This,  again,  leads  to  mutual  fellowship. 
God  dwells  in  us,  and  we  dwell  in  him;  he 
walks  with  us,  and  we  walk  with  God. 
Happy  communion  this! 

Oh,  for  grace  to  treat  the  Lord  as  my  God: 
to  trust  him,  and  to  serve  him,  as  his  Godhead 
deserves!  Oh,  that  I  could  love,  worship, 
adore,  and  obey  Jehovah  in  spirit  and  in  truth ! 
this  is  my  heart's  desire.  When  I  shall  attain 
to  it,  I  shall  have  found  my  heaven.  Lord, 
help  me!  Be  my  God  in  helping  me  to  know 
thee  as  my  God,  for  Jesus'  sake. 


120 3f  aitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

APRIL  29. 

"Say  not  thou,  I  will  recompense  evil;  but 
wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  save  thee" 
Prov.  xx.  22. 
,* 

not  in  haste.  Let  anger  cool  down. 
Say  nothing  and  do  nothing  to  avenge 
yourself.  You  will  be  sure  to  act  un 
wisely  if  you  take  up  the  cudgels  and  fight 
your  own  battles;  and,  certainly,  you  will  not 
show  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  no 
bler  to  forgive,  and  let  the  offence  pass.  To 
let  an  injury  rankle  in  your  bosom,  and  to 
meditate  revenge,  is  to  keep  old  wounds  open, 
and  to  make  new  ones.  Better  forget  and  for 
give. 

Peradventure,  you  say  that  you  must  do 
something  or  be  a  great  loser;  then  do  what 
this  morning's  promise  advises :  "  Wait  on 
the  Lord,  and  he  shall  save  thee."  This  ad 
vice  will  not  cost  you  six-and-eight-pence, 
but  it  is  worth  far  more.  Be  calm  and  quiet. 
Wait  upon  the  Lord :  tell  him  your  grievance : 
spread  Rab-shakeh's  letter  before  the  Lord, 
and  this  of  itself  will  be  an  ease  to  your  bur 
dened  mind.  Besides,  there  is  the  promise, 
"  He  shall  save  thee."  God  will  find  a  way 
of  deliverance  for  you.  How  he  will  do  it 
neither  you  nor  I  can  guess,  but  do  it  he  will. 
If  the  Lord  save  you,  this  will  be  a  deal  better 
than  getting  into  petty  quarrels,  and  cover 
ing  yourself  with  filth  by  wrestling  with  the 
unclean.  Be  no  more  angry.  Leave  your 
suit  with  the  Judge  of  all. 


" 


ffaitb's  Cbeaue  JBoofc*  121 

APRIL  30. 

To  Jinn  that  overcometh  zvill  I  give  to 
eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  and  will  give  him  a 
white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name 
written,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  he 
that  receiveth  it."  —  Rev.  ii.  17. 


JnC  Y  heart,  be  thou  stirred  up  to  persevere 

£  I  I  J  m  tne  n°ty  war'  f°r  t^ie  reward  of  vic 
tory  is  great.  To-day  we  eat  of  heav 
enly  food  which  falls  about  our  camps;  the 
food  of  the  wilderness,  the  food  which  comes 
from  heaven,  the  food  which  never  fails  the 
pilgrims  to  Canaan.  But  there  is  reserved  for 
us  in  Christ  Jesus  a  still  higher  degree  of  spir 
itual  life,  and  a  food  for  it  which,  as  yet,  is 
hidden  from  our  experience.  In  the  golden 
pot  which  was  laid  up  in  the  ark  there  was  a 
portion  of  manna  hidden  away,  which  though 
kept  for  ages  never  grew  stale.  No  one  ever 
saw  it  ;  it  was  hid  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant, 
in  the  Holy  of  holies.  Even  so,  the  highest 
life  of  the  believer  is  hid  with  Christ,  in  God. 
We  shall  come  to  it  soon.  Being  made  vic 
torious  through  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus, 
we  shall  eat  of  the  King's  meat,  and  feed  upon 
royal  dainties.  We  shall  feed  upon  Jesus. 
He  is  our  "  hidden  manna  "  as  well  as  the 
manna  of  the  wilderness.  He  is  all  in  all  to 
us  in  our  highest  as  well  as  in  our  lowest  es 
tate.  He  helps  us  to  fight,  gives  us  the  vic 
tory,  and  then  is  himself  our  reward.  Lord, 
help  me  to  overcome. 


122 ffattb'g  Cbegue  JSooft. 

MAY  i. 

"The  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 
forth  before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the 
trees  of  the  Held  shall  clap  their  hands." 
Is.  Iv.  12. 


HEN  sin  is  pardoned,  our  greatest  sor- 
row  is  ended,  and  our  truest  pleasure 
begins.  Such  is  the  joy  which  the 
Lord  bestows  upon  his  reconciled  ones,  that 
it  overflows  and  fills  all  nature  with  delight. 
The  material  world  has  latent  music  in  it,  and 
a  renewed  heart  knows  how  to  bring  it  out 
and  make  it  vocal.  Creation  is  the  organ,  and 
a  gracious  man  finds  out  its  keys,  lays  his  hand 
thereon,  and  wakes  the  whole  system  of  the 
universe  to  the  harmony  of  praise.  Mountains 
and  hills,  and  other  great  objects,  are,  as  it 
were,  the  bass  of  the  chorus;  while  the  trees 
of  the  wood,  and  all  things  that  have  life,  take 
up  the  air  of  the  melodious  song. 

When  God's  word  is  made  to  prosper  among 
us,  and  souls  are  saved,  then  everything  seems 
full  of  song.  When  we  hear  the  confessions 
of  young  believers,  and  the  testimonies  of  well- 
instructed  saints,  we  are  made  so  happy  that 
we  must  praise  the  Lord,  and  then  it  seems  as 
if  rocks  and  hills,  and  woods  and  fields, 
echoed  our  joy-notes,  and  turned  the  world 
into  an  orchestra.  Lord,  on  this  happy  May 
day  lead  me  out  into  thy  tuneful  world  as 
rich  in  praise  as  a  lark  in  full  song. 


2faftb'0  dbeque  JBooft. 


MAY  2. 

"He  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the 
Spirit  reap  life  everlasting." — Gal.  vi.  8. 


SOWING  looks  like  a  losing  business,  for 
we  put  good  corn  into  the  ground  never 
to  see  it  any  more.  Sowing  to  the  Spirit 
seems  a  very  fanciful,  dreamy  business;  for 
we  deny  ourselves,  and  apparently  get  noth 
ing  for  it.  Yet  if  we  sow  to  the  Spirit  by 
studying  to  live  unto  God,  seeking  to  obey 
the  will  of  God,  and  laying  ourselves  out  to 
promote  his  honour,  we  shall  not  sow  in  vain. 
Life  shall  be  our  reward,  even  everlasting  life. 
This  we  enjoy  here  as  we  enter  into  the 
knowledge  of  God,  communion  with  God,  and 
enjoyment  of  God.  This  life  flows  on  like  an 
ever-deepening,  ever-widening  river,  till  it 
bears  us  to  the  ocean  of  infinite  felicity,  where 
the  life  of  God  is  ours  for  ever  and  ever. 

Let  us  not  this  day  sow  to  our  flesh,  for  the 
harvest  will  be  corruption,  since  flesh  always 
tends  that  way;  but  with  holy  self-conquest 
let  us  live  for  the  highest,  purest,  and  most 
spiritual  ends,  seeking  to  honour  our  most 
holy  Lord  by  obeying  his  most  gracious 
Spirit.  What  a  harvest  will  that  be  when  we 
reap  life  everlasting!  What  sheaves  of  end 
less  bliss  will  be  reaped!  What  a  festival 
will  that  harvest  be!  Lord,  make  us  such 
•reapers,  for  thy  Son's  sake. 


124  ffaitb's  Cbeque  $oofc. 

MAY  3. 

"And  let  it  be  when  thou  hearest  the  sound 
of  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees, 
that  then  thou  shalt  bestir  thyself:  for  then 
shall  the  Lord  go  out  before  thee,  to  smite 
the  host  of  the  Philistines"  —  2  Sam.  v.  24. 
Jl 


are  signs  of  the  Lord's  moving 
which  should  move  us.  The  Spirit  of 
God  blows  where  he  listeth,  and  we  hear 
the  sound  thereof.  Then  is  the  time  for  us  to 
be  more  than  ever  astir.  We  must  seize  the 
golden  opportunity,  and  make  the  most  we 
can  of  it.  It  is  ours  to  fight  the  Philistines 
at  all  times;  but  when  the  Lord  himself  goes 
out  before  us,  then  we  should  be  specially 
valiant  in  the  war. 

The  breeze  stirred  the  tops  of  the  trees,  and 
David  and  his  men  took  this  for  the  signal  for 
an  onslaught,  and  at  their  advance  the  Lord, 
himself,  smote  the  Philistines.  Oh,  that  this 
day  the  Lord  may  give  us  an  opening  to  speak 
for  him  with  many  of  our  friends!  Let  us  be 
on  the  watch  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  hope 
ful  opening  when  it  comes.  Who  knows  but 
this  may  be  a  day  of  good  tidings;  a  season 
of  soul-winning.  Let  us  keep  our  ear  open 
to  hear  the  rustle  of  the  wind,  and  our  minds 
ready  to  obey  the  signal.  Is  not  this  promise 
"  then  shall  the  Lord  go  out  before  thee,"  a 
sufficient  encouragement  to  play  the  man? 
Since  the  Lord  goes  before  us,  we  dare  not 
hold  back. 


ffaitb's  Cbcque  JBoofc.  125 

MAY  4. 

"Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy: 
when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise;  when  I  sit  in  dark 
ness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light  unto  me." 
Micah  vii.  8. 


may  express  the  feeling  of  a  man  or 
woman  down-trodden  and  oppressed. 
Our  enemy  may  put  out  our  light  for 
a  season.  There  is  sure  hope  for  us  in  the 
Lord ;  and  if  we  are  trusting  in  him,  and  hold 
ing  fast  our  integrity,  our  season  of  down- 
casting  and  darkness  will  soon  be  over.  The 
insults  of  the  foe  are  only  for  a  moment.  The 
Lord  will  soon  turn  their  laughter  into  lamen 
tation,  and  our  sighing  into  singing. 

What  if  the  great  enemy  of  souls  should  for 
a  while  triumph  over  us,  as  he  has  triumphed 
over  better  men  than  we  are,  yet  let  us  take 
heart,  for  we  shall  overcome  him  before  long. 
We  shall  rise  from  our  fall,  for  our  God  has 
not  fallen,  and  he  will  lift  us  up.  We  shall 
not  abide  in  darkness,  although  for  the  mo 
ment  we  sit  in  it;  for  our  Lord  is  the  fountain 
of  light,  and  he  will  soon  bring  us  a  joyful 
day.  Let  us  not  despair,  or  even  doubt. 
One  turn  of  the  wheel  and  the  lowest  will  be 
at  the  top.  Woe  unto  those  who  laugh  now, 
for  they  shall  mourn  and  weep  when  their 
boasting  is  turned  into  everlasting  contempt. 
But  blessed  are  all  holy  mourners,  for  they 
shall  be  divinely  comforted. 


126    .          ffattb's  Cbeque  Boofc. 

MAY  5. 

"The  Lord  thy  God  will  turn  thy  cap 
tivity" — Deut.  xxx.  3. 

Jl 

kOD'S  own  people  may  sell  themselves 
into  captivity  by  sin.  A  very  bitter  fruit 
is  this  of  an  exceeding  bitter  root. 
What  a  bondage  it  is  when  the  child  of  God 
is  sold  under  sin,  held  in  chains  by  Satan, 
deprived  of  his  liberty,  robbed  of  his  power 
in  prayer,  and  his  delight  in  the  Lord !  Let  us 
watch  that  we  come  not  into  such  bondage; 
but  if  this  has  already  happened  to  us,  let  us 
by  no  means  despair. 

But  we  cannot  be  held  in  slavery  for  ever. 
The  Lord  Jesus  has  paid  too  high  a  price  for 
our  redemption  to  leave  us  in  the  enemy's 
hand.  The  way  to  freedom  is,  "  Return  unto 
the  Lord  thy  God."  Where  we  first  found 
salavation  we  shall  find  it  again.  At  the  foot 
of  Christ's  cross  confessing  sin  we  shall  find 
pardon  and  deliverance.  Moreover,  the  Lord 
will  have  us  obey  his  voice  according  to  all 
that  he  has  commanded  us,  and  we  must  do 
this  with  all  our  heart,  and  all  our  soul,  and 
then  our  captivity  shall  end. 

Often  depression  of  spirit  and  great  misery 
of  soul  are  removed  as  soon  as  we  quit  our 
idols  and  bow  ourselves  in  obedience  before 
the  living  God.  We  need  not  be  captives. 
We  may  return  to  Zion's  citizenship,  and  that 
speedily.  Lord,  turn  our  captivity! 


3faltb's  Gbeque  JSooft.  127 

MAY  6. 

"Let  not  thine  heart  envy  sinners:  but  be 
thou  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long. 
For  surely  there  is  an  end;  and  thine  expec 
tation  shall  not  be  cut  off." 

Prov.  xxiii.  17,  18. 


MHEN  we  see  the  wicked  prosper  we 
are  apt  to  envy  them.  When  we  hear 
the  noise  of  their  mirth,  and  our  own 
spirit  is  heavy,  we  half  think  that  they  have 
the  best  of  it.  This  is  foolish  and  sinful.  If 
we  knew  them  better,  and  specially  if  we  re 
membered  their  end,  we  should  pity  them. 

The  cure  for  envy  lies  in  living  under  a  con 
stant  sense  of  the  divine  presence,  worshipping 
God  and  communing  with  him  all  the  day 
long,  however  long  the  day  may  seem.  True 
religion  lifts  the  soul  into  a  higher  region, 
where  the  judgment  becomes  more  clear,  and 
the  desires  are  more  elevated.  The  more  of 
heaven  there  is  in  our  lives,  the  less  of  earth 
we  shall  covet.  The  fear  of  God  casts  out 
envy  of  men. 

The  death-blow  of  envy  is  a  calm  considera 
tion  of  the  future.  The  wealth  and  glory  of 
the  ungodly  are  a  vain  show.  This  pompous 
appearance  flashes  out  for  an  hour,  and  then 
is  extinguished.  What  is  the  prosperous  sin 
ner  the  better  for  his  prosperity  when  judg 
ment  overtakes  him?  As  for  the  godly  man, 
his  end  is  peace  and  blessedness,  and  none 
can  rob  him  of  his  joy;  wherefore,  let  him 
forego  envy,  and  be  filled  with  sweet  content. 


128  tfaftb's  Cbeque  JBooft. 

MAY  7. 

"And  there  shall  cleave  nought  of  the 
cursed  thing  to  thine  hand:  that  the  Lord 
may  turn  from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger t 
and  show  thee  mercy,  and  have  compassion 
upon  thee,  and  multiply  thee,  as  he  hath 
sworn  unto  thy  fathers/' — Deut.  xiii.  17. 
Jl 

«fTSRAEL  must  conquer  idolatrous  cities, 
I  and  destroy  all  the  spoil,  regarding  all 
that  had  been  polluted  by  idolatry  as  an 
accursed  thing  to  be  burned  with  fire.  Now, 
sin  of  all  sorts  must  be  treated  by  Christians 
in  the  same  manner.  We  must  not  allow  a 
single  evil  habit  to  remain.  It  is  now  war 
to  the  knife  with  sins  of  all  sorts  and  sizes, 
whether  of  the  body,  the  mind,  or  the  spirit. 
We  do  not  look  upon  this  giving  up  of  evil 
as  deserving  mercy,  but  we  regard  it  as  a 
fruit  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  we  would 
on  no  account  miss. 

When  God  causes  us  to  have  no  mercy  on 
our  sins,  then  he  has  great  mercy  on  us. 
When  we  are  angry  with  evil,  God  is  no  more 
angry  with  us.  When  we  multiply  our  efforts 
against  iniquity,  the  Lord  multiplies  our  bless 
ings.  The  way  of  peace,  of  growth,  of  safety, 
of  joy  in  Christ  Jesus,  will  be  found  by  follow 
ing  out  these  words :  "  There  shall  nought  of 
the  cursed  thing  cleave  to  thine  hand."  Lord, 
purify  me  this  day.  Compassion,  prosperity, 
increase,  and  joy,  will  surely  be  given  to  those 
who  put  away  sin  with  solemn  resolution. 


Jfaftb's  Cbeque  $oofc* 


MAY  8. 

"Go  ye  also  vnto  the  vineyard;  and  what- 
soever  is  right,  that  shall  ye  receive" 
Matt.  xx.  7. 


•^  l^4ES,  there  is  work  in  Christ's  vineyard  for 
[_[/  old  bodies.  It  is  the  eleventh  hour,  and 
^-^  yet  he  will  let  us  work.  What  great 
grace  is  this!  Surely  every  old  man  ought 
to  jump  at  this  invitation!  After  men  are 
advanced  in  years  nobody  wants  them  as 
servants;  they  go  from  shop  to  shop,  and  em 
ployers  look  at  their  grey  hairs,  and  shake 
their  heads.  But  Jesus  will  engage  old  peo 
ple,  and  give  them  good  wages  too!  This  is 
mercy  indeed.  Lord,  help  the  aged  to  enlist 
in  thy  service  without  an  hour's  delay. 

But  will  the  Lord  pay  wages  to  worn-out 
old  men?  Do  not  doubt  it.  He  says  he  will 
give  you  what  is  right  if  you  will  work  in  his 
field.  He  will  surely  give  you  grace  here  and 
glory  hereafter.  He  will  grant  present  com 
fort  and  future  rest;  strength  equal  to  yoUr 
day,  and  a  vision  of  glory  when  the  night  of 
death  comes  on.  All  these  the  Lord  Jesus 
will  as  freely  give  to  the  aged  convert  as  to 
one  who  enters  his  service  in  his  youth. 

Let  me  tell  this  to  some  unsaved  old  man 
or  old  woman,  and  pray  the  Lord  to  bless  it, 
for  Jesus'  sake.  Where  can  I  find  such  per 
sons?  I  will  be  on  the  look-out  for  them, 
and  kindly  tell  them  the  news. 
9 


tfaitb'a  Cbeaue 


MAY  9. 

"For  our  heart  shall  rejoice  in  him,  be 
cause  we  have  trusted  in  his  holy  name." 
Ps.  xxxiii.  21. 


root  of  faith  produces  the  flower  of 
heart-joy.  We  may  not  at  the  first  re 
joice,  but  it  comes  in  due  time.  We  trust 
the  Lord  when  we  are  sad,  and  in  due  season 
he  so  answers  our  confidence  that  our  faith 
turns  to  fruition  and  we  rejoice  in  the  Lord. 
Doubt  breeds  distress,  but  trust  means  joy  in 
the  long  run. 

The  assurance  expressed  by  the  Psalmist  in 
this  verse  is  really  a  promise  held  out  in  the 
hands  of  holy  confidence.  Oh  for  grace  to  ap 
propriate  it.  If  we  do  not  rejoice  at  this  mo 
ment,  yet  we  shall  do  so,  as  surely  as  David's 
God  is  our  God. 

Let  us  meditate  upon  the  Lord's  holy  name, 
that  we  may  trust  him  the  better  and  rejoice 
the  more  readily.  He  is  in  character,  holy, 
just,  true,  gracious,  faithful  and  unchanging. 
Is  not  such  a  God  to  be  trusted?  He  is  all- 
wise,  almighty,  and  everywhere  present,  can 
we  not  cheerfully  rely  upon  him?  Yes,  we 
will  do  so  at  once,  and  do  so  without  reserve. 
Jehovah-Jireh  will  provide,  Jehovah-Shalom 
will  send  peace,  Jehovah-Tsidkenu  will  jus 
tify,  Jehovah-Shammah  will  be  for  ever  near, 
and  in  Jehovah-Nissi  we  will  conquer  every 
foe.  They  that  know  thy  name  will  trust 
thee;  and  they  that  trust  thee  will  rejoice  in 
thee,  O  Lord. 


jfaftb's  Cbcque  3Boofc.  131 

MAY  10. 

"So  that  we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  is 
my  helper,  and  I  will  not  fear  what  man 
shall  do  unto  me."  —  Heb.  xiii.  6. 

Jl 


God  will  never  leave  nor  for- 

us»  we  mav  we^  ke  content  with 
such  things  as  we  have.  Since  the  Lord 
is  ours,  we  cannot  be  left  without  a  friend, 
a  treasure,  and  a  dwelling-place.  This  assur 
ance  may  make  us  feel  quite  independent  of 
men.  Under  such  high  patronage  we  do  not 
feel  tempted  to  cringe  before  our  fellowmen, 
and  ask  of  them  permission  to  call  our  lives 
our  own  ;  but  what  we  say  we  boldly  say,  and 
defy  contradiction. 

He  who  fears  God  has  nothing  else  to  fear. 
We  should  stand  in  such  awe  of  the  living 
Lord  that  all  the  threats  that  can  be  used  by 
the  proudest  persecutor  should  have  no  more 
effect  upon  us  than  the  whistling  of  the  wind. 
Man  in  these  days  cannot  do  so  much  against 
us  as  he  could  when  the  apostle  wrote  the 
verse  at  the  head  of  this  page.  Racks  and 
stakes  are  out  of  fashion.  Giant  Pope  cannot 
burn  the  pilgrims  now.  If  the  followers  of 
false  teachers  try  mockery  and  scorn,  we  do 
not  wonder  at  it,  for  the  men  of  this  world 
cannot  love  the  heavenly  seed.  What  then? 
We  must  bear  the  world's  scorn.  It  breaks 
no  bones.  God  helping  us,  let  us  be  bold,  and 
when  the  world  rages  let  it  rage,  but  let  us 
not  fear  it. 


132  ffaftb's  Cbeque  36oofe* 

MAY  ii. 

"Gad,  a  troop  shall  overcome  him:  but  he 
shall  overcome  at  the  last."  —  Gen.  xlix.  19. 


SOME  of  us  have  been  like  the  tribe  of 
Gad.  Our  adversaries  for  a  while  were 
too  many  for  us,  they  came  upon  us  like 
a  troop.  Yes,  and  for  the  moment  they  over 
came  us;  and  they  exulted  greatly  because  of 
their  temporary  victory.  Thus  they  only 
proved  the  first  part  of  the  family  heritage  to 
be  really  ours,  for  Christ's  people,  like  Dan, 
shall  have  a  troop  overcoming  them.  This 
being  overcome  is  very  painful,  and  we  should 
have  despaired  if  we  had  not  by  faith  believed 
the  second  line  of  our  father's  benedictioji, 
"  He  shall  overcome  at  the  last."  "  All's  well 
that  ends  well,"  said  the  world's  poet;  and 
he  spoke  the  truth.  A  war  is  to  be  judged, 
not  by  its  first  successes  or  defeats,  but  by 
that  which  happens  "  at  the  last."  The  Lord 
will  give  to  truth  and  righteousness  victory 
"at  the  last";  and,  as  Mr.  Bunyan  says,  that 
means  for  ever,  for  nothing  can  come  after  the 
last. 

What  we  need  is  patient  perseverance  in 
well-doing,  calm  confidence  in  our  glorious 
Captain.  Christ,  our  Lord  Jesus,  would  teach 
us  his  holy  art  of  setting  the  face  like  a  flint 
to  go  through  with  work  or  suffering  till  we 
can  say,  "  It  is  finished."  Hallelujah.  Vic 
tory!  Victory!  We  believe  the  promise. 
"  He  shall  overcome  at  the  last." 


3faUb'0  Gbeque  ffiooft*  133 

MAY  12. 

'Whoso  keepcth  the  fig  tree  shall  eat  the 
fruit  thereof ;  so  he  that  waitcth  on  his  mas 
ter  shall  be  honoured." — Prov.  xxvii.  18. 


ME  who  tends  the  fig  tree  has  figs  for  his 
pains,  and  he  who  waits  on  a  good  mas 
ter  has  honour  as  his  reward.  Truly 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  very  best  of  masters,  and 
it  is  an  honour  to  be  allowed  to  do  the  least  act 
for  his  sake.  To  serve  some  lords  is  to  watch 
over  a  crab  tree  and  eat  the  crabs  as  one's 
wages;  but  to  serve  my  Lord  Jesus  is  to  keep 
a  fig  tree  of  the  sweetest  figs.  His  service 
is  in  itself  delight,  continuance  in  it  is  pro 
motion,  success  in  it  is  blessedness  below,  and 
the  reward  for  it  is  glory  above. 

Our  greatest  honours  will  be  gathered  in 
that  season  when  the  figs  will  be  ripe,  even 
in  the  next  world.  Angels  who  are  now  our 
servitors  will  bear  us  home  when  our  day's 
work  is  done.  Heaven,  where  Jesus  is,  will 
be  our  honourable  mansion,  eternal  bliss  our 
honourable  portion,  and  the  Lord  himself  our 
honourable  occupation.  Who  can  imagine  the 
full  meaning  of  this  promise  — "  He  that 
waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  honoured"? 

Lord,  help  me  to  wait  upon  my  Master. 
Let  me  leave  all  idea  of  honour  to  the  hour 
when  thou  thyself  shalt  honour  me.  May  thy 
Holy  Spirit  make  me  a  lowly  and  patient 
worker  and  waiter! 


134  ffaitb's  Cheque 


MAY  13. 

"And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star." 
Rev.  ii.  28. 


mNTIL  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows 
flee  away,  what  a  blessing  it  is  to  see  in 
Jesus  "  the  morning  star  "  !  I  remember 
when  we  read  in  the  newspapers  the  idle  tale 
that  the  star  of  Bethlehem  had  again  appeared. 
On  enquiry  we  found  that  it  was  only  "  the 
morning  star  "  ;  but  no  great  mistake  had  been 
made  after  all. 

It  is  best  to  see  Jesus  as  the  sun;  but  when 
we  cannot  do  so,  the  next  best  thing  is  to  see 
him  as  that  star  which  prophesies  the  day, 
and  shows  that  the  .eternal  light  is  near  at 
hand.  If  I  am  not  to-day  all  that  I  hope  to  be, 
yet  I  see  Jesus,  and  that  assures  me  that  I 
shall  one  day  be  like  him.  A  sight  of  Jesus 
by  faith  is  the  pledge  of  beholding  him  in 
his  glory  and  being  transformed  into  his  im 
age.  If  I  have  not  at  this  hour  all  the  light 
and  joy  I  could  desire,  yet  I  shall  have  it; 
for  as  surely  as  I  see  the  morning  star  I  shall 
see  the  day.  The  morning  star  is  never  far 
from  the  sun. 

Come,  my  soul,  has  the  Lord  given  thee  the 
morning  star?  Dost  thou  hold  fast  that 
truth,  grace,  hope,  and  love  which  the  Lord 
has  given  thee?  Then  in  this  thou  hast  the 
dawn  of  coming  glory.  He  that  makes  thee 
overcome  evil,  and  persevere  in  righteousness, 
has  therein  given  thee  the  morning  star. 


ffaftb'0  Cbeque  JBooft.  135 

MAY  14. 

"Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord: 
for  he  hath  torn,  and  he  ivill  heal  us;  he 
hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up." 
Hosea  vi.  i. 


+ff"T  is  the  Lord's  way  to  tear  before  he 
heals.  This  is  the  honest  love  of  his 
heart,  and  the  sure  surgery  of  his  hand. 
He  also  bruises  before  he  binds  up,  or  else  it 
would  be  uncertain  work.  The  law  comes 
before  the  gospel;  the  sense  of  need  before 
the  supply  of  it.  Is  the  reader  now  under 
the  convincing,  crushing  hand  of  the  Spirit? 
Has  he  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to 
fear?  This  is  a  salutary  preliminary  to  real 
gospel  healing  and  binding  up. 

Do  not  despair,  dear  heart,  but  come  to  the 
Lord  with  all  thy  jagged  wounds,  black 
bruises,  and  running  sores.  He  alone  can 
heal,  and  he  delights  to  do  it.  It  is  our  Lord's 
office  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  and  he  is 
gloriously  at  home  at  it.  Let  us  not  linger, 
but  at  once  return  unto  the  Lord  from  whom 
we  have  gone  astray.  Let  us  show  him  our 
gaping  wounds,  and  beseech  him  to  know 
his  own  work,  and  complete  it.  Will  a  sur 
geon  make  an  incision,  and  then  leave  his  pa 
tient  to  bleed  to  death?  Will  the  Lord  pull 
down  our  old  house,  and  then  refuse  to  build 
us  a  better  one?  Dost  thou  ever  wantonly  in 
crease  the  misery  of  poor  anxious  souls? 
That  be  far  from  thee,  O  Lord. 


136 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  38ooft0 

MAY  15. 

"I  will  set  him  on  high,  because  he  hath 
known  my  name." — Ps.  xci.  14. 


^ 


the  Lord  say  this  to  me?  Yes,  if 
I  have  known  his  name.  Blessed  be 
the  Lord,  I  am  no  stranger  to  him.  I 
have  tried  him  and  proved  him,  and  known 
him,  and,  therefore,  do  I  trust  him.  I  know 
his  name  as  a  sin-hating  God,  for  by  his 
Spirit's  convincing  power  I  have  been  taught 
that  he  will  never  wink  at  evil.  But  I  also 
know  him  as  the  sin-pardoning  God  in  Christ 
Jesus,  for  he  has  forgiven  me  all  trespasses. 
His  name  is  faithfulness,  and  I  know  it,  for 
he  has  never  forsaken  me  though  my  troubles 
have  multiplied  upon  me. 

This  knowledge  is  a  gift  of  grace,  and  the 
Lord  makes  it  to  be  the  reason  why  he  grants 
another  grace-gift,  namely,  setting  on  high. 
This  is  grace  upon  grace.  Observe  that  if  we 
climb  on  high,  the  position  may  be  dangerous ; 
but  if  the  Lord  sets  us  there,  it  is  safe.  He 
may  raise  us  to  great  usefulness,  to  eminent 
experiences,  to  success  in  service,  to  leader 
ship  among  workers,  to  a  father's  place  among 
the  little  ones.  If  he  does  not  do  this,  he  may 
set  us  on  high  by  near  fellowship,  clear  in 
sight,  holy  triumph,  and  gracious  anticipation 
of  eternal  glory.  When  God  sets  us  on  high, 
Satan  himself  cannot  pull  us  down.  Oh,  that 
this  may  be  our  case  all  through  this  day ! 


jfaftb's  Cbcque  JBooft.  137 

MAY  1  6. 

"Blessed  are  the  merciful:  for  they  shall 
obtain  mercy."  —  Matt.  v.  7. 


*fFT  is  not  meet  that  the  man  who  will  not 

forgive  should  be  forgiven,  nor  shall  he 

who  will  not  give  to  the  poor  have  his 

own  wants  relieved.     God  will  measure  to  us 

with  our  own  bushels,  and  those  who  have 

been   hard   masters   and   hard   creditors,   will 

find    that    the    Lord    will    deal    hardly    with 

them.     "  He    shall    have    judgment    without 

mercy,  that  hath  shewed  no  mercy.'* 

This  day  let  us  try  to  give  and  to  forgive. 
Let  us  mind  the  two  bears  —  bear  and  for 
bear.  Let  us  be  kind,  and  gentle,  and  ten 
der.  Let  us  not  put  harsh  constructions  upon 
men's  conduct,  nor  drive  hard  bargains,  nor 
pick  foolish  quarrels,  nor  be  difficult  to  please. 
Surely  we  wish  to  be  blessed,  and  we  also 
want  to  obtain  mercy:  let  us  be  merciful,  that 
we  may  have  mercy.  Let  us  fulfil  the  condi 
tion,  that  we  may  earn  the  beatitude.  Is  it 
not  a  pleasant  duty  to  be  kind?  Is  there  not 
much  more  sweetness  in  it  than  in  being  an 
gry  and  ungenerous?  Why,  there  is  a  bless 
edness  in  the  thing  itself!  Moreover,  the  ob 
taining  of  mercy  is  a  rich  reward.  What  but 
sovereign  grace  could  suggest  such  a  prom 
ise  as  this?  We  are  merciful  to  our  fellow- 
mortal  in  pence,  and  the  Lord  forgives  us 
"all  that  debt." 


138 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

MAY  17. 

"The  upright  shall  have  good  things  in 
possession." — Prov.  xxviii.  10. 


Book  of  Proverbs  is  also  a  Book 
of  Promises.  Promises  ought  to  be 
proverbs  among  the  people  of  God. 
This  is  a  very  remarkable  one.  We  are  ac 
customed  to  think  of  our  good  things  as  in 
reversion,  but  here  we  are  told  that  we  shall 
have  them  in  possession. 

Not  all  the  malice  and  cunning  of  our  ene 
mies  can  work  our  destruction:  they  shall  fall 
into  the  pit  which  they  have  digged.  Our 
inheritance  is  so  entailed  upon  us  that  we  shall 
not  be  kept  out  of  it,  nor  so  turned  out  of  the 
way  as  to  miss  it. 

But  what  have  we  now?  We  have  a  quiet 
conscience  through  the  precious  blood  of 
Jesus.  We  have  the  love  of  God  set  upon  us 
beyond  all  change.  We  have  power  with 
God  in  prayer  in  all  time  of  need.  We  have 
the  providence  of  God  to  watch  over  us,  the 
angels  of  God  to  minister  to  us,  and,  above 
all,  the  Spirit  of  God  to  dwell  in  us.  In  fact, 
all  things  are  ours.  "  Whether  things  pres 
ent  or  things  to  come:  all  are  yours."  Jesus 
is  ours.  Yea,  the  divine  Trinity  in  Unity  is 
ours.  Hallelujah.  Let  us  not  pine  and 
whine,  and  stint  and  slave,  since  we  have  good 
things  in  possession.  Let  us  live  on  our  God 
and  rejoice  in  him  all  the  day.  Help  us,  O 
Holy  Ghost! 


ffaftb's  Gbeaue  JBooft*  139 

MAY  1 8. 

"And  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that 
the  locust  hath  eaten." — Joel  ii.  25. 


•^  l^ES,  those  wasted  years  over  which  we 
l|/  sigh  shall  be  restored  to  us.  God  can 
£-^  give  us  such  plentiful  grace  that  we 
shall  crowd  into  the  remainder  of  our  days 
as  much  of  service  as  will  be  some  recom 
pense  for  those  years  of  unregeneracy  over 
which  we  mourn  in  humble  penitence. 

The  locusts  of  backsliding,  worldliness, 
lukewarmness,  are  now  viewed  by  us  as  a 
terrible  plague.  Oh  that  they  had  never  come 
near  us!  The  Lord  in  mercy  has  now  taken 
them  away,  and  we  are  full  of  zeal  to  serve 
him.  Blessed  be  his  name,  we  can  raise  such 
harvests  of  spiritual  graces  as  shall  make  our 
former  barrenness  to  disappear.  Through 
rich  grace  we  can  turn  to  account  our  bitter 
experience,  and  use  it  to  warn  others.  We 
can  become  the  more  rooted  in  humility,  child 
like  dependence,  and  penitent  spirituality,  by 
reason  of  our  former  shortcomings.  If  we  are 
the  more  watchful,  zealous,  and  tender,  we 
shall  gain  by  our  lamentable  losses.  The 
wasted  years,  by  a  miracle  of  love,  can  be  re 
stored.  Does  it  seem  too  great  a  boon?  Let 
us  believe  for  it,  and  live  for  it,  and  we  may  yet 
realize  it,  even  as  Peter  became  all  the  more 
useful  a  man  after  his  presumption  was  cured 
by  his  discovered  weakness.  Lord,  aid  us  by 
thy  grace. 


140  ffaitb's  Gbeque  3Book. 

MAY  19. 

"Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,  If  thou 
return,  then  will  I  bring  thee  again,  and  thou 
shalt  stand  before  me:  and  if  thou  take  forth 
the  precious  from  the  vile,  thou  shalt  be  as 
my  mouth/'  —  Jer.  xv.  19. 


kOOR  Jeremiah!  Yet  why  do  we  say  so? 
The  weeping  prophet  was  one  of  the 
choicest  servants  of  God,  and  honored 
by  him  above  many.  He  was  hated  for  speak 
ing  the  truth.  The  word  which  was  so  sweet 
to  him  was  bitter  to  his  hearers,  yet  he  was 
accepted  of  his  Lord.  He  was  commanded  to 
abide  in  his  faithfulness,  and  then  the  Lord 
would  continue  to  speak  through  him.  He 
was  to  deal  boldly  and  truthfully  with  men, 
and  perform  the  Lord's  winnowing  work  upon 
the  professors  of  his  day,  and  then  the  Lord 
gave  him  this  word,  "  Thou  shalt  be  as  my 
mouth/' 

What  an  honour!  Should  not  every 
preacher,  yea,  every  believer,  covet  it?  For 
God  to  speak  by  us,  what  a  marvel  !  We  shall 
speak  sure,  pure  truth;  and  we  shall  speak  it 
with  power.  Our  word  shall  not  return  void; 
it  shall  be  a  blessing  to  those  who  receive  it, 
and  those  who  refuse  it  shall  do  so  at  their 
peril.  Our  lips  shall  feed  many.  We  shall 
arouse  the  sleeping  and  call  the  dead  to  life. 

O  dear  reader,  pray  that  it  may  be  so  with 
the  writer,  and  with  all  the  sent  servants  of 
our  Lord. 


Jfaftb'8  Cbeque  JSoofc.  141 

MAY  20. 

"I  will  go  before  thee,  and  make  the 
crooked  places  straight:  I  will  break  in  pieces 
the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  in  sunder  the 
bars  of  iron.'3  —  Isa.  xlv.  2. 


was  for  Cyrus;  but  it  is  evermore 
the  heritage  of  all  the  Lord's  own  spir 
itual  servants.  Only  let  us  go  forward 
by  faith,  and  our  way  will  be  cleared  for  us. 
Crooks  and  turns  of  human  craft  and  Satanic 
subtlety  shall  be  straightened  for  us;  we  shall 
not  need  to  track  their  devious  windings.  The 
gates  of  brass  shall  be  broken,  and  the  iron 
bars  which  fastened  them  shall  be  cut  asunder. 
We  shall  not  need  the  battering  ram  nor  the 
crow-bar:  the  Lord  himself  will  do  the  impos 
sible  for  us,  and  the  unexpected  shall  be  a 
fact. 

Let  us  not  sit  down  in  coward  fear.  Let  us 
press  onward  in  the  path  of  duty  ;  for  the  Lord 
hath  said  it,  "  I  will  go  before  thee."  Ours 
not  to  reason  why;  ours  but  to  dare  and  dash 
forward.  It  is  the  Lord's  work,  and  he  will 
enable  us  to  do  it;  all  impediments,  must  yield 
before  him.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  I  will  break 
in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass?  "  What  can  hin 
der  his  purpose  or  balk  his  decrees?  Those 
who  serve  God  have  infinite  resources.  The 
way  is  clear  to  faith  though  barred  to  human 
strength.  When  Jehovah  says,  "  I  will,"  as 
he  does  twice  in  this  promise,  we  dare  not 
doubt. 


142  3faltb'0  Gbeque 


MAY  21. 

"//  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 
themselves  upon  the  earth."  —  Eccl.  xi.  3. 


MHY,   then,    do   we    dread   the   clouds 
which  now   darken  our  sky?     True, 
for  a  while  they  hide  the  sun,  but  the 
sun  is  not  quenched;  he  will  shine  out  again 
before   long.     Meanwhile   those   black   clouds 
are  filled  with  rain;  and  the  blacker  they  are, 
the   more   likely    they   are   to   yield   plentiful 
showers.     How    can    we    have    rain    without 
clouds? 

Our  troubles  have  always  brought  us  bless 
ings,  and  they  always  will.  They  are  the  dark 
chariots  of  bright  grace.  These  clouds  will 
empty  themselves  before  long,  and  every  ten 
der  herb  will  be  the  gladder  for  the  shower. 
Our  God  may  drench  us  with  grief,  but  he  will 
not  drown  us  with  wrath  ;  nay,  he  will  refresh 
us  with  mercy.  Our  Lord's  love-letters  often 
come  to  us  in  black-edged  envelopes.  His 
wagons  rumble,  but  they  are  loaded  with 
benefits.  His  rod  blossoms  with  sweet  flowers 
and  nourishing  fruits.  Let  us  not  worry 
about  the  clouds,  but  sing  because  May  flow 
ers  are  brought  to  us  through  the  April  clouds 
and  showers. 

O  Lord,  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  thy  feet! 
How  near  thou  art  in  the  cloudy  and  dark 
day!  Love  beholds  thee,  and  is  glad.  Faith 
sees  the  clouds  emptying  themselves  and 
ing  the  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  side. 


JFaitb'0  Cbeque  $oofc*  143 

MAY  22. 

"Though  I  walk  in  the  midst  of  trouble, 

thou  wilt  receive  me:  thou  shalt  stretch  forth 

thine    hand    against    the    wrath    of    mine 

enemies,  and  thy  right  hand  shall  save  me." 

Ps.  cxxxviii.  7. 


RETCHED  walking  in  the  midst  of 
trouble.  Nay,  blessed  walking,  since 
there  is  a  special  promise  for  it.  Give 
me  a  promise,  and  what  is  the  trouble?  What 
doth  my  Lord  teach  me  here  to  say?  Why 
this  —  "  Thou  wilt  revive  me."  I  shall  have 
more  life,  more  energy,  more  faith.  Is  it  not 
often  so,  that  trouble  revives  us,  like  a  breath 
of  cold  air  when  one  is  ready  to  faint? 

How  angry  are  my  enemies  and  especially 
the  arch-enemy!  Shall  I  stretch  forth  my 
hand  and  fight  my  foes?  No,  my  hand  is  bet 
ter  employed  in  doing  service  for  my  Lord. 
Besides,  there  is  no  need,  for  my  God  will  use 
his  far-reaching  arm,  and  he  will  deal  with 
them  far  better  than  I  could  if  I  were  to  try. 
"  Vengeance  is  mine  ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the 
Lord."  He  will  with  his  own  right  hand  of 
power  and  wisdom  save  me,  and  what  more 
can  I  desire? 

Come,  my  heart,  talk  this  promise  over  to 
thyself  till  thou  canst  use  it  as  the  song  of 
thy  confidence,  the  solace  of  thy  loneliness. 
Pray  to  be  revived  thyself,  and  leave  the  rest 
with  the  Lord,  who  performeth  all  things 
for  thee. 


144  _  ffaitb'g  Cbegue  Booft. 

MAY  23. 

"For  he  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he 
crieth;  the  poor  also,  and  him  that  hath  no 
helper"  —  Ps.  Ixxii.  12. 


needy  cries;  what  else  can  he  do? 
His  cry  is  heard  of  God;  what  else  need 
he  do?  Let  the  needy  reader  take  to 
crying  at  once,  for  this  will  be  his  wisdom. 
Do  not  cry  in  the  ears  of  friends,  for  even  if 
they  can  help  you  it  is  only  because  the  Lord 
enables  them.  The  nearest  way  is  to  go 
straight  to  God,  and  let  your  cry  come  up  be 
fore  him.  Straight-forward  makes  the  best 
runner  :  run  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  secondary 
causes. 

"  Alas  !  "  you  cry,  "  I  have  no  friend  or 
helper."  So  much  the  better;  you  can  rely 
upon  God  in  both  capacities  —  as  without  sup 
plies  and  without  helpers.  Make  your  double 
need  your  double  plea.  Even  for  temporal 
mercies  you  may  wait  upon  God,  for  he  careth 
for  his  children  in  these  temporary  concerns. 
As  for  spiritual  necessities,  which  are  the 
heaviest  of  all,  the  Lord  will  hear  your  cry, 
and  will  deliver  you  and  supply  you. 

O  poor  friend,  try  your  rich  God.  O  help 
less  one,  lean  on  his  help.  He  has  never  failed 
me,  and  I  am  sure  he  will  never  fail  you. 
Come  as  a  beggar,  and  God  will  not  refuse  you 
help.  Come  with  no  plea  but  his  grace. 
Jesus  is  King,  will  he  let  you  perish  of  want? 
What!  Did  you  forget  this? 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  ffiooft. 145 

MAY  24. 

"One  man  of  you  shall  chase  a  thousand: 
for  the  Lord  your  God,  he  it  is  that  fight eth 
for  you,  as  he  hath  promised  you." 
Joshua  xxiii.  10. 


MHY  count  heads?  One  man  with  God 
is  a  majority  though  there  be  a  thou 
sand  on  the  other  side.  Sometimes 
our  helpers  may  be  too  many  for  God  to  work 
with  them,  as  was  the  case  with  Gideon,  who 
could  do  nothing  till  he  had  increased  his 
forces  by  thinning  out  their  numbers.  But 
the  Lord's  host  are  never  too  few.  When 
God  would  found  a  nation,  he  called  Abram 
alone  and  blessed  him.  When  he  would  van 
quish  proud  Pharaoh,  he  used  no  armies,  but 
only  Moses  and  Aaron.  The  "  one  man  min 
istry,"  as  certain  wise  men  call  it,  has  been 
far  more  used  of  the  Lord  than  trained  bands 
with  their  officers.  Did  all  the  Israelites  to 
gether  slay  so  many  as  Samson  alone?  Saul 
and  his  hosts  slew  their  thousands,  but  David 
his  ten  thousands. 

The  Lord  can  give  the  enemy  long  odds  and 
yet  vanquish  him.  If  we  have  faith,  we  have 
God  with  us,  and  what  are  multitudes  of  men? 
One  shepherd's  dog  can  drive  before  him  a 
great  flock  of  sheep.  If  the  Lord  sent  thee,  O 
my  brother,  his  strength  will  accomplish  his 
divine  purpose.  Wherefore  rely  on  the  prom 
ise,  and  be  very  courageous. 
10 


146 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JSooft. 

MAY  25. 

"The  Lord  shall  open  unto  thee  his  good 
treasure." — Deut.  xxvii.  12. 


refers  first  to  the  rain.  The  Lord 
will  give  this  in  its  season.  Rain  is  the 
emblem  of  all  those  celestial  refreshings 
which  the  Lord  is  ready  to  bestow  upon  his 
people.  Oh  for  a  copious  shower  to  refresh 
the  Lord's  heritage ! 

We  seem  to  think  that  God's  treasury  can 
only  be  opened  by  a  great  prophet  like  Elijah, 
but  it  is  not  so,  for  this  promise  is  to  all  the 
faithful  in  Israel,  and,  indeed,  to  each  one  of 
them.  O  believing  friend,  "  the  Lord  shall 
open  unto  thee  his  good  treasure."  Thou, 
too,  mayest  see  heaven  opened,  and  thrust 
in  thy  hand  and  take  out  thy  portion,  yea,  and 
a  portion  for  all  thy  brethren  round  about 
thee.  Ask  what  thou  wilt,  and  thou  shalt 
not  be  denied,  if  thou  abidest  in  Christ,  and 
his  words  abide  in  thee. 

As  yet  thou  hast  not  known  all  thy  Lord's 
treasures,  but  he  shall  open  them  up  to  thine 
understanding.  Certainly  thou  hast  not  yet 
enjoyed  the  fulness  of  his  covenant  riches, 
but  he  will  direct  thine  heart  into  his  love,  and 
reveal  Jesus  in  thee.  Only  the  Lord  himself 
can  do  this  for  thee;  but  here  is  his  promise, 
and  if  thou  wilt  hearken  diligently  unto  his 
voice,  and  obey  his  will,  his  riches  in  glory  by 
Christ  Jesus  shall  be  thine. 


jFaftb's  Gbegue  JBoofc.  147 

MAY  26. 

"Ye  shall  serve  the  Lord  your  God,  and  he 
shall  bless  thy  bread,  and  thy  water." 
Ex.  xxiii.  25. 

Jl 

MHAT  a  promise  is  this !  To  serve  God 
is  in  itself  a  high  delight.  But  what 
an  added  privilege  to  have  the  blessing 
of  the  Lord  resting  upon  us  in  all  things !  Our 
commonest  things  become  blessed  when  we 
ourselves  are  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  took  bread  and  blessed  it;  be 
hold,  we  also  eat  of  blessed  bread.  Jesus 
blessed  water  and  made  it  wine:  the  water 
which  we  drink  is  far  better  to  us  than  any  of 
the  wine  with  which  men  make  merry;  every 
drop  has  a  benediction  in  it.  The  divine  bless 
ing  is  on  the  man  of  God  in  everything,  and  it 
shall  abide  with  him  at  every  time. 

What  if  we  have  only  bread  and  water! 
Yet  it  is  blessed  bread  and  water.  Bread  and 
water  we  shall  have.  That  is  implied,  for  it 
must  be  there  for  God  to  bless  it.  "  Thy  bread 
shall  be  given  thee,  and  thy  waters  shall  be 
sure."  With  God  at  our  table,  we  not  only 
ask  a  blessing,  but  we  have  one.  It  is  not 
only  at  the  altar  but  at  the  table  that  he 
blesses  us.  He  serves  those  well  who  serve 
him  well.  This  table-dressing  is  not  of  debt, 
but  of  grace.  Indeed,  there  is  a  treble  grace; 
he  grants  us  grace  to  serve  him,  by  his  grace 
feeds  us  with  bread,  and  then  in  his  grace 
blesses  it. 


148  afaitb'0  Cbecjue  UBoofe. 

MAY  27. 

"For  if  these  things  be  in  you,  and  abound, 
they  make  you  that  ye  shall  neither  be  barren 
nor  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."— 2  Pet.  i.  8. 
jt 

we  desire  to  glorify  our  Lord  by  fruit- 
fulness  we  must  have  certain  things 
within  us ;  for  nothing  can  come  out  of  us 
which  is  not  first  of  all  within  us.  We  must 
begin  with  faith,  which  is  the  groundwork  of 
all  the  virtues;  and  then  diligently  add  to  it 
virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  and  patience. 
With  these  we  must  have  godliness  and  broth 
erly  love.  All  these  put  together  will  most 
assuredly  cause  us  to  produce,  as  our  life  fruit, 
the  clusters  of  usefulness,  and  we  shall  not 
be  mere  idle  knowers,  but  real  doers  of  the 
word.  These  holy  things  must  not  only  be  in 
us,  but  abound,  or  we  shall  be  barren.  Fruit 
is  the  overflow  of  life,  and  we  must  be  full  be 
fore  we  can  flow  over. 

We  have  noticed  men  of  considerable  parts 
and  opportunities  who  have  never  succeeded 
in  doing  real  good  in  the  conversion  of  souls; 
and  after  close  observation  we  have  concluded 
that  they  lacked  certain  graces  which  are  ab 
solutely  essential  to  fruit-bearing.  For  real 
usefulness  graces  are  better  than  gifts.  As 
the  man  is,  so  is  his  work.  If  we  would  do 
better  we  must  be  better.  Let  the  text  be  a 
gentle  hint  to  unfruitful  professors,  and  to  my 
self  also. 


ffaftb's  Cbequc  JBoofc.  149 

MAY  28. 

"And  thou  saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thee 
good." — Gen.  xxxii.  12. 


is  the  sure  way  of  prevailing  with 
the  Lord  in  prayer.  We  may  humbly  re 
mind  him  of  what  he  has  said.  Our 
faithful  God  will  never  run  back  from  his 
word,  nor  will  he  leave  it  unfulfilled;  yet  he 
loves  to  be  enquired  of  by  his  people,  and  put 
in  mind  of  his  promise.  This  is  refreshing  to 
their  memories,  reviving  to  their  faith,  and  re 
newing  to  their  hope.  God's  word  is  given, 
not  for  his  sake,  but  for  ours.  His  purposes 
are  settled,  and  he  needs  nothing  to  bind  him 
to  his  design  of  doing  his  people  good;  but 
he  gives  the  promise  for  our  strengthening 
and  comfort.  Hence  he  wishes  us  to  plead 
it,  and  say  to  him,  "  Thou  saidst." 

"  I  will  surely  do  thee  good  "  is  just  the  es 
sence  of  all  the  Lord's  gracious  sayings.  Lay 
a  special  stress  on  the  word  "  surely."  He 
will  do  us  good,  real  good,  lasting  good,  only 
good,  every  good.  He  will  make  us  good,  and 
this  is  to  do  us  good  in  the  very  highest  de 
gree.  He  will  treat  us  as  he  does  his  saints 
while  we  are  here,  and  that  is  good.  He  will 
soon  take  us  to  be  with  Jesus  and  all  his 
chosen,  and  that  is  supremely  good.  With 
this  promise  in  our  hearts  we  need  not  fear 
angry  Esau,  nor  anyone  else.  If  the  Lord 
will  do  us  good,  who  can  do  us  hurt? 


ffaftb's  Gbeque  JBooft* 


MAY  29. 

"And  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Come  ye  after 
me,  and  I  will  make  you  to  become  Ushers 
of  men!3  —  Mark  i.  17. 

£ 

(NLY  by  coming  after  Jesus  can  we  ob 
tain  our  heart's  desire,  and  be  really  use 
ful  to  our  fellow  men.  Oh,  how  we  long 
to  be  successful  fishers  for  Jesus!  We  would 
sacrifice  our  lives  to  win  souls.  But  we  are 
tempted  to  try  methods  which  Jesus  would 
never  have  tried.  Shall  we  yield  to  this  sug 
gestion  of  the  enemy?  If  so,  we  may  splash 
the  water,  but  we  shall  never  take  the  fish. 
We  must  follow  after  Jesus  if  we  would  suc 
ceed.  Sensational  methods,  entertainments, 
and  so  forth  —  are  these  coming  after  Jesus? 
Can  we  imagine  the  Lord  Jesus  drawing  a 
congregation  by  such  means  as  are  now  com 
monly  used?  What  is  the  result  of  such  ex 
pedients?  The  result  is  nothing  which  Jesus 
will  count  up  at  the  last  great  day. 

We  must  keep  to  our  preaching  as  our  Mas 
ter  did,  for  by  this  means  souls  are  saved.  We 
must  preach  our  Lord's  doctrine,  and  pro 
claim  a  full  and  free  gospel  ;  for  this  is  the  net 
in  which  souls  are  taken.  We  must  preach 
with  his  gentleness,  boldness,  and  love;  for 
this  is  the  secret  of  success  with  human  hearts. 
We  must  work  under  divine  anointing,  de 
pending  upon  the  sacred  Spirit.  Thus,  com 
ing  after  Jesus,  and  not  running  before  him, 
nor  aside  from  him,  we  shall  be  fishers  of  men. 


" 


jfaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft,  _  151 

MAY  30. 

Nevertheless  I  say  unto  you,  Hereafter 
shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man,  sitting  on  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in.  the 
clouds  of  heaven."  —  Matt.  xxvi.  64. 


HH,  'Lord,  thou  wast  in  thy  lowest  state 
when  before  thy  persecutors  thou  wast 
made  to  stand  like  a  criminal!  Yet  the 
eyes  of  thy  faith  could  see  beyond  thy  pres 
ent  humiliation  into  thy  future  glory.  What 
words  are  these,  "  Nevertheless  —  hereafter  !  " 
I  would  imitate  thy  holy  foresight,  and  in  the 
midst  of  poverty,  or  sickness,  or  slander,  I 
also  would  say,  "  Nevertheless  —  hereafter." 
Instead  of  weakness,  thou  hast  all  power;  in 
stead  of  shame,  all  glory;  instead  of  derision, 
all  worship.  Thy  cross  has  not  dimmed  the 
splendour  of  thy  crown,  neither  has  the  spittle 
marred  the  beauty  of  thy  face.  Say,  rather, 
thou  art  the  more  exalted  and  honoured  be 
cause  of  thy  sufferings. 

So,  Lord,  I  also  would  take  courage  from 
the  "  hereafter."  I  would  forget  the  present 
tribulation  in  the  future  triumph.  Help  thou 
me  by  directing  me  into  thy  Father's  love 
and  into  thine  own  patience,  so  that  when  I 
am  derided  for  thy  name  I  may  not  be  stag 
gered,  but  think  more  and  more  of  the  here 
after,  and,  therefore,  all  the  less  of  to-day. 
I  shall  be  with  thee  soon  and  behold  thy 
glory.  Wherefore,  I  am  not  ashamed,  but 
say  in  my  inmost  soul,  "  Nevertheless  — 
hereafter." 


152  Jfaftb's  Gbeque 


MAY  31. 

"In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation: 
but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the 
world!'  —  John  xvi.  33. 
Jl 

Y  Lord's  words  are  true  as  to  the  tribu- 
lation.  I  have  my  share  of  it  beyond 
all  doubt.  The  flail  is  not  hung  up  out 
of  the  way,  nor  can  I  hope  that  it  will  be  laid 
aside  so  long  as  I  lie  upon  the  threshing-floor. 
How  can  I  look  to  be  at  home  in  the  enemy's 
country,  joyful  while  in  exile,  or  comfortable 
in  a  wilderness?  This  is  not  my  rest.  This 
is  the  place  of  the  furnace,  and  the  forge,  and 
the  hammer.  My  experience  tallies  with  my 
Lord's  words. 

I  note  how  he  bids  me  "  be  of  good  cheer." 
Alas!  I  am  far  too  apt  to  be  downcast. 
My  spirit  soon  sinks  when  I  am  sorely  tried. 
But  I  must  not  give  way  to  this  feeling. 
When  my  Lord  bids  me  cheer  up  I  must  not 
dare  to  be  cast  down. 

What  is  the  argument  which  he  uses  to 
encourage  me?  Why,  it  is  his  own  victory. 
He  says,  "  I  have  overcome  the  world."  His 
battle  was  much  more  severe  than  mine.  I 
have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood.  Why  do  I 
despair  of  overcoming?  See,  my  soul,  the 
enemy  has  been  once  overcome.  I  fight  with 
a  beaten  foe.  O  world,  Jesus  has  already  van 
quished  thee;  and  in  me,  by  his  grace,  he  will 
overcome  thee  again.  Therefore  am  I  of  good 
cheer,  and  sing  unto  my  conquering  Lord. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  3Booft»  153 

JUNE  i. 

"Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters:  for  thou 
shalt  find  it  after  many  days." — Eccl.  xi.  i. 

Jl 

ME  must  not  expect  to  see  an  immediate 
reward  for  all  the  good  we  do;  nor 
must  we  always  confine  our  efforts  to 
places  and  persons  which  seem  likely  to  yield 
us  a  recompense  for  our  labours.  The  Egyp 
tian  casts  his  seed  upon  the  waters  of  the  Nile, 
where  it  might  seem  a  sheer  waste  of  corn. 
But  in  due  time  the  flood  subsides,  the  rice 
or  other  grain  sinks  into  the  fertile  mud, 
and  rapidly  a  harvest  is  produced.  Let  us  to 
day  do  good  to  the  unthankful  and  the  evil. 
Let  us  teach  the  careless  and  the  obstinate. 
Unlikely  waters  may  cover  hopeful  soil.  No 
where  shall  our  labour  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 
It  is  ours  to  cast  our  bread  upon  the  waters ; 
it  remains  with  God  to  fulfil  the  promise, 
"  Thou  shalt  find  it."  He  will  not  let  his 
promise  fail.  His  good  word  which  we  have 
spoken  shall  live,  shall  be  found,  shall  be 
found  by  us.  Perhaps  not  just  yet,  but  some 
day  we  shall  reap  what  we  have  sown.  We 
must  exercise  our  patience ;  for  perhaps  the 
Lord  may  exercise  it.  "  After  many  days," 
says  the  Scripture,  and  in  many  instances  those 
days  run  into  months  and  years,  and  yet  the 
word  stands  true.  God's  promise  will  keep; 
let  us  mind  that  we  keep  the  precept,  and  keep 
it  this  day. 


154  ffaltb's  Cbeaue  JBoofc. 

JUNE  2. 

"For  now  will  I  break  his  yoke  from  off 
thee,  and  will  burst  thy  bonds  in  sunder." 
Nahum  i.   13. 


Assyrian  was  allowed  for  a  season  to 
oppress  the  Lord's  people,  but  there 
came  a  time  for  his  power  to  be  broken. 
So,  many  a  heart  is  held  in  bondage  by  Satan, 
and  frets  sorely  under  the  yoke.  Oh,  that  to 
such  prisoners  of  hope  the  word  of  the  Lord 
may  come  at  once,  according  to  the  text  — 
"  Now  will  I  break  his  yoke  from  off  thee,  and 
will  burst  thy  bonds  in  sunder"  ! 

See!  the  Lord  promises  a  present  deliver 
ance  :  "  Now  will  I  break  his  yoke  from  off 
thee."  Believe  for  immediate  freedom,  and 
according  to  thy  faith  so  shall  it  be  unto  thee 
at  this  very  hour.  When  God  saith  "now," 
let  no  man  say  "  to-morrow." 

See  how  complete  the  rescue  is  to  be;  for 
the  yoke  is  not  to  be  removed,  but  broken; 
and  the  bonds  are  not  to  be  untied,  but  burst 
asunder.  Here  is  a  display  of  divine  force 
which  guarantees  that  the  oppressor  shall  not 
return.  His  yoke  is  broken,  we  cannot  again 
be  bowed  down  by  its  weight.  His  bonds  are 
burst  asunder,  they  can  no  longer  hold  us. 
Oh,  to  believe  in  Jesus  for  complete  and  ever 
lasting  emancipation  !  "  If  the  Son  shall  make 
you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  Come, 
Lord,  and  set  free  thy  captives,  according  to 
thy  word. 


jfaitb'g  Gbeque  JBoofc.  155 

JUNE  3. 

"The  Lord  God  is  my  strength,  and  he 
will  make  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet,  and  he 
will  make  me  to  walk  upon  mine  high 
places!'  —  Hab.  iii.  19. 


confidence  of  the  man  of  God  is  tan- 
tamount  to  a  promise;  for  that  which 
faith  is  persuaded  of  is  the  purpose  of 
God.  The  prophet  had  to  traverse  the  deep 
places  of  poverty  and  famine,  but  he  went 
down  hill  without  slipping,  for  the  Lord  gave 
him  standing.  By-and-by  he  was  called  to  the 
high  places  of  the  hills  of  conflict;  and  he  was 
no  more  afraid  to  go  up  than  to  go  down. 

See!  the  Lord  lent  him  strength.  Nay,  Je 
hovah  himself  was  his  strength.  Think  of 
that:  the  Almighty  God  himself  becomes  our 
strength  ! 

Note,  that  the  Lord  also  gave  him  sure- 
footedness.  The  hinds  leap  over  rock  and 
crag,  never  missing  their  foothold.  Our  Lord 
will  give  us  grace  to  follow  the  most  difficult 
paths  of  duty  without  a  stumble.  He  can  fit 
our  foot  for  the  crags,  so  that  we  shall  be  at 
home  where  apart  from  God  we  should  perish. 

One  of  these  days  we  shall  be  called  to  high 
er  places  still.  Up  yonder  we  shall  climb,  even 
to  the  mount  of  God,  the  high  places  where 
the  shining  ones  are  gathered.  Oh,  what  feet 
are  the  feet  of  faith,  by  which,  following  the 
the  Hind  of  the  Morning,  we  shall  ascend  into 
the  hill  of  the  Lord! 


156  Jfaftb'0  Cbeque  $oofe. 

JUNE  4. 

"They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jeiv- 
els." — Mai.  iii.  17. 


HDAY  is  coming  in  which  the  crown  jew 
els  of  our  great  King  shall  be  counted, 
that  it  may  be  seen  whether  they  answer 
to  the  inventory  which  his  Father  gave  him. 
My  soul,  wilt  thou  be  among  the  precious 
things  of  Jesus?  Thou  art  precious  to  him  if 
he  is  precious  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  his 
"  in  that  day,"  if  he  is  thine  in  this  day. 

In  the  days  of  Malachi,  the  chosen  of  the 
Lord  were  accustomed  so  to  converse  with 
each  other  that  their  God  himself  listened  to 
their  talk.  He  liked  it  so  well  that  he  took 
notes  of  it;  yes,  and  made  a  book  of  it,  which 
he  lodged  in  his  Record  Office.  Pleased  with 
their  conversation,  he  was  also  pleased  with 
them.  Pause,  my  soul,  and  ask  thyself:  If 
Jesus  were  to  listen  to  thy  talk  would  he  be 
pleased  with  it?  Is  it  to  his  glory  and  to 
the  edification  of  the  brotherhood?  Say,  my 
soul,  and  be  sure  thou  sayest  the  truth. 

But  what  will  the  honour  be  for  us  poor 
creatures  to  be  reckoned  by  the  Lord  to  be  his 
crown  jewels!  This  honour  have  all  the 
saints.  Jesus  not  only  says,  "  They  are  mine," 
but,  "They  shall  be  mine."  He  bought  us, 
sought  us,  brought  us  in,  and  has  so  far 
wrought  us  to  his  image,  that  we  shall  be 
fought  for  by  him  with  all  his  might. 


ffaitb'0  Cbeque  Soofe.  157 

JUNE  5. 

"But  against  any  of  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue,  against 
man  or  beast:  that  ye  may  know  how  that 
the  Lord  doth  put  a  difference  between  the 
Egyptians  and  Israel."  —  Ex.  xi.  7. 


!  has  God  power  over  the  tongues 
of  dogs?  Can  he  keep  curs  from 
barking?  Yes,  it  is  even  so.  He  can 
even  prevent  an  Egyptian  dog  from  worrying 
one  of  the  lambs  of  Israel's  flock.  Doth  God 
silence  dogs,  and  doggish  ones  among  men, 
and  the  great  dog  at  hell's  gate?  Then  let  us 
move  on  our  way  without  fear. 

If  he  lets  dogs  move  their  tongues,  yet  he 
can  stop  their  teeth.  They  may  make  a  dread 
ful  noise,  and  still  do  us  no  real  harm.  Yet, 
how  sweet  is  quiet!  How  delightful  to  move 
about  among  enemies,  and  perceive  that  God 
maketh  them  to  be  at  peace  with  us!  Like 
Daniel  in  the  den  of  lions,  we  are  unhurt  amid 
destroyers. 

Oh,  that  to-day,  this  word  of  the  Lord  to 
Israel  might  be  true  to  me!  Does  the  dog 
worry  me?  I  will  tell  my  Lord  about  him. 
Lord,  he  does  not  care  for  my  pleadings;  do 
thou  speak  the  word  of  power,  and  he  must 
lie  down.  Give  me  peace,  O  my  God,  and  let 
me  see  thy  hand  so  distinctly  in  it  that  I 
may  most  clearly  perceive  the  difference  which 
thy  grace  has  made  between  me  and  the  un 
godly  ! 


158 ffaitb'g  Cbegue  ffoofe, 

JUNE  6. 

"The  Lord  hath  heard  my  supplication; 
the  Lord  will  receive  my  prayer." — Ps.  vi.  9. 


experience  here  recorded  is  mine.  I 
can  set  my  seal  that  God  is  true.  In 
very  wonderful  ways  he  has  answered  the 
prayers  of  his  servant  many  and  many  a  time. 
Yes,  and  he  is  hearing  my  present  supplica 
tion,  and  he  is  not  turning  away  his  ear  from 
me.  Blessed  be  his  holy  name! 

What  then?  Why,  for  certain  the  promise 
which  lies  sleeping  in  the  Psalmist's  believing 
confidence  is  also  mine.  Let  me  grasp  it  by 
the  hand  of  faith :  "  The  Lord  will  receive  my 
prayer."  He  will  accept  it,  think  of  it,  and 
grant  it  in  the  way  and  time  which  his  loving 
wisdom  judges  to  be  best.  I  bring  my  poor 
prayer  in  my  hand  to  the  great  King,  and 
he  gives  me  audience,  and  graciously  receives 
my  petition.  My  enemies  will  not  listen  to 
me,  but  my  Lord  will.  They  ridicule  my  tear 
ful  prayers,  but  my  Lord  does  not ;  he  receives 
my  prayer  into  his  ear  and  his  heart. 

What  a  reception  this  is  for  a  poor  sinner! 
We  receive  Jesus,  and  then  the  Lord  receives 
us  and  our  prayers  for  his  Son's  sake.  Blessed 
be  that  dear  name  which  franks  our  prayers  so 
that  they  freely  pass  even  within  the  golden 
gates.  Lord,  teach  me  to  pray,  since  thou 
nearest  my  prayers. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  159 

JUNE  7. 

"And  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life;  and 
they  shall  never  perish,   neither  shall  any 
man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." 
John  x.  28. 


believe  in  the  eternal  security  of  the 
saints.  First,  because  they  are 
Christ's,  and  he  will  never  lose  the 
sheep  which  he  has  bought  with  his  blood,  and 
received  of  his  Father. 

Next,  because  he  gives  them  eternal  life, 
and  if  it  be  eternal,  well  then,  it  is  eternal, 
and  there  can  be  no  end  to  it,  unless  there  can 
be  an  end  to  hell,  and  heaven,  and  God.  If 
spiritual  life  can  die  out,  it  is  manifestly  not 
eternal  life,  but  temporary  life.  But  the  Lord 
speaks  of  eternal  life,  and  that  effectually 
shuts  out  the  possibility  of  an  end. 

Observe,  further,  that  the  Lord  expressly 
says,  "  They  shall  never  perish."  As  long  as 
words  have  a  meaning,  this  secures  believers 
from  perishing.  The  most  obstinate  unbelief 
cannot  force  this  meaning  out  of  this  sentence. 

Then,  to  make  the  matter  complete,  he  de 
clares  that  his  people  are  in  his  hand,  and  he 
defies  all  their  enemies  to  pluck  them  out  of 
it.  Surely  it  is  a  thing  impossible  even  for  the 
fiend  of  hell.  We  must  be  safe  in  the  grasp 
of  an  Almighty  Saviour. 

Be  it  ours  to  dismiss  carnal  fear  as  well 
as  carnal  confidence,  and  rest  peacefully  in  the 
hollow  of  the  Redeemer's  hand. 


160  ffaitb's  Cbeaue  ffiooft. 

JUNE  8. 

"If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask 
of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and 
upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him." 
James  i.  5. 


^*ff"F  any  of  you  lack  wisdom."    There  is 

no  "  if  "  in  the  matter,  for  I  am  sure 

I  lack  it.    What  do  I  know?     How 

can  I  guide  my  own  way?     How  can  I  direct 

others?    Lord,  I  am  a  mass  of  folly,  and  wis 

dom  I  have  none. 

Thou  sayest,  "  Let  him  ask  of  God."  Lord, 
I  now  ask.  Here  at  thy  footstool  I  ask  to 
be  furnished  with  heavenly  wisdom  for  this 
day's  perplexities,  ay,  and  for  this  day's  sim 
plicities;  for  I  know  I  may  do  very  stupid 
things,  even  in  plain  matters,  unless  thou  dost 
keep  me  out  of  mischief. 

I  thank  thee  that  all  I  have  to  do  is  to  ask. 
What  grace  is  this  on  thy  part,  that  I  have 
only  to  pray  in  faith,  and  thou  wilt  give  me 
wisdom!  Thou  dost  here  promise  me  a  lib 
eral  education,  and  that,  too,  without  an  angry 
tutor,  or  a  scolding  usher.  This,  too,  thou 
wilt  bestow  without  a  fee  —  bestow  it  on  a 
fool  who  lacks  wisdom.  O  Lord,  I  thank  thee 
for  that  positive  and  expressive  word,  "  It 
shall  be  given  him."  I  believe  it.  Thou  wilt 
this  day  make  thy  babe  to  know  the  hidden 
wisdom  which  the  carnally  prudent  never 
learn.  Thou  wilt  guide  me  with  thy  counsel, 
and  afterwards  receive  me  to  glory. 


jfaitb'g  Cheque  JBooft,  _  161 

JUNE  9.    • 

"I  will  also  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an 
afflicted   and  poor  people,   and   they   shall. 
trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
Zeph.  iii.  12. 


HEN  true  religion  is  ready  to  die  out 
among  the  wealthy  it  finds  a  home 
among  the  poor  of  this  world,  rich 
in  faith.  The  Lord  has  even  now  his  faithful 
remnant.  Am  I  one  of  them? 

Perhaps  it  is  because  men  are  afflicted  and 
poor  that  they  learn  to  trust  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  He  that  hath  no  money  must  try 
what  he  can  do  on  trust.  He  whose  own  name 
is  good  for  nothing  in  his  own  esteem,  acts 
wisely  to  rest  in  another  name,  even  that  best 
of  names,  the  name  of  Jehovah.  God  will 
always  have  a  trusting  people,  and  these  will 
be  an  afflicted  and  poor  people.  Little  as  the 
world  thinks  of  them,  their  being  left  in  the 
midst  of  a  nation  is  the  channel  of  untold 
blessings  to  it.  Here  we  have  the  conserv 
ing  salt  which  keeps  in  check  the  corruption 
which  is  in  the  world  through  lust. 

Again  the  question  comes  home  to  each  one 
of  us,  Am  I  one  of  them?  Am  I  afflicted  by 
the  sin  within  me  and  around  me?  Am  I 
poor  in  spirit?  Do  I  trust  in  God?  That  is 
the  main  business.  Jesus  reveals  the  name, 
the  character,  the  person  of  God  ;  am  I  trusting 
in  him?  If  so,  I  am  left  in  this  world  for  a 
purpose.  Lord,  help  me  to  fulfil  it, 


162  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JSSoofe, 

JUNE  10. 

"They  shall  feed  and  lie  down,  and  none 
shall  make  them  afraid.''  —  Zeph.  iii.  13. 


ESTERDAY  we  thought  of  the  afflicted 
and  poor  people  whom  the  Lord  left  to 
be  a  living  seed  in  a  dead  world.  The 
prophet  says  of  such  that  they  shall  not  work 
iniquity  nor  speak  lies.  So  that  while  they 
had  neither  rank  nor  riches  to  guard  them, 
they  were  also  quite  unable  to  use  those 
weapons  in  which  the  wicked  place  so  much 
reliance:  they  could  neither  defend  themselves 
by  sin  nor  by  subtlety. 

What  then?  Would  they  be  destroyed? 
By  no  means!  They  should  both  feed  and 
rest,  and  be  not  merely  free  from  danger,  but 
even  quiet  from  fear  of  evil.  Sheep  are  very 
feeble  creatures,  and  wolves  are  terrible  ene 
mies;  yet  at  this  hour  sheep  are  more  numer 
ous  than  wolves,  and  the  cause  of  the  sheep 
is  always  winning,  while  the  cause  of  the 
wolves  is  always  declining.  One  day  flocks  of 
sheep  will  cover  the  plains,  and  not  a  wolf  will 
be  left.  The  fact  is  that  sheep  have  a  shep 
herd,  and  this  gives  them  provender,  protec 
tion,  and  peace.  "  None  "  —  which  means  not 
one,  whether  in  human  or  diabolical  form  — 
"  shall  make  them  afraid."  Who  shall  terrify 
the  Lord's  flock  when  he  is  near?  We  lie 
down  in  green  pastures,  for  Jesus  himself  is 
food  and  rest  to  our  souls. 


Jfaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  163 

JUNE  ii. 

"Fear  not;  for  thoii  shalt  not  be  ashamed." 
Isa.  liv.  4. 


ME  shall  not  be  ashamed  of  our  faith. 
Carping  critics  may  assail  the  Scrip 
tures  upon  which  we  ground  our  be 
lief,  but  every  year  the  Lord  will  make  it  more 
and  more  clear  that  in  his  Book  there  is  no 
error,  no  excess,  and  no  omission.  It  is  no 
discredit  to  be  a  simple  believer;  the  faith 
which  looks  alone  to  Jesus  is  a  crown  of  hon 
our  on  any  man's  head,  and  better  than  a  star 
on  his  breast. 

We  shall  not  be  ashamed  of  our  hope.  It 
shall  be  even  as  the  Lord  has  said.  We  shall 
be  fed,  led,  blest  and  rested.  Our  Lord  will 
come,  and  then  the  days  of  our  mourning  shall 
be  ended.  How  we  shall  glory  in  the  Lord 
who  first  gave  us  lively  hope,  and  then  gave  us 
that  which  we  hoped  for! 

We  shall  not  be  ashamed  of  our  love.  Je 
sus  is  to  us  the  altogether  lovely,  and  never, 
never,  shall  we  have  to  blush  because  we  have 
yielded  our  hearts  to  him.  The  sight  of  our 
glorious  Well-beloved  will  justify  the  most  en 
thusiastic  attachment  to  him.  None  will 
blame  the  martyrs  for  dying  for  him.  When 
the  enemies  of  Christ  are  clothed  with  everlast 
ing  contempt,  the  lovers  of  Jesus  shall  find 
themselves  honoured  by  all  holy  beings,  be 
cause  they  chose  the  reproach  of  Christ  rather 
than  the  treasures  of  Egypt. 


164  afaitb'0  Cbeque  3Boofc. 

JUNE  12. 

"Israel  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone: 
the  fountain  of  Jacob  shall  be  upon  a  land 
of  corn  and  wine;  also  his  heavens  shall  drop, 
down  dew."  —  Deut.  xxxiii.  28. 


more  we  dwell  alone,  the  more  safe 
shall  we  be.  God  would  have  his  people 
separate  from  sinners.  His  call  to  them 
is,  "  Come  ye  out  from  among  them."  A 
Christian  world  is  such  a  monstrosity  as  the 
Scriptures  never  contemplate.  A  worldly 
Christian  is  spiritually  diseased.  Those  who 
compromise  with  Christ's  enemies  may  be 
reckoned  with  them. 

Our  safety  lies,  not  in  making  terms  with 
the  enemy,  but  in  dwelling  alone  with  our 
best  Friend.  If  we  do  this,  we  shall  dwell  in 
safety,  despite  the  sarcasms,  the  slanders,  and 
the  sneers  of  the  world.  We  shall  be  safe 
from  the  baleful  influence  of  its  unbelief,  its 
pride,  its  vanity,  its  filthiness. 

God  also  will  make  us  dwell  in  safety  alone 
in  that  day  when  sin  shall  be  visited  on  the 
nations  by  wars  and  famines. 

The  Lord  brought  Abraham  from  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees,  but  he  stopped  half-way.  He  had 
no  blessing  till,  having  set  out  to  gro  to  the 
land  of  Canaan,  to  the  land  of  Canaan  he 
came.  He  was  safe  alone  even  in  the  midst  of 
foes.  Lot  was  not  safe  in  Sodom  though  in  a 
circle  of  friends.  Our  safety  is  in  dwelling 
apart  with  God. 


jfaftb's  Cbcque  JBoofe.  165 

JUNE  13. 

"I  the  Lord  do  keep  it;  I  will  water  it 
every  moment:  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep 
it  night  and  day." — Isa.  xxvii.  3. 

Jl 

MHEN  the  Lord  himself  speaks  in  his 
own  proper  person  rather  than 
through  a  prophet,  the  word  has  a  pe 
culiar  weight  to  believing  minds.  It  is  Je 
hovah  himself  who  is  the  keeper  of  his  own 
vineyard;  he  does  not  trust  it  to  any  other, 
but  he  makes  it  his  own  personal  care.  Are 
they  not  well  kept  whom  God  himself  keeps? 

We  are  to  receive  gracious  watering,  not 
only  every  day  and  every  hour,  but  "  every 
moment."  How  we  ought  to  grow!  How 
fresh  and  fruitful  every  plant  should  be! 
What  rich  clusters  the  vines  should  bear! 

But  disturbers  come  —  little  foxes  and  the 
boar.  Therefore,  the  Lord  himself  is  our 
guardian,  and  that  at  all  hours,  both  "  night 
and  day."  What,  then,  can  harm  us?  Why 
are  we  afraid?  He  tends,  he  waters,  he 
guards;  what  more  do  we  need? 

Twice  in  this  verse  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will." 
What  truth,  what  power,  what  love,  what  im 
mutability  we  find  in  the  great  "  I  will "  of 
Jehovah!  Who  can  resist  his  will?  If  he 
says  "I  will,"  what  room  is  there  for  doubt? 
With  an  "  I  will '  of  God  we  can  face  all  the 
hosts  of  sin,  death,  and  hell.  O  Lord,  since 
thou  sayest,  "  I  will  keep  thee,"  I  reply,  "  I 
will  praise  thee !  " 


i66  _  ffattb'g  Gbeque  38oo?u 

JUNE  14. 

"For  the  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people 
for  his  great  name's  sake;  because  it  hath 
pleased  the  Lord  to  make  you  his  people" 
I   Sam.  xii.  22. 


;OD'S  choice  of  his  people  is  the  reason 
for  his  abiding  by  them,  and  not  for 
saking  them.  He  chose  them  for  his 
love,  and  he  loves  them  for  his  choice.  His 
own  good  pleasure  is  the  source  of  their  elec 
tion,  and  his  election  is  the  reason  for  the  con 
tinuance  of  his  pleasure  in  them.  It  would 
dishonour  his  great  name  for  him  to  forsake 
them,  since  it  would  either  show  that  he  made 
an  error  in  his  choice,  or  that  he  was  fickle  in 
his  love.  God's  love  has  this  glory,  that  it 
never  changes,  and  this  glory  he  will  never 
tarnish. 

By  all  the  memories  of  the  Lord's  former 
loving-kindnesses  let  us  rest  assured  that  he 
will  not  forsake  us.  He  who  has  gone  so  far 
as  to  make  us  his  people,  will  not  undo  the 
creation  of  his  grace.  He  has  not  wrought 
such  wonders  for  us  that  he  might  leave  us 
after  all.  His  Son  Jesus  has  died  for  us,  and 
we  may  be  sure  that  he  has  not  died  in  vain. 
Can  he  forsake  those  for  whom  he  shed  his 
blood?  Because  he  has  hitherto  taken  pleas 
ure  in  choosing  and  in  saving  us,  it  will  be  his 
pleasure  still  to  bless  us.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
is  no  changeable  Lover.  Having  loved  his 
own,  he  loves  them  to  the  end. 


Cbeque  JBooft, 167 


JUNE  15. 

"The  Lord  shall  bless  thee  out  of  Zion: 
and  thou  shalt  see  the  good  of  Jerusalem  all 
the  days  of  thy  life." — Ps.  cxxviii.  5. 


is  a  promise  to  the  God-fearing  man 
who  walks  in  the  ways  of  holiness  with 
earnest  heed.  He  shall  have  domestic 
blessedness;  his  wife  and  children  shall  be 
a  source  of  great  home  happiness.  But  then 
as  a  member  of  the  church  he  desires  to  see 
the  cause  prosper,  for  he  is  as  much  concerned 
for  the  Lord's  house  as  for  his  own.  When  the 
Lord  builds  our  house,  it  is  but  fitting  that 
we  should  desire  to  see  the  Lord's  house 
builded.  Our  goods  are  not  truly  good  unless 
we  promote  by  them  the  good  of  the  Lord's 
chosen  church. 

Yes,  you  shall  get  a  blessing  when  you  go 
up  to  the  assemblies  of  Zion;  you  shall  be  in 
structed,  enlivened,  and  comforted,  where 
prayer  and  praise  ascend,  and  testimony  is 
borne  to  the  Great  Sacrifice.  "The  Lord 
shall  bless  thee  out  of  Zion." 

Nor  shall  you  alone  be  profited;  the  church 
itself  shall  prosper;  believers  shall  be  multi 
plied,  and  their  holy  work  shall  be  crowned 
with  success.  Certain  gracious  men  have  this 
promise  fulfilled  to  them  as  long  as  they  live. 
Alas!  when  they  die  the  cause  often  flags. 
Let  us  be  among  those  who  bring  good  things 
to  Jerusalem  all  their  days.  Lord,  of  thy 
mercy  make  us  such!  Amen. 


i68 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofr, 

JUNE  16. 

"For  whosoever  hath,   to   him   shall   be 
given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abundance." 
Matt.  xiii.  12. 


MHEN  the  Lord  has  given  to  a  man 
much  grace  he  will  give  him  more.  A 
little  faith  is  a  nest  egg;  more  faith 
will  come  to  it.  But  then  it  must  not  be  seem 
ing  faith,  but  real  and  true.  What  a  necessity 
is  laid  upon  us  to  make  sure  work  in  religion, 
and  not  to  profess  much,  and  possess  nothing ! 
for  one  of  these  days  the  very  profession  will 
be  taken  from  us,  if  that  be  all  we  have.  The 
threatening  is  as  true  as  the  promise. 

Blessed  be  the  Lord,  it  is  his  way  when  he 
has  once  made  a  beginning  to  go  on  bestow 
ing  the  graces  of  his  Spirit,  till  he  who  had 
but  little,  and  yet  truly  had  that  little,  is  made 
to  have  abundance.  Oh,  for  that  abundance! 
Abundance  of  grace  is  a  thing  to  be  coveted. 
It  would  be  well  to  know  much,  but  better  to 
love  much.  It  would  be  delightful  to  have 
abundance  of  skill  to  serve  God,  but  better  still 
to  have  abundance  of  faith  to  trust  in  the  Lord 
for  skill  and  everything. 

Lord,  since  thou  hast  given  me  a  sense  of 
sin,  deepen  my  hatred  of  evil.  Since  thou  hast 
caused  me  to  trust  Jesus,  raise  my  faith  to 
full  assurance.  Since  thou  hast  made  me  to 
love  thee,  cause  me  to  be  carried  away  with 
vehement  affection  for  thee! 


ffattb'g  Cheque  38ooft>  _  169 

JUNE  17. 

"For  the  Lord  your  God  is  he  that  goeth 
with  you,  to  fight  for  you  against  your 
enemies,  to  save  you."  —  Deut.  xx.  4. 


ME  have  no  enemies  but  the  enemies  of 
God.  Our  fights  are  not  against  men, 
but  against  spiritual  wickednesses. 
We  war  with  the  devil,  and  the  blasphemy, 
and  error,  and  despair  which  he  brings  into 
the  field  of  battle.  We  fight  with  all  the 
armies  of  sin  —  impurity,  drunkenness,  oppres 
sion,  infidelity,  and  ungodliness.  With  these 
we  contend  earnestly,  but  not  with  sword  or 
spear;  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not 
carnal. 

Jehovah,  our  God,  abhors  everything  which 
is  evil,  and,  therefore,  he  goeth  with  us  to 
fight  for  us  in  this  crusade.  He  will  save  us, 
and  he  will  give  us  grace  to  war  a  good  war 
fare,  and  win  the  victory.  We  may  depend 
upon  it  that  if  we  are  on  God's  side  God  is 
on  our  side.  With  such  an  august  ally  the 
conflict  is  never  in  the  least  degree  doubtful. 
It  is  not  that  truth  is  mighty  and  must  pre 
vail,  but  that  might  lies  with  the  Father  who 
is  Almighty,  with  Jesus  who  has  all  power  in 
heaven  and  in  earth,  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
who  worketh  his  will  among  men. 

Soldiers  of  Christ,  gird  on  your  armour. 
Strike  home  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  holi 
ness,  and  by  faith  grasp  his  salvation.  Let  not 
this  day  pass  without  striking  a  blow  for  Jesus 
and  holiness. 


ffaitb'g  Cheque  JSooft. 


JUNE  18. 

"Now  will  I  rise,  saith  the  Lord;  noiv  will 
I  be  exalted;  now  will  I  lift  up  myself/' 
Isa.  xxxiii.  10. 


MHEN  the  spoilers  had  made  the  land 
as  waste  as  if  devoured  by  locusts, 
and  the  warriors  who  had  defended 
the  country  sat  down  and  wept  like  women, 
then  the  Lord  came  to  the  rescue.  When 
travellers  ceased  from  the  roads  to  Zion,  and 
Bashan  and  Carmel  were  as  vineyards  from 
which  the  fruit  has  failed,  then  the  Lord  arose. 
God  is  exalted  in  the  midst  of  an  afflicted 
people,  for  they  seek  his  face  and  trust  him. 
He  is  still  more  exalted  when  in  answer  to 
their  cries  he  lifts  up  himself  to  deliver  them 
and  overthrow  their  enemies. 

Is  it  a  day  of  sorrow  with  us?  Let  us  now 
expect  to  see  the  Lord  glorified  in  our  deliver 
ance.  Are  we  drawn  out  in  fervent  prayer? 
Do  we  cry  day  and  night  unto  him?  Then 
the  set  time  for  his  grace  is  near.  God  will 
lift  up  himself  at  the  right  season.  He  will 
arise  when  it  will  be  most  for  the  display  of 
his  glory.  We  wish  for  his  glory  more  than 
we  long  for  our  own  deliverance.  Let  the 
Lord  be  exalted,  and  our  chief  desire  is  ob 
tained. 

Lord,  help  us  in  such  a  way  that  we  may 
see  that  thou  thyself  art  working.  May  we 
magnify  thee  in  our  inmost  souls.  Make  all 
around  us  to  see  how  good  and  great  a  God 
thou  art. 


Cbeque  :fi3oofe.  171 


JUNE  19. 

"Let  my  heart  be  sound  m  thy  statutes: 
that  I  be  not  ashamed"  —  Ps.  cxix.  So. 

£ 

ME  may  regard  this  inspired  prayer  as 
containing  within  itself  the  assurance 
that  those  who  keep  close  to  the 
Word  of  God  shall  never  have  cause  to  be 
ashamed  of  doing  so. 

See,  the  prayer  is  for  soundness  of  heart. 
A  sound  creed  is  good,  a  sound  judgment 
concerning  it  is  better,  but  a  sound  heart 
towards  the  truth  is  best  of  all.  We  must 
love  the  truth,  feel  the  truth,  and  obey  the 
truth,  otherwise  we  are  not  truly  sound  in 
God's  statutes.  Are  there  many  in  these  evil 
days  who  are  sound?  Oh,  that  the  writer  and 
the  reader  may  be  two  of  this  sort! 

Many  will  be  ashamed  in  the  last  great 
day,  when  all  disputes  will  be  decided.  Then 
they  will  see  the  folly  of  their  inventions, 
and  be  filled  with  remorse  because  of  their 
proud  infidelity  and  wilful  defiance  of  the 
Lord;  but  he  who  believed  what  the  Lord 
taught,  and  did  what  the  Lord  commanded, 
will  stand  forth  justified  in  what  he  did.  Then 
shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun. 
Men  much  slandered  and  abused  shall  find 
their  shame  turned  into  glory  in  that  day. 

Let  us  pray  the  prayer  of  our  text,  and  we 
may  be  sure  that  its  promise  will  be  fulfilled 
to  us.  If  the  Lord  makes  us  sound,  he  will 
keep  us  safe. 


172  ffaitb'0  Cbeaue  ffioofc. 

JUNE  20. 

"Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley 
of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil: 
for  thou  art  with  me;  thy  rod  and  thy  staff 
they  comfort  me." — Ps.  xxiii.  4. 


SWEET  are  these  words  in  describing  a 
deathbed  assurance.  How  many  have 
repeated  them  in  their  last  hours  with 
intense  delight! 

But  the  verse  is  equally  applicable  to  agonies 
of  spirit  in  the  midst  of  life.  Some  of  us, 
like  Paul,  die  daily  through  a  tendency  to 
gloom  of  soul.  Bunyan  puts  the  Valley  of  the 
Shadow  of  Death  far  earlier  in  the  pilgrimage 
than  the  river  which  rolls  at  the  foot  of  the 
celestial  hills.  We  have  some  of  us  traversed 
the  dark  and  dreadful  defile  of  "  the  shadow  of 
death  "  several  times,  and  we  can  bear  witness 
that  the  Lord  alone  enabled  us  to  bear  up 
amid  its  wild  thoughts,  its  mysterious  horrors, 
its  terrible  depressions.  The  Lord  has  sus 
tained  us,  and  kept  us  above  all  real  fear  of 
evil,  even  when  our  spirit  has  been  over 
whelmed.  We  have  been  pressed  and  oppres 
sed,  but  yet  we  have  lived,  for  we  have  felt 
the  presence  of  the  Great  Shepherd,  and  have 
been  confident  that  his  crook  would  prevent 
the  foe  from  giving  us  any  deadly  wound. 

Should  the  present  time  be  one  darkened  by 
the  raven  wings  of  a  great  sorrow,  let  us 
glorify  God  by  a  peaceful  trust  in  him. 


ffaitb'g  Cbegue  JBoofe.  _  173 

JUNE  21. 

"The  Lord  shall  sell  Sisera  into  the  hand 
of  a  ivoman."  —  Judges  iv.  9. 


an  unusual  text,  but  there  may 
ke  souls  in  the  world  that  may  have 
faith  enough  to  grasp  it.  Barak,  the 
man,  though  called  to  the  war,  had  little  stom 
ach  for  the  fight  unless  Deborah  would  go 
with  him,  and  so  the  Lord  determined  to  make 
it  a  woman's  war.  By  this  means  he  re 
buked  the  slackness  of  the  man,  and  gained 
for  himself  the  more  renown,  and  cast  the 
more  shame  upon  the  enemies  of  his  people. 

The  Lord  can  still  use  feeble  instrumentali 
ties.  Why  not  me  ?  He  may  use  persons  who 
are  not  commonly  called  to  great  public  en 
gagements.  Why  not  you?  The  woman  who 
slew  the  enemy  of  Israel  was  no  Amazon, 
but  a  wife  who  tarried  in  her  tent.  She  was 
no  orator,  but  a  woman  who  milked  the  cows 
and  made  butter.  May  not  the  Lord  use  any 
one  of  us  to  accomplish  his  purpose?  Some 
body  may  come  to  the  house  to-day,  even  as 
Sisera  came  to  Jael's  tent.  Be  it  ours,  not 
to  slay  him,  but  to  save  him.  Let  us  re 
ceive  him  with  great  kindness,  and  then  bring 
forth  the  blessed  truth  of  salvation  by  the 
Lord  Jesus,  our  great  Substitute,  and  press 
home  the  command,  "  Believe  and  live."  Who 
knoweth  but  some  stout-hearted  sinner  may 
be  slain  by  the  gospel  to-day? 


174  ffaitb'g  Cbeque 


JUNE  22. 

"The  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  days: 
but  the  years  of  the  wicked  shall  be  short 
ened."  —  Prov.  x.  27. 


is  no  doubt  about  it.  The  fear  of 
the  Lord  leads  to  virtuous  habits,  and 
these  prevent  that  waste  of  life  which 
comes  of  sin  and  vice.  The  holy  rest  which 
springs  out  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  also 
greatly  helps  a  man  when  he  is  ill.  Every 
physician  rejoices  to  have  a  patient  whose 
mind  is  fully  at  ease.  Worry  kills,  but  con 
fidence  in  God  is  like  healing  medicine. 

We  have  therefore  all  the  arrangements  for 
long  life,  and  if  it  be  really  for  our  good,  we 
shall  see  a  good  old  age,  and  come  to  our 
graves  as  shocks  of  corn  in  their  season.  Let 
us  not  be  overcome  with  sudden  expectation 
of  death  the  moment  we  have  a  finger-ache, 
but  let  us  rather  expect  that  we  may  have 
to  work  on  through  a  considerable  length  of 
days. 

And  what  if  we  should  soon  be  called  to  the 
higher  sphere?  Certainly  there  would  be 
nothing  to  deplore  in  such  a  summons,  but 
everything  to  rejoice  in.  Living  or  dying  we 
are  the  Lord's.  If  we  live,  Jesus  will  be  with 
us;  if  we  die,  we  shall  be  with  Jesus. 

The  truest  lengthening  of  life  is  to  live  while 
we  live,  wasting  no  time,  but  using  every 
hour  for  the  highest  ends.  So  be  it  this  day. 


jfattb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  175 

JUNE  23. 

"Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  concern 
ing  the  king  of  Assyria,  He  shall  not  come 
into  this  city,  nor  shoot  an  arrow  there,  nor 
come  before  it  with  shield,  nor  cast  a  bank 
against  it." — 2  Kings  xix.  32. 
Jl 

m EITHER   did    Sennacherib   molest   the 
city.     He  had   boasted  loudly,   but  he 
could  not  carry  out  his  threats.     The 
Lord  is  able  to  stop  the  enemies  of  his  people 
in  the  very  act.     When  the  lion  has  the  lamb 
between  his  jaws,  the  great  Shepherd  of  the 
sheep  can  rob  him  of  his  prey.     Our  extrem 
ity  only  provides  an  opportunity  for  a  grander 
display  of  divine  power  and  wisdom. 

In  the  case  before  us,  the  terrible  foe  did 
not  put  in  an  appearance  before  the  city  which 
he  thirsted  to  destroy.  No  annoying  arrow 
could  he  shoot  over  the  walls,  and  no  besieg 
ing  engines  could  he  put  to  work  to  batter 
down  the  castles,  and  no  banks  could  he  cast 
up  to  shut  in  the  inhabitants.  Perhaps  in  our 
case  also  the  Lord  will  prevent  our  adversaries 
from  doing  us  the  least  harm.  Certainly  he 
can  alter  their  intentions,  or  render  their  de 
signs  so  abortive  that  they  will  gladly  forego 
them.  Let  us  trust  in  the  Lord  and  keep  his 
way,  and  he  will  take  care  of  us.  Yea,  he 
will  fill  us  with  wondering  praise  as  we  see 
the  perfection  of  his  deliverance. 

Let  us  not  fear  the  enemy  till  he  actually 
comes,  and  then  let  us  trust  in  the  Lord. 


176  ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofc. 

JUNE  24. 

11  And  Arnaziah  said  to  the  man  of  God, 
But  what  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  tal 
ents  which  I  have  given  to  the  army  of 
Israel?  And  the  man  of  God  answered, 
The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more 
than  this."  —  2  Chron.  xxv.  9. 


you  have  made  a  mistake,  bear  the  loss 
of  it;  but  do  not  act  contrary  to  the  will 
of  the  Lord.  The  Lord  can  give  you 
much  more  than  you  are  likely  to  lose;  and  if 
he  does  not,  will  you  begin  bargaining  and 
chaffering  with  God?  The  king  of  Judah  had 
hired  an  army  from  idolatrous  Israel,  and  he 
was  commanded  to  send  home  the  fighting  men 
because  the  Lord  was  not  with  them.  He  was 
willing  to  send  away  the  host,  only  he  grudged 
paying  the  hundred  talents  for  nothing.  Oh 
for  shame!  If  the  Lord  will  give  the  victory 
without  the  hirelings,  surely  it  was  a  good 
bargain  to  pay  their  wages  and  to  be  rid  of 
them. 

Be  willing  to  lose  money  for  conscience  sake, 
for  peace  sake,  for  Christ's  sake.  Rest  as 
sured  that  losses  for  the  Lord  are  not  losses. 
Even  in  this  life  they  are  more  than  recom 
pensed:  in  some  cases  the  Lord  prevents  any 
loss  from  happening.  As  to  our  immortal  life, 
what  we  lose  for  Jesus  is  invested  in  heaven. 
Fret  not  at  apparent  disaster,  but  listen  to  the 
whisper,  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much 
more  than  this." 


ffaitb'0  Cbeaue  3Boofe.  177 

JUNE  25. 

"And  he  saith  unto  him,  Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you,  Hereafter  ye  shall  see  heaven 
open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and 
descending  upon  the  Son  of  man." 
John  i.  51. 
Jl 

ES,  to  our  faith  this  sight  is  plain  even  at 
this  day.  We  do  see  heaven  opened. 
Jesus  himself  has  opened  that  kingdom 
to  all  believers.  We  gaze  into  the  place  of 
mystery  and  glory,  for  he  has  revealed  it  to 
us,  and  we  shall  enter  it,  for  he  is  the  way. 

Now  we  see  the  explanation  of  Jacob's  lad 
der.  Between  earth  and  heaven  there  is  a 
holy  commerce;  prayer  ascends,  and  answers 
come  down,  by  the  way  of  Jesus,  the  Mediator. 
We  see  this  ladder  when  we  see  our  Lord. 
In  him  a  stair-way  of  light  now  furnishes  a 
clear  passage  to  the  throne  of  the  Most  High. 
Let  us  use  it,  and  send  up  by  it  the  messen 
gers  of  our  prayers.  We  shall  live  the  angelic 
life  ourselves  if  we  run  up  to  heaven  in  in 
tercession,  and  lay  hold  upon  the  blessings  of 
the  covenant,  and  then  descend  again  to  scatter 
those  gifts  among  the  sons  of  men. 

This  choice  sight  which  Jacob  only  saw  in 
a  dream  we  will  turn  into  a  bright  reality. 
This  very  day  we  will  be  up  and  down  the 
ladder  each  hour ;  climbing  in  communion,  and 
coming  down  in  labour  to  save  our  fellow- 
men.  This  is  thy  promise,  O  Lord  Jesus,  let 
us  joyfully  see  it  fulfilled. 


ITS fattb'g  Cheque  ffooft. 

JUNE  26. 

"Be  ye  also  rpatient;  stablish  your  hearts: 
for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh" 
James  v.  8. 


last  word  in  the  Canticle  of  love  is, 
"  Make  haste,  my  beloved,"  and  among 
the  last  words  of  the  Apocalypse  we  read, 
"The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come";  to 
which  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  answers, 
"  Surely  I  come  quickly."  Love  longs  for  the 
glorious  appearing  of  the  Lord,  and  enjoys  this 
sweet  promise  — "  The  coming  of  the  Lord 
draweth  nigh."  This  stays  our  minds  as  to 
the  future.  We  look  out  with  hope  through 
this  window. 

This  sacred  "  window  of  agate "  lets  in  a 
flood  of  light  upon  the  present,  and  puts  us 
into  fine  condition  for  immediate  work  or  suf 
fering.  Are  we  tried?  Then  the  nearness  of 
our  joy  whispers  patience.  Are  we  growing 
weary  because  we  do  not  see  the  harvest 
of  our  seed-sowing?  Again  this  glorious  truth 
cries  to  us,  "  Be  patient."  Do  our  multiplied 
temptations  cause  us  in  the  least  to  waver? 
Then  the  assurance,  that  before  long  the 
Lord  will  be  here,  preaches  to  us  from  this 
text,  "Stablish  your  hearts."  Be  firm,  be 
stable,  be  constant,  "  stedfast,  unmoveable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord." 
Soon  will  you  hear  the  silver  trumpets  which 
announce  the  coming  of  your  King.  Be  not 
in  the  least  afraid.  Hold  the  fort,  for  he  is 
coming ;  yea,  he  may  appear  this  very  day. 


_  ffaitb'g  Cbegue  3Booft»  _  179 

JUNE  27. 

"Surely  the  righteous  shall  give  thanks 
unto  thy  name:  the  upright  shall  dwell  in 
thy  presence."  —  Ps.  cxl.  13. 


that  my  heart  may  be  upright,  that  I 
may  always  be  able  to  bless  the  name 
of  the  Lord!  He  is  so  good  to  those 
that  be  good,  that  I  would  fain  be  among  them, 
and  feel  myself  full  of  thankfulness  every  day. 
Perhaps,  for  a  moment,  the  righteous  are  stag 
gered  when  their  integrity  results  in  severe 
trial;  but  assuredly  the  day  shall  come  when 
they  shall  bless  their  God  that  they  did  not 
yield  to  evil  suggestions  and  adopt  a  shifty 
policy.  In  the  long  run  true  men  will  thank 
the  God  of  the  right  for  leading  them  by  a 
right  way.  Oh  that  I  may  be  among  them! 
What  a  promise  is  implied  in  this  second 
clause,  "  The  upright  shall  dwell  in  thy  pres 
ence  "  !  They  shall  stand  accepted  where 
others  appear  only  to  be  condemned.  They 
shall  be  the  courtiers  of  the  Great  King,  in 
dulged  with  audience  whensoever  they  desire 
it.  They  shall  be  favoured  ones  upon  whom 
Jehovah  smiles,  and  with  whom  he  graciously 
communes.  Lord,  I  covet  this  high  honour, 
this  precious  privilege:  it  will  be  heaven  on 
earth  to  me  to  enjoy  it.  Make  me  in  all 
things  upright,  that  I  may  to-day,  and  to 
morrow,  and  every  day  stand  in  thy  heavenly 
presence.  Then  will  I  give  thanks  unto  thy 
name  evermore.  Amen. 


i8o  _  ffaitb'g  Cbegue  3Boo?u 

JUNE  28. 

"And  the  Lord  looked  upon  him,  and  said, 
Go  in  this  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  save 
Israel  from  the  hand  of  the  Midianites:  have 
not  I  sent  thee?"  —  Judges  vi.  14. 


MHAT  a  look  was  that  which  the  Lord 
gave  to  Gideon!  He  looked  him  out 
of  his  discouragements  into  a  holy 
bravery.  If  our  look  to  the  Lord  saves  us, 
what  will  not  his  look  at  us  do?  Lord,  look 
on  me  this  day,  and  nerve  me  for  its  duties 
and  conflicts. 

What  a  word  was  this  which  Jehovah  spake 
to  Gideon!  "Go."  He  must  not  hesitate. 
He  might  have  answered,  "  What,  go  in  all 
this  weakness  !  "  But  the  Lord  put  that  word 
out  of  court  by  saying,  "  Go  in  this  thy  might." 
The  Lord  had  looked  might  into  him,  and  he 
had  now  nothing  to  do  but  to  use  it,  and 
save  Israel  by  smiting  the  Midianites.  It  may 
be  that  the  Lord  has  more  to  do  by  me  than 
I  ever  dreamed  of.  If  he  has  looked  upon  me 
he  has  made  me  strong.  Let  me  by  faith  ex 
ercise  the  power  with  which  he  has  entrusted 
me.  He  never  bids  me  "  idle  away  my  time 
in  this  my  might."  Far  from  it.  I  must 
"  go,"  because  he  strengthens  me. 

What  a  question  is  that  which  the  Lord 
puts  to  me  even  as  he  put  it  to  Gideon! 
"Have  not  I  sent  thee?"  Yes,  Lord,  thou 
hast  sent  me,  and  I  will  go  in  thy  strength. 
At  thy  command  I  go,  and  going,  I  am  as 
sured  that  thou  wilt  conquer  by  me, 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft, 181 

JUNE  29. 

"Call  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and 
shew  thee  great  and  mighty  things,  which 
thou  knowest  not!' — Jer.  xxxiii.  3. 


OD  encourages  us  to  pray.  They  tell  us 
that  prayer  is  a  pious  exercise  which  has 
no  influence  except  upon  the  mind  en 
gaged  in  it.  We  know  better.  Our  experi 
ence  gives  the  lie  a  thousand  times  over  to 
this  infidel  assertion.  Here  Jehovah,  the  liv 
ing  God,  distinctly  promises  to  answer  the 
prayer  of  his  servant.  Let  us  call  upon  him 
again,  and  admit  no  doubt  upon  the  question 
of  his  hearing  us  and  answering  us.  He  that 
made  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear?  He  that  gave 
parents  a  love  to  their  children,  will  he  not 
listen  to  the  cries  of  his  own  sons  and  daugh 
ters? 

God  will  answer  his  pleading  people  in  their 
anguish.  He  has  wonders  in  store  for  them. 
What  they  have  never  seen,  heard  of,  or 
dreamed  of,  he  will  do  for  them.  He  will 
invent  new  blessings  if  needful.  He  will  ran 
sack  sea  and  land  to  feed  them:  he  will  send 
every  angel  out  of  heaven  to  succour  them,  if 
their  distress  requires  it.  He  will  astound  us 
with  his  grace,  and  make  us  feel  that  it  was 
never  before  done  in  this  fashion.  All  he  asks 
of  us  is  that  we  will  call  upon  him.  He  can 
not  ask  less  of  us.  Let  us  cheerfully  render 
him  our  prayers  at  once. 


182 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3BooFu 

JUNE  30. 

"Nevertheless  I  will  remember  my  cove 
nant  with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and 
I  will  establish  unto  thee  an  everlasting 
covenant!3 — Ez.  xvi.  60. 


mOTWITHSTANDING  our  sins  the 
Lord  is  still  faithful  in  his  love  to  us. 
He  looks  back.  See  how  he  remem 
bers  those  early  days  of  ours  when  he  took 
us  into  covenant  with  himself,  and  we  gave 
ourselves  over  to  him.  Happy  days  those! 
The  Lord  does  not  twit  us  with  them,  and 
charge  us  with  being  insincere.  No,  he  looks 
rather  to  his  covenant  with  us  than  to  our 
covenant  with  him.  There  was  no  hypocrisy 
in  that  sacred  compact,  on  his  part,  at  any 
rate.  How  gracious  is  the  Lord  thus  to  look 
back  in  love ! 

He  looks  forward  also.  He  is  resolved  that 
the  covenant  shall  not  fail.  If  we  do  not  stand 
to  it,  he  does.  He  solemnly  declares,  "  I  will 
establish  unto  thee  an  everlasting  covenant." 
He  has  no  mind  to  draw  back  from  his  prom 
ises.  Blessed  be  his  name,  he  sees  the  sacred 
seal,  "  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant," 
and  he  remembers  our  Surety,  in  whom  he  rati 
fied  that  covenant,  even  his  own  dear  Son ;  and 
therefore  he  rests  in  his  covenant  engage 
ments.  "  He  abideth  faithful ;  he  cannot  deny 
himself." 

O  Lord,  lay  this  precious  word  upon  my 
heart,  and  help  me  to  feed  upon  it  all  this 
day  I 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe. 183 

JULY  i. 
"God  shall  be  with  you." — Gen.  xlviii.  21. 


old  Jacob  could  no  more  be  with 
Joseph,  for  his  hour  had  come  to  die :  but 
he  left  his  son  without  anxiety,  for  he 
said  with  confidence,  "  God  shall  be  with  you." 
When  our  dearest  relations,  or  our  most  help 
ful  friends,  are  called  home  by  death,  we  must 
console  ourselves  with  the  reflection  that  the 
Lord  is  not  departed  from  us,  but  lives  for  us, 
and  abides  with  us  for  ever. 

If  God  be  with  us,  we  are  in  ennobling  com 
pany,  even  though  we  are  poor  and  despised. 
If  God  be  with  us,  we  have  all-sufficient 
strength,  for  nothing  can  be  too  hard  for  the 
Lord.  If  God  be  with  us,  we  are  always  safe, 
for  none  can  harm  those  who  walk  under  his 
shadow.  Oh,  what  a  joy  we  have  here!  Not 
only  is  God  with  us,  but  he  will  be  with  us  — 
with  us  as  individuals;  with  us  as  families; 
with  us  as  churches.  Is  not  the  very  name 
of  Jesus,  Immanuel  —  God  with  us?  Is  not 
this  the  best  of  all,  that  God  is  with  us?  Let 
us  be  bravely  diligent  and  joyously  hopeful. 
Our  cause  must  prosper,  the  truth  must  win, 
for  the  Lord  is  with  those  who  are  with  him. 

All  this  day  may  this  sweet  word  be  en 
joyed  by  every  believer  who  turns  to  "  Faith's 
Cheque  Book."  No  greater  happiness  is  pos 
sible. 


184  3faltb'8  Cbeque  ffioofe. 

JULY  2. 

"So  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep!' 
Ps.  cxxvii.  2. 


JJRS  is  not  a  life  of  anxious  care,  but  of 
happy  faith.  Our  heavenly  Father  will 
supply  the  wants  of  his  own  children, 
and  he  knoweth  what  we  have  need  of  be 
fore  we  ask  him.  We  may  therefore  go  to 
our  beds  at  the  proper  hour,  and  not  wear  our 
selves  out  by  sitting  up  late  to  plot,  and  plan, 
and  contrive.  If  we  have  learned  to  rely  upon 
our  God  we  shall  not  lie  awake  with  fear 
gnawing  at  our  hearts;  but  we  shall  leave 
our  care  with  the  Lord,  our  meditation  of  him 
shall  be  sweet,  and  he  will  give  us  sleep. 

To  be  the  Lord's  beloved  is  the  highest  pos 
sible  honour,  and  he  who  has  it  may  feel  that 
ambition  itself  could  desire  no  more,  and  there 
fore  every  selfish  wish  may  go  to  sleep.  What 
more  is  there  even  in  heaven  than  the  love  of 
God?  Rest,  then,  O  soul,  for  thou  hast  all 
things. 

Yet  we  toss  to  and  fro  unless  the  Lord  him 
self  gives  us  not  only  the  reasons  for  rest, 
but  rest  itself.  Yea,  he  doth  this.  Jesus  him 
self  is  our  peace,  our  rest,  our  all.  On  his 
bosom  we  sleep  in  perfect  security,  both  in 
life  and  in  death. 

"Sprinkled  afresh  with  pardoning  blood, 

I  lay  me  down  to  rest, 
As  in  the  embraces  of  my  God, 
Or  on  my  Saviour's  breast." 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofc  185 

JULY  3. 

"He  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death." 
Ps.  xlviii.  14. 

jl 

need  a  guide.  Sometimes  we  would 
give  all  that  we  have  to  be  told  ex 
actly  what  to  do,  and  where  to  turn. 
We  are  willing  to  do  right,  but  we  do  not 
know  which  out  of  two  roads  we  are  to  fol 
low.  Oh,  for  a  guide! 

The  Lord  our  God  condescends  to  serve  us 
as  guide.  He  knows  the  way,  and  will  pilot 
us  along  it  till  we  reach  our  journey's  end 
in  peace.  Surely  we  do  not  desire  more  in 
fallible  direction.  Let  us  place  ourselves  ab 
solutely  under  his  guidance,  and  we  shall  never 
miss  our  way.  Let  us  make  him  our  God,  and 
we  shall  find  him  our  guide.  If  we  follow 
his  law  we  shall  not  miss  the  right  road  of 
life,  provided  we  first  learn  to  lean  upon  him 
in  every  step  that  we  take. 

Our  comfort  is,  that  as  he  is  our  God  for 
ever  and  ever,  he  will  never  cease  to  be  with 
us  as  our  guide.  "  Even  unto  death  "  will  he 
lead  us,  and  then  we  shall  dwell  with  him 
eternally,  and  go  no  more  out  for  ever.  This 
promise  of  divine  guidance  involves  life-long 
security:  salvation  at  once,  guidance  unto  our 
last  hour,  and  then  endless  blessedness. 
Should  not  each  one  seek  this  in  youth,  re 
joice  in  it  in  middle  life,  and  repose  in  it 
in  old  age?  This  day  let  us  look  up  for  guid 
ance  before  we  trust  ourselves  out  of  doors. 


i86  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

JULY  4. 

"Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but 
by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the 
mouth  of  God."  —  Matt.  iv.  4. 


*f|"F  God  so  willed  it  we  could  live  without 
II  bread,  even  as  Jesus  did  for  forty  days; 
but  we  could  not  live  without  his  Word. 
By  that  Word  we  were  created,  and  by  it 
alone  can  we  be  kept  in  being,  for  he  sus- 
taineth  all  things  by  the  Word  of  his  power. 
Bread  is  a  second  cause;  the  Lord  himself  is 
the  first  source  of  our  sustenance.  He  can 
work  without  the  second  cause  as  well  as  with 
it;  and  we  must  not  tie  him  down  to  one 
mode  of  operation.  Let  us  not  be  too  eager 
after  the  visible,  but  let  us  look  to  the  invisible 
God.  We  have  heard  believers  say  that  in 
deep  poverty,  when  bread  ran  short,  their  ap 
petites  became  short  too  ;  and  to  others,  when 
common  supplies  failed,  the  Lord  has  sent  in 
unexpected  help. 

But  we  must  have  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
With  this  alone  we  can  withstand  the  devil. 
Take  this  from  us,  and  our  enemy  will  have 
us  in  his  power,  for  we  shall  soon  faint.  Our 
souls  need  food,  and  there  is  none  for  them 
outside  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  All  the 
books  and  all  the  preachers  in  the  world  can 
not  furnish  us  a  single  meal:  it  is  only  the 
Word  from  the  mouth  of  God  that  can  fill  the 
mouth  of  a  believer.  Lord,  evermore  give^us 
this  bread.  We  prize  it  above  royal  dainties. 


'g  Cbeque  JBooft,  187 


JULY  5. 

"But  I  will  deliver  thee  in  that  day,  saith 
the  Lord:  and  thou  shalt  not  be  given  into 
the  hand   of  the   men  of  whom   thou  art 
afraid."  —  Jer.  xxxix.  17. 
Jl 

MHEN  the  Lord's  faithful  ones  are  suf 
fering  for  him,  they  shall  have  sweet 
messages  of  love  from  himself,  and 
sometimes  they  shall  have  glad  tidings  for 
those  who  sympathize  with  them  and  help 
them.  Ebed-melech  was  only  a  despised  Ethi 
opian,  but  he  was  kind  to  Jeremiah,  and  so  the 
Lord  sent  him  this  special  promise  by  the 
mouth  of  his  prophet.  Let  us  be  ever  mindful 
of  God's  persecuted  servants,  and  he  will  re 
ward  us. 

Ebed-melech  was  to  be  delivered  from  the 
men  whose  vengeance  he  feared.  He  was 
only  a  poor  black  man,  but  Jehovah  would 
take  care  of  him.  Thousands  were  slain  by 
the  Chaldeans,  but  this  lowly  negro  could  not 
be  hurt.  We,  too,  may  be  fearful  of  some 
great  ones  who  are  bitter  against  us  ;  but  if  we 
have  been  faithful  to  the  Lord's  cause  in  the 
hour  of  persecution,  he  will  be  faithful  to  us. 
After  all,  what  can  man  do  without  the  Lord's 
permission?  He  puts  a  bit  into  the  mouth  of 
rage,  and  a  bridle  upon  the  head  of  power. 
Let  us  fear  the  Lord,  and  we  shall  have  no  one 
else  to  fear.  No  cup  of  cold  water  given  to  a 
despised  prophet  of  God  shall  be  without  its 
reward;  and  if  we  stand  up  for  Jesus,  Jesus 
will  stand  up  for  us. 


i88  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JSoofe. 

JULY  6. 

"For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he 
gave  his  only-begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life."  —  John  iii.  16. 


all  the  stars  in  the  sky  the  pole-star 
is  the  most  useful  to  the  mariner.  This 
text  is  a  pole-star,  for  it  has  guided  more 
souls  to  salvation  than  any  other  Scripture. 
It  is  among  promises  what  the  Great  Bear  is 
among  constellations. 

Several  words  in  it  shine  with  peculiar  bril 
liance.  Here  we  have  God's  love,  with  a  so 
to  it,  which  marks  its  measureless  greatness. 
Then  we  have  God's  gift  in  all  its  freeness  and 
greatness.  This  also  is  God's  Son,  that  unique 
and  priceless  gift  of  a  love  which  could  never 
fully  show  itself  till  heaven's  Only-begotten 
had  been  sent  to  live  and  die  for  men.  These 
three  points  are  full  of  light. 

Then  there  is  the  simple  requirement  of 
believing,  which  graciously  points  to  a  way 
of  salvation  suitable  for  guilty  men.  This  is 
backed  by  a  wide  description  —  "  whosoever 
believeth  in  him."  Many  have  found  room  in 
"  whosoever  "  who  would  have  felt  themselves 
shut  out  by  a  narrower  word.  Then  comes 
the  great  promise,  that  believers  in  Jesus  shall 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.  This  is 
cheering  to  every  man  who  feels  that  he  is 
ready  to  perish,  and  that  he  cannot  save  him 
self.  We  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  we 
have  eternal  life. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBoofc  189 

JULY  7. 

"Sing,  0  heavens;  and  be  joyful,  0  earth; 
and  break  forth  into  singing,  0  mountains: 
for  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people,  and 
will  have  mercy  upon  his  afflicted." 
Isa.  xlix.  13. 


SO  sweet  are  the  comforts  of  the  Lord,  that 
not  only  the  saints  themselves  may  sing 
of  them,  but  even  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  may  take  up  the  song.  It  takes  some 
thing  to  make  a  mountain  sing;  and  yet  the 
prophet  summons  quite  a  choir  of  them.  Leb 
anon,  and  Sirion,  and  the  high  hills  of  Bashan 
and  Moab,  he  would  set  them  all  singing  be 
cause  of  Jehovah's  grace  to  his  own  Zion. 
May  we  not  also  make  mountains  of  difficulty, 
and  trial,  and  mystery,  and  labour  become  oc 
casions  for  praise  unto  our  God?  "  Break 
forth  into  singing,  O  mountains  !  " 

This  word  of  promise,  that  our  God  will 
have  mercy  upon  his  afflicted,  has  a  whole 
peal  of  bells  connected  with  it.  Hear  their 
music  —  "  Sing  !  "  "  Be  joyful  !  "  "  Break 
forth  into  singing."  The  Lord  would  have 
his  people  happy  because  of  his  unfailing  love. 
He  would  not  have  us  sad  and  doubtful;  he 
claims  from  us  the  worship  of  believing  hearts. 
He  cannot  fail  us  :  why  should  we  sigh  or  sulk 
as  if  he  would  do  so?  Oh  for  a  well  tuned 
harp!  Oh  for  voices  like  those  of  the  cheru 
bim  before  the  throne! 


ffaftb's  Gbeque  3Booft. 


JULY  8. 

"The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  round 
about  them  that  fear  him,  and  delivereth 
them."  —  Ps.  xxxiv.  7. 


ME   cannot   see   the    angels,    but   it   is 
enough  that  they  can  see  us.     There 
is  one  great  Angel  of  the  Covenant, 
whom  not  having  seen  we  love,  and  his  eye 
is  always  upon  us  both  day  and  night.     He 
has  a  host  of  holy  ones  under  him,  and  he 
causes  these  to  be  watchers  over  his  saints 
and  to  guard  them  from  all  ill.     If  devils  do 
us  mischief,  shining  ones  do  us  service. 

Note  that  the  Lord  of  angels  does  not  come 
and  go,  and  pay  us  transient  visits,  but  he  and 
his  armies  encamp  around  us.  The  head-quar 
ters  of  the  army  of  salvation  are  where  those 
live  whose  trust  is  in  the  living  God.  This 
camp  surrounds  the  faithful,  so  that  they  can 
not  be  attacked  from  any  quarter  unless  the 
adversary  can  break  through  the  entrench 
ments  of  the  Lord  of  angels.  We  have  a 
fixed  protection,  a  permanent  watch.  Senti 
nelled  by  the  messengers  of  God,  we  shall  not 
be  surprised  by  sudden  assaults,  nor  swallowed 
up  by  overwhelming  forces.  Deliverance  is 
promised  in  this  verse  —  deliverance  by  the 
great  Captain  of  our  salvation,  and  that  de 
liverance  we  shall  obtain  again  and  again  until 
our  warfare  is  accomplished  and  we  exchange 
the  field  of  conflict  for  the  home  of  rest. 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  191 

JULY  9. 

"Mine  eyes  shall  be  upon  the  faithful  of 
the  land,  that  they  may  divell  with  me:  he 
that  ivalketh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  shall  serve 
me."—  Ps.  ci.  6. 


+fFF  David  spoke  thus,  we  may  be  sure  that 

the   Son  of  David  will  be  of  the  same 

mind.    Jesus  looks  out  for  faithful  men, 

and  he  fixes  his  eyes  upon  them,  to  observe 

them,  to  bring   them  forward,   to   encourage 

them,    and    to    reward    them.     Let    no    true- 

hearted  man  think  that  he  is  overlooked;  the 

King  himself  has  his  eye  upon  him. 

There  are  two  results  of  this  royal  notice. 
First  we  read,  "  that  they  may  dwell  with 
me."  Jesus  brings  the  faithful  into  his  house, 
he  sets  them  in  his  palace,  he  makes  them  his 
companions,  he  delights  in  their  society.  We 
must  be  true  to  our  Lord,  and  he  will  then 
manifest  himself  to  us.  When  our  faithful 
ness  costs  us  most  it  will  be  best  rewarded; 
the  more  furiously  men  reject  the  more  joy 
fully  will  our  Lord  receive  us. 

Next,  he  says  of  the  sincere  man,  "  he  shall 
serve  me."  Jesus  will  use  for  his  own  glory 
those  who  scorn  the  tricks  of  policy,  and  are 
faithful  to  himself,  his  Word,  and  his  Cross. 
These  shall  be  in  his  royal  retinue,  the  hon 
oured  servants  of  his  Majesty.  Communion 
and  usefulness  are  the  wages  of  faithfulness. 
Lord,  make  me  faithful,  that  I  may  dwell  with 
thee,  and  serve  thee. 


ffaitb's  Cbeque 


JULY  10. 

"Thou  shalt  rise,  and  have  mercy  upon 
Zion:  for  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea,  the 
set  time,  is  come.  For  thy  servants  take 
pleasure  in  her  stonesf  and  favor  the  dust 
thereof."  —  Ps.  cii.  13,  14. 
£ 

&>  our  prayers  for  the  church  will  be 
heard.  The  set  time  is  come.  We  love 
the  prayer  meeting,  and  the  Sunday- 

school,  and  all  the  services  of  the  Lord's  house. 

We  are  bound  in  heart  to  all  the  people  of 

God,  and  can  truly  say, 

"  There's  not  a  lamb  in  all  thy  flock 

I  would  disdain  to  feed; 
There's  not  a  foe  before  whose  face 
I'd  fear  thy  cause  to  plead." 

If  this  is  the  general  feeling,  we  shall  soon 
enjoy  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  Our  assemblies  will  be  filled, 
saints  will  be  revived,  and  sinners  will  be  con 
verted.  This  can  only  come  of  the  Lord's 
mercy;  but  it  will  come,  and  we  are  called 
upon  to  expect  it.  The  time,  the  set  time, 
is  come.  Let  us  bestir  ourselves.  Let  us  love 
every  stone  of  our  Zion,  even  though  it  may 
be  fallen  down.  Let  us  treasure  up  the  least 
truth,  the  least  ordinance,  the  least  believer, 
even  though  some  may  despise  them  as  only 
so  much  dust.  When  we  favour  Zion,  God  is 
about  to  favour  her.  When  we  take  pleasure 
in  the  Lord's  work,  the  Lord  himself  will  take 
pleasure  in  it. 


Cbeque  JBooft.  193 


JULY  ii. 

"And  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in 
me  shall  never  die.    Believest  thou  this?" 
John  xi.  26. 
Jt 

S,  Lord,  we  believe  it;  we  shall  never 
die.  Our  soul  may  be  separated  from 
our  body,  and  this  is  death  of  a  kind; 
but  our  soul  shall  never  be  separated  from 
God,  which  is  the  true  death  —  the  death 
which  was  threatened  to  sin  —  the  death  pen 
alty  which  is  the  worst  that  can  happen.  We 
believe  this  most  assuredly,  for  who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord?  We  are  members  of 
the  body  of  Christ;  will  Christ  lose  parts  of 
his  body?  We  are  married  to  Jesus;  will  he 
be  bereaved  and  widowed?  It  is  not  possible. 
There  is  a  life  within  us  which  is  not  capable 
of  being  divided  from  God:  yea,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  dwells  within  us,  and  how  then  can  we 
die?  Jesus,  himself,  is  our  life,  and  therefore 
there  is  no  dying  for  us,  for  he  cannot  die 
again.  In  him  we  died  unto  sin  once,  and  the 
capital  sentence  cannot  a  second  time  be  ex 
ecuted.  Now  we  live,  and  live  for  ever.  The 
reward  of  righteousness  is  life  everlasting,  and 
we  have  nothing  less  than  the  righteousness 
of  God,  and  can  claim  the  highest  reward. 

Living  and  believing,  we  believe   that  we 
shall  live  and  enjoy.     Wherefore  we  press  for 
ward  with  full  assurance  that  our  life  is  secure 
in  our  living  Head. 
13 


i94  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooFu 

JULY  12. 

"The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the 
godly  out  of  temptations,  and  to  reserve  the 
unjust  unto  the  day  of  judgment  to  be  pun 
ished."  —  2  Peter  ii.  9. 
Jt 


godly  are  tempted  and  tried.  That  is 
not  true  faith  which  is  never  put  to  the 
test.  But  the  godly  are  delivered  out  of 
their  trials,  and  that  not  by  chance,  nor  by 
secondary  agencies,  but  by  the  Lord  himself. 
He  personally  undertakes  the  office  of  deliver 
ing  those  who  trust  him.  God  loves  the  godly 
or  godlike,  and  he  makes  a  point  of  knowing 
where  they  are,  and  how  they  fare. 

Sometimes  their  way  seems  to  be  a  labyrinth, 
and  they  cannot  imagine  how  they  are  to  es 
cape  from  threatening  danger.  What  they  do 
not  know  their  Lord  knows.  He  knows  whom 
to  deliver,  and  when  to  deliver,  and  how  to  de 
liver.  He  delivers  in  the  way  which  is  most 
beneficial  to  the  godly,  most  crushing  to  the 
tempter,  and  most  glorifying  to  himself.  We 
may  leave  the  "  how  "  with  the  Lord,  and  be 
content  to  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  he  will,  in 
some  way  or  other,  bring  his  own  people 
through  all  the  dangers,  trials,  and  temptations 
of  this  mortal  life,  to  his  own  right  hand  in 
glory. 

This  day  it  is  not  for  me  to  pry  into  my 
Lord's  secrets,  but  patiently  to  wait  his  time, 
knowing  this,  that  though  I  know  nothing,  my 
heavenly  Father  knows. 


jfaftb'3  Cbeque  jBoofe.  195 

JULY  13. 

"For  I  ivill  surely  deliver  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  not  fall  by  the  sword,  but  thy  life  shall 
be  for  a  prey  unto  thee:  because  thou  hast 
put  thy  trust  in  me,  saith  the  Lord." 
Jer.  xxxix.  18. 


the  protecting  power  of  trust  in 
God.  The  great  men  of  Jerusalem  fell 
by  the  sword,  but  poor  Ebed-melech  was 
secure,  for  his  confidence  was  in  Jehovah. 
Where  else  should  a  man  trust  but  in  his 
Maker?  We  are  foolish  when  we  prefer  the 
creature  to  the  Creator.  Oh,  that  we  could 
in  all  things  live  by  faith,  then  should  we  be 
delivered  in  all  time  of  danger!  No  one  ever 
did  trust  in  the  Lord  in  vain,  and  no  one  ever 
shall. 

The  Lord  saith,  "  I  will  surely  deliver  thee." 
Mark  the  divine  "  surely."  Whatever  else 
may  be  uncertain,  God's  care  of  believers  is 
sure.  God  himself  is  the  guardian  of  the  gra 
cious.  Under  his  sacred  wing  there  is  safety 
even  when  every  danger  is  abroad.  Can  we 
accept  this  promise  as  sure?  Then  in  our 
present  emergency  we  shall  find  that  it  stands 
fast.  We  hope  to  be  delivered  because  we 
have  friends,  or  because  we  are  prudent,  or 
because  we  can  see  hopeful  signs;  but  none 
of  these  things  is  one  half  so  good  as  God's 
simple  "  because  thou  hast  put  thy  trust  in 
me."  Dear  reader,  try  this  way,  and,  trying 
it,  you  will  keep  to  it  all  your  life.  It  is  as 
sweet  as  it  is  sure. 


ig6  JFaltb'0  Gbecjue  UBoofc. 

JULY  14. 

"Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and  he 
shall  sustain  thee:  he  shall  never  suffer  the 
righteous  to  be  moved." — Ps.  Iv.  22. 


+ff*T  is  a  heavy  burden,  roll  it  on  Omnipo 
tence.  It  is  thy  burden  now,  and  it 
crushes  thee;  but  when  the  Lord  takes 
it,  he  will  make  nothing  of  it.  If  thou  art 
called  still  to  bear  it,  "  he  will  sustain  thee." 
It  will  be  on  thee,  and  not  on  thee.  Thou  wilt 
be  so  upheld  under  it  that  the  burden  will 
be  a  blessing.  Bring  the  Lord  into  the  matter 
and  thou  wilt  stand  upright  under  that  which 
in  itself  would  bow  thee  down. 

Our  worst  fear  is  lest  our  trial  should  drive 
us  from  the  path  of  duty;  but  this  the  Lord 
will  never  suffer.  If  we  are  righteous  before 
him  he  will  not  endure  that  our  affliction 
should  move  us  from  our  standing.  In  Jesus 
he  accepts  us  as  righteous,  and  in  Jesus  he 
will  keep  us  so. 

What  about  the  present  moment?  Art  thou 
going  forth  to  this  day's  trial  alone?  Are 
thy  poor  shoulders  again  to  be  galled  with  the 
oppressive  load?  Be  not  so  foolish.  Tell  the 
Lord  all  about  thy  grief,  and  leave  it  with 
him.  Don't  cast  your  burden  down,  and  then 
take  it  up  again;  but  roll  it  on  the  Lord,  and 
leave  it  there.  Then  shalt  thou  walk  at  large, 
a  joyful  and  unburdened  believer,  singing  the 
praises  of  thy  great  Burden-bearer. 


ffaftb'0  Cbeaue  OBooft.  197 

JULY  15. 

"Blessed  are  they  that  mourn:  for  they 
shall  be  comforted." — Matt.  v.  4. 


the  valley  of  weeping  we  come  to  Zion. 
One  would  have  thought  mourning  and 
being  blessed  were  in  opposition,  but  the 
infinitely  wise  Saviour  puts  them  together,  in 
this  beatitude.  What  he  has  joined  together 
let  no  man  put  asunder.  Mourning  for  sin  — 
our  own  sins,  and  the  sins  of  others  —  is  the 
Lord's  seal  set  upon  his  faithful  ones.  When 
the  Spirit  of  grace  is  poured  upon  the  house  of 
David,  or  any  other  house,  they  shall  mourn. 
By  holy  mourning  we  receive  the  best  of  our 
blessings,  even  as  the  rarest  commodities  come 
to  us  by  water.  Not  only  shall  the  mourner 
be  blessed  at  some  future  day,  but  Christ  pro 
nounces  him  blessed  even  now. 

The  Holy  Spirit  will  surely  comfort  those 
hearts  which  mourn  for  sin.  They  shall  be 
comforted  by  the  application  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  and  by  the  cleansing  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  They  shall  be  comforted  as  to  the 
abounding  sin  of  their  city  and  of  their  age 
by  the  assurance  that  God  will  glorify  him 
self,  however  much  men  may  rebel  against 
him.  They  shall  be  comforted  with  the  expec 
tation  that  they  shall  be  wholly  freed  from  sin 
before  long,  and  shall  soon  be  taken  up  to 
dwell  for  ever  in  the  glorious  presence  of  their 
Lord. 


ffaitb's  Cbegue  JBooft. 


JULY  16. 
"I  will  save  her  that  halteth."—Zeph.  iii.  19. 


HERE  are  plenty  of  these  lame  ones, 
both  male  and  female.  You  may  meet 
"  her  that  halteth  "  twenty  times  in  an 
hour.  They  are  in  the  right  road,  and  exceed 
ingly  anxious  to  run  in  it  with  diligence,  but 
they  are  lame,  and  make  a  sorry  walk  of  it. 
On  the  heavenly  road  there  are  many  cripples. 
It  may  be  that  they  say  in  their  hearts  — 
What  will  become  of  us  ?  Sin  will  overtake  us, 
Satan  will  throw  us  down.  Ready-to-halt  is 
our  name  and  our  nature;  the  Lord  can  never 
make  good  soldiers  of  us,  nor  even  nimble 
messengers  to  go  on  his  errands.  Well,  well! 
he  will  save  us,  and  that  is  no  small  thing. 
He  says,  "  I  will  save  her  that  halteth."  In 
saving  us  he  will  greatly  glorify  himself. 
Everybody  will  ask  —  How  came  this  lame 
woman  to  run  the  race  and  win  the  crown? 
And  then  the  praise  will  all  be  given  to  al 
mighty  grace. 

Lord,  though  I  halt  in  faith,  in  prayer,  in 
praise,  in  service,  and  in  patience,  save  me, 
I  beseech  thee!  Only  thou  canst  save  such  a 
cripple  as  I  am.  Lord,  let  me  not  perish  be 
cause  I  am  among  the  hindmost,  but  gather 
up  by  thy  grace  the  slowest  of  thy  pilgrims  — 
even  me.  Behold  he  hath  said  it  shall  be  so, 
and  therefore,  like  Jacob,  prevailing  in  prayer, 
I  go  forward  though  my  sinew  be  shrunk. 


ffaitb'0  Gbcque  3Booft.  199 

JULY  17. 

"The  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall 
be  strong,  and  do  exploits." — Dan.  xi.  32. 


Lord  is  a  man  of  war,  Jehovah  is 
his  name."  Those  who  enlist  under 
his  banner  shall  have  a  commander 
who  will  train  them  for  the  conflict,  and  give 
them  both  vigour  and  valour.  The  times  of 
which  Daniel  wrote  were  of  the  very  worst 
kind,  and  then  it  was  promised  that  the  people 
of  God  would  come  out  in  their  best  colours: 
they  would  be  strong  and  stout  to  confront  the 
powerful  adversary. 

Oh,  that  we  may  know  our  God  —  his 
power,  his  faithfulness,  his  immutable  love  — 
and  so  may  be  ready  to  risk  everything  in  his 
behalf!  He  is  one  whose  character  excites 
our  enthusiasm,  and  makes  us  willing  to  live 
and  to  die  for  him.  Oh,  that  we  may  know 
our  God  by  familiar  fellowship  with  him;  for 
then  we  shall  become  like  him,  and  shall  be 
prepared  to  stand  up  for  truth  and  righteous 
ness.  He  who  comes  forth  fresh  from  behold 
ing  the  face  of  God  will  never  fear  the  face  of 
man.  If  we  dwell  with  him,  we  shall  catch 
the  heroic  spirit,  and  to  us  a  world  of  enemies 
will  be  but  as  the  drop  of  a  bucket.  A  count 
less  array  of  men,  or  even  of  devils,  will  seem 
as  little  to  us  as  the  nations  are  to  God,  and 
he  counts  them  only  as  grasshoppers.  Oh,  to 
be  valiant  for  truth  in  this  day  of  falsehood ! 


200  ffattb'0  Gbeque  SBoofc. 

JULY  1 8. 

"I  will  allure  her,  and  bring  her  into  the 
wilderness  and  speak  comfortably  unto  her." 
Hosea  ii.  14. 


goodness  of  God  sees  us  allured  by 
sin,  and  it  resolves  to  try  upon  us  the 
more  powerful  allurements  of  love.  Do 
we  not  remember  when  the  Lover  of  our  souls 
first  cast  a  spell  upon  us  and  charmed  us 
away  from  the  fascinations  of  the  world?  He 
will  do  this  again  and  again  whenever  he  sees 
us  likely  to  be  ensnared  by  evil. 

He  promises  to  draw  us  apart,  for  there  he 
can  best  deal  with  us,  and  this  separated  place 
is  not  to  be  a  Paradise,  but  a  wilderness,  since 
in  such  a  place  there  will  be  nothing  to  take 
off  our  attention  from  our  God.  In  the  deserts 
of  affliction  the  presence  of  the  Lord  becomes 
everything  to  us,  and  we  prize  his  company 
beyond  any  value  which  we  set  upon  it  when 
we  sat  under  our  own  vine  and  fig-tree  in  the 
society  of  our  fellows.  Solitude  and  affliction 
bring  more  to  themselves  and  to  their  heavenly 
Father  than  any  other  means. 

When  thus  allured  and  secluded  the  Lord 
has  choice  things  to  say  to  us  for  our  com 
fort.  He  "  speaks  to  our  heart,"  as  the  orig 
inal  has  it.  Oh  that  at  this  time  we  may  have 
this  promise  explained  in  our  experience!  Al 
lured  by  love,  separated  by  trial,  and  comforted 
by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  may  we  know  the  Lord 
and  sing  for  joy! 


jfattb's  Cbeque  JBoofe*  201 

JULY  19. 

"Thy  shoes  shall  be  iron  and  brass;  and 
as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
Deut.  xxxiii.  25. 


MERE  are  two  things  provided  for  the  pil 
grim:  shoes  and  strength. 

As  for  the  shoes :  they  are  very  need 
ful  for  travelling  along  rough  ways,  and  for 
trampling  upon  deadly  foes.  We  shall  not  go 
barefoot  —  this  would  not  be  suitable  for  prin 
ces  of  the  blood  royal.  Our  shoes  shall  not 
be  at  all  of  the  common  sort,  for  they  shall 
have  soles  of  durable  metal,  which  will  not 
wear  out  even  if  the  journey  be  long  and  dif 
ficult.  We  shall  have  protection  proportionate 
to  the  necessities  of  the  road  and  the  battle. 
Wherefore  let  us  march  boldly  on,  fearing  no 
harm  even  though  we  tread  on  serpents,  or  set 
our  foot  upon  the  dragon  himself. 

As  for  the  strength:  it  shall  be  continued 
as  long  as  our  days  shall  continue,  and  it  shall 
be  proportioned  to  the  stress  and  burden  of 
those  days.  The  words  are  few,  "  as  thy  days 
thy  strength,"  but  the  meaning  is  full.  This 
day  we  may  look  for  trial,  and  for  work  which 
will  require  energy,  but  we  may  just  as  con 
fidently  look  for  equal  strength.  This  word 
given  to  Asher  is  given  to  us  also  who  have 
faith  wherewith  to  appropriate  it.  Let  us  rise 
to  the  holy  boldness  which  it  is  calculated  to 
create  within  the  believing  heart. 


202  sfaftb'e  Cbeaue  $oofe* 

JULY  20. 

"Unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he 
appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  sal 
vation!3 — Heb.  ix.  28. 

Jl 

HIS  is  our  hope.  He  to  whom  we  have 
already  looked  as  coming  once  to  bear 
the  sins  of  many  will  have  another  mani 
festation  to  the  sons  of  men;  this  is  a  happy 
prospect  in  itself.  But  that  second  appearing 
has  certain  peculiar  marks  which  glorify  it 
exceedingly. 

Our  Lord  will  have  ended  the  business  of 
sin.  He  has  so  taken  it  away  from  his  people, 
and  so  effectually  borne  its  penalty,  that  he 
will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  at  his  second 
coming.  He  will  present  no  sin-offering,  for 
he  will  have  utterly  put  sin  away. 

Our  Lord  will  then  complete  the  salvation 
of  his  people.  They  will  be  finally  and  per 
fectly  saved,  and  will  in  every  respect  enjoy 
the  fulness  of  that  salvation.  He  comes  not 
to  bear  the  result  of  our  transgressions,  but 
to  bring  the  result  of  his  obedience;  not  to 
remove  our  condemnation,  but  to  perfect  our 
salvation. 

Our  Lord  thus  appears  only  to  those  who 
look  for  him.  He  will  not  be  seen  in  this  char 
acter  by  men  whose  eyes  are  blinded  with  self 
and  sin.  To  them  he  will  be  a  terrible  Judge, 
and  nothing  more.  We  must  first  look  to  him, 
and  then  look  for  him;  and  in  both  cases  our 
look  shall  be  life. 


ffaftb'0  Cbeque  JBooft.  203 

JULY  21. 

"And  they  that  be  -wise  shall  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  firmament;  and  they  that 
turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for 
ever  and  ever." — Dan.  xii.  3. 

j* 

MERE  is  something  to  wake  me  up.  This 
is  worth  living  for.  To  be  wise  is  a  no 
ble  thing  in  itself :  in  this  place  it  refers 
to  a  divine  wisdom  which  only  the  Lord  him 
self  can  bestow.  Oh  to  know  myself,  my  God, 
my  Saviour!  May  I  be  so  divinely  taught 
that  I  may  carry  into  practice  heavenly  truth, 
and  live  in  the  light  of  it!  Is  my  life  a  wise 
one?  Am  I  seeking  that  which  I  ought  to 
seek?  Am  I  living  as  I  shall  wish  I  had  lived 
when  I  come  to  die?  Only  such  wisdom  can 
secure  for  me  eternal  brightness  as  of  yonder 
sunlit  skies. 

To  be  a  winner  of  souls  is  a  glorious  at 
tainment.  I  had  need  be  wise  if  I  am  to  turn 
even  one  to  righteousness;  much  more  if  I 
am  to  turn  many.  Oh  for  the  knowledge  of 
God,  of  men,  of  the  Word,  and  of  Christ,  which 
will  enable  me  to  convert  my  fellow-men,  and 
to  convert  large  numbers  of  them!  I  would 
give  myself  to  this,  and  never  rest  till  I  ac 
complish  it.  This  will  be  better  than  winning 
stars  at  court.  This  will  make  me  a  star,  a 
shining  star,  a  star  shining  for  ever  and  ever; 
yea  more,  it  will  make  me  shine  as  many  stars. 
My  soul,  arouse  thyself !  Lord,  quicken  me ! 


204  ffaitb's  Gbeaue 


JULY  22. 

"And  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  for  ever; 
yea,  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  righteous 
ness,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  lovingkind- 
ness,  and  in  mercies.  I  -will  even  betroth 
thee  unto  me  in  faithfulness;  and  thou  shalt 
know  the  Lord." 

Hosea  ii.  19,  20. 


ETROTHMENT  unto  the  Lord!  What 
an  honour  and  a  joy!  My  soul,  is  Je 
sus  indeed  thine  by  his  own  condescend 
ing  betrothal?  Then,  mark,  it  is  for  ever. 
He  will  never  break  his  engagement,  much  less 
sue  out  a  divorce  against  a  soul  joined  to  him 
self  in  marriage  bonds. 

Three  times  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will  betroth 
thee."  What  words  he  heaps  together  to  set 
forth  the  betrothal!  Righteousness  comes  in 
to  make  the  covenant  legal;  none  can  forbid 
these  lawful  banns.  Judgment  sanctions  the 
alliance  with  its  decree:  none  can  see  folly 
or  error  in  the  match.  Lovingkindness  war 
rants  that  this  is  a  love  union,  for  without 
love  betrothal  is  bondage,  and  not  blessedness. 
Meanwhile,  mercy  smiles,  and  even  sings  ;  yea, 
she  multiplies  herself  into  "  mercies,"  because 
of  the  abounding  grace  of  this  holy  union. 

Faithfulness  is  the  registrar,  and  records  the 
marriage,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  says  "  Amen  " 
to  it,  as  he  promises  to  teach  the  betrothed 
heart  all  the  sacred  knowledge  needful  for  its 
high  destiny.  What  a  promise! 


3faUb'0  Cbeaue  JBooft  205 

JULY  23. 

"And  their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  re 
member  no  more." — Heb.  x.  17. 


BCCORDING   to   this   gracious   covenant 
the  Lord  treats  his  people  as  if  they  had 
never  sinned.     Practically,  he  forgets  all 
their  trespasses.     Sins  of  all  kinds  he  treats 
as  if  they  had  never  been;  as  if  they  were 
quite  erased  from  his  memory.     O  miracle  of 
grace!     God  here  doth  that  which  in  certain 
aspects    is    impossible    to    him.      His    mercy 
worketh  miracles  which  far  transcend  all  other 
miracles. 

Our  God  ignores  our  sin  now  that  the  sac 
rifice  of  Jesus  has  ratified  the  covenant.  We 
may  rejoice  in  him  without  fear  that  he 
will  be  provoked  to  anger  against  us  because 
of  our  iniquities.  See!  he  puts  us  among  the 
children;  he  accepts  us  as  righteous;  he  takes 
delight  in  us  as  if  we  were  perfectly  holy. 
He  even  puts  us  into  places  of  trust;  makes 
us  guardians  of  his  honour,  trustees  of  the 
crown  jewels,  stewards  of  the  gospel.  He 
counts  us  worthy,  and  gives  us  a  ministry; 
this  is  the  highest  and  most  special  proof  that 
he  does  not  remember  our  sins.  Even  when 
we  forgive  an  enemy,  we  are  very  slow  to 
trust  him;  we  judge  it  to  be  imprudent  so  to 
do.  But  the  Lord  forgets  our  sins,  and  treats 
us  as  if  we  had  never  erred.  O  my  soul,  what 
a  promise  is  this!  Believe  it  and  be  happy. 


206  tfaitb's  Cbeque  ;fi3oofe. 

JULY  24. 

"He  that  overcorneth,  the  same  shall  be 
clothed  in  white  raiment."  —  Rev.  iii.  5. 


MARRIOR  of  the  cross,  fight  on! 
Never  rest  till  thy  victory  is  com 
plete,  for  thine  eternal  reward  will 
prove  worthy  of  a  life  of  warfare. 

See,  here  is  perfect  purity  for  thee!  A  few 
in  Sardis  kept  their  garments  undefiled,  and 
their  recompense  is  to  be  spotless.  Perfect 
holiness  is  the  prize  of  our  high  calling;  let 
us  not  miss  it. 

See,  here  is  joy!  Thou  shalt  wear  holiday 
robes,  such  as  men  put  on  at  wedding  feasts; 
thou  shalt  be  clothed  with  gladness,  and  be 
made  bright  with  rejoicing.  Painful  strug 
gles  shall  end  in  peace  of  conscience,  and  joy 
in  the  Lord. 

See,  here  is  victory!  Thou  shalt  have  thy 
triumph.  Palm,  and  crown,  and  white  robe 
shall  be  thy  guerdon;  thou  shalt  be  treated 
as  a  conqueror,  and  owned  as  such  by  the 
Lord  himself. 

See,  here  is  priestly  array!  Thou  shalt 
stand  before  the  Lord  in  such  raiment  as  the 
sons  of  Aaron  wore;  thou  shalt  offer  the  sac 
rifices  of  thanksgiving,  and  draw  near  unto 
the  Lord  with  the  incense  of  praise. 

Who  would  not  fight  for  a  Lord  who  gives 
such  large  honours  to  the  very  least  of  his 
faithful  servants?  Who  would  not  be  clothed 
in  a  fool's  coat  for  Christ's  sake,  seeing  he  will 
robe  us  with  glory? 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  3Booft.  207 

JULY  25. 

"But  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be:  for 
thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the 
end  of  the  days." — Dan.  xii.  13. 


cannot  understand  all  the  prophecies, 
but  yet  we  regard  them  with  pleasure, 
and  not  with  dismay.  There  can  be 
nothing  in  the  Father's  decree  which  should 
justly  alarm  his  child.  Though  the  abomina 
tion,  of  desolation  be  set  up,  yet  the  true  be 
liever  shall  not  be  defiled;  rather  shall  he 
be  purified,  and  made  white,  and  tried. 
Though  the  earth  be  burned  up  no  smell  of 
fire  shall  come  upon  the  chosen.  Amid  the 
crash  of  matter,  and  the  wreck  of  worlds,  the 
Lord  Jehovah  will  preserve  his  own. 

Calmly  resolute  in  duty,  brave  in  conflict, 
patient  in  suffering,  let  us  go  our  way,  keep 
ing  to  our  road,  and  neither  swerving  from  it 
nor  loitering  in  it.  The  end  will  come;  let 
us  go  our  way  till  it  does. 

Rest  will  be  ours.  All  other  things  swing 
to  and  fro,  but  our  foundation  standeth  sure. 
God  rests  in  his  love,  and,  therefore,  we  rest 
in  it.  Our  peace  is,  and  ever  shall  be,  like  a 
river.  A  lot  in  the  heavenly  Canaan  is  ours, 
and  we  shall  stand  in  it,  come  what  may. 
The  God  of  Daniel  will  give  a  worthy  portion 
to  all  who  dare  to  be  decided  for  truth  and 
holiness  as  Daniel  was.  No  den  of  lions  shall 
deprive  us  of  our  sure  inheritance. 


208  ffaitb's  Cbcque  $oofc. 

JULY  26. 

"And  it  shall  be  at  that  day,  saith  the 
Lord,  that  thou  shall  call  me  Ishi;  and  shalt 
call  me  no  more  Baali;  for  I  mill  take  away 
the  names  of  Baalim  out  of  her  mouth ,  and 
they  shall  no  more  be  remembered  by  their 
name." — Hosea  ii.  16,  17. 


day  has  come.  We  view  our  God 
no  more  as  Baal,  our  tyrant  lord  and 
mighty  master,  for  we  are  not  under 
law,  but  under  grace.  We  now  think  of  Je 
hovah,  our  God,  as  our  Ishi,  our  beloved  hus 
band,  our  lord  in  love,  our  next-of-kin  in  bonds 
of  sacred  relationship.  We  do  not  reverence 
him  less,  but  we  love  him  more.  We  do  not 
serve  him  less  obediently,  but  we  serve  him 
for  a  higher  and  more  endearing  reason.  We 
no  longer  tremble  under  his  lash,  but  rejoice 
in  his  love.  The  slave  is  changed  into  a  child, 
and  the  task  into  a  pleasure. 

Is  it  so  with  thee,  dear  reader?  Has  grace 
cast  out  slavish  fear  and  implanted  filial  love? 
How  happy  are  we  in  such  an  experience! 
Now  we  call  the  Sabbath  a  delight,  and  wor 
ship  is  never  a  weariness.  Prayer  is  now  a 
privilege,  and  praise  is  a  holiday.  To  obey 
is  heaven;  to  give  to  the  cause  of  God  is  a 
banquet.  Thus  have  all  things  become  new. 
Our  mouth  is  filled  with  singing,  and  our 
heart  with  music.  Blessed  be  our  heavenly 
Ishi  for  ever  and  for  ever. 


jfattb's  Cheque  JBooft.  209 

JULY  27. 

"I   will   give   you   the   sure   mercies   of 
David."  —  Acts  xiii.  34. 


mOTHING  of  man  is  sure;  but  every 
thing  of  God  is  so.     Especially  are  cov 
enant   mercies    sure   mercies,    even   as 
David  said,  "  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered 
in  all  things  and  sure." 

We  are  sure  that  the  Lord  meant  his  mercy. 
He  did  not  speak  mere  words:  there  is  sub 
stance  and  truth  in  every  one  of  his  promises. 
His  mercies  are  mercies  indeed.  Even  if  a 
promise  seems  as  if  it  must  drop  through  by 
reason  of  death,  yet  it  never  shall,  for  the 
good  Lord  will  make  good  his  word. 

We  are  sure  that  the  Lord  will  bestow 
promised  mercies  on  all  his  covenanted  ones. 
They  shall  come  in  due  course  to  all  the 
chosen  of  the  Lord.  They  are  sure  to  all  the 
seed,  from  the  least  unto  the  greatest. 

We  are  sure  that  the  Lord  will  continue  his 
mercies  to  his  own  people.  He  does  not  give 
and  take.  What  he  has  granted  us  is  the  to 
ken  of  much  more.  That  which  we  have  not 
yet  received  is  as  sure  as  that  which  has  al 
ready  come;  therefore,  let  us  wait  before  the 
Lord  and  be  still.  There  is  no  justifiable  rea 
son  for  the  least  doubt.  God's  love,  and  word, 
and  faithfulness  are  sure.  Many  things  are 
questionable,  but  of  the  Lord  we  sing  — 
"  For  his  mercies  shall  endure 

Ever  faithful,  ever  sure." 
14 


jfaUb'g  Cbegue 


JULY  28. 

"Humble  yourselves  therefore  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God,  that  he  may  exalt  you 
in  due  time!'  —  i  Peter  v.  6. 


is  tantamount  to  a  promise:  if  we 
will  bow  down,  the  Lord  will  lift  us  up. 
Humility  leads  to  honour:  submission 
is  the  way  to  exaltation.  That  same  hand  of 
God  which  presses  us  down  is  waiting  to  raise 
us  up  when  we  are  prepared  to  bear  the  bless 
ing.  We  stoop  to  conquer.  Many  cringe  be 
fore  men,  and  yet  miss  the  patronage  they 
crave;  but  he  that  humbles  himself  under  the 
hand  of  God  shall  not  fail  to  be  enriched,  up 
lifted,  sustained  and  comforted  by  the  ever- 
gracious  One.  It  is  a  habit  of  Jehovah  to 
cast  down  the  proud,  and  lift  up  the  lowly. 

Yet  there  is  a  time  for  the  Lord's  working. 
We  ought  now  to  humble  ourselves,  even  at 
this  present  moment;  and  we  are  bound  to 
keep  on  doing  so  whether  the  Lord  lays  his 
afflicting  hand  upon  us  or  not.  When  the 
Lord  smites,  it  is  our  special  duty  to  accept 
the  chastisement  with  profound  submission. 
But  as  for  the  Lord's  exaltation  of  us,  that 
can  only  come  "  in  due  time,"  and  God  is  the 
best  judge  of  that  day  and  hour.  Do  we  cry 
out  impatiently  for  the  blessing?  Would  we 
wish  for  untimely  honour?  What  are  we  at? 
Surely  we  are  not  truly  humbled,  or  we  should 
wait  with  quiet  submission.  So  let  us  do. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft* 211 

JULY  29. 

"He  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy" 
Zeph.  iii.  15. 


a  castinS  out  was  that!  Satan 
has  lost  his  throne  in  our  nature  even 
as  he  lost  his  seat  in  heaven.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  has  destroyed  the  enemy's  reign 
ing  power  over  us.  He  may  worry  us,  but  he 
cannot  claim  us  as  his  own.  His  bonds  are  no 
longer  upon  our  spirits:  the  Son  has  made  us 
free,  and  we  are  free  indeed. 

Still  is  the  arch-enemy  the  accuser  of  the 
brethren ;  but  even  from  this  position  our  Lord 
has  driven  him.  Our  advocate  silences  our 
accuser.  The  Lord  rebukes  our  enemies,  and 
pleads  the  causes  of  our  soul,  so  that  no  harm 
comes  of  all  the  devil's  revilings. 

As  a  tempter,  the  evil  spirit  still  assails  us, 
and  insinuates  himself  into  our  minds;  but 
thence  also  is  he  cast  out  as  to  his  former  pre 
eminence.  He  wriggles  about  like  a  serpent, 
but  he  cannot  rule  like  a  sovereign.  He  hurls 
in  blasphemous  thoughts  when  he  has  oppor 
tunity;  but  what  a  relief  it  is  when  he  is  told 
to  be  quiet,  and  is  made  to  slink  off  like  a 
whipped  cur!  Lord,  do  this  for  any  who  are 
at  this  time  worried  and  wearied  by  his  bark 
ings.  Cast  out  their  enemy,  and  be  thou  glo 
rious  in  their  eyes.  Thou  hast  cast  him  down, 
Lord,  cast  him  out.  Oh  that  thou  wouldst 
banish  him  from  the  world! 


212  3faftb'0  Cbeque 


JULY  30. 

"I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall 
rejoice."  —  John  xvi.  22. 


SURELY  he  will  come  a  second  time,  and 
then,  when  he  sees  us,  and  we  see  him, 
there  will  be  rejoicings  indeed.  Oh  for 
that  joyous  return! 

But  this  promise  is  being  daily  fulfilled  in 
another  sense.  Our  gracious  Lord  has  many 
"  agains  "  in  his  dealings  with  us.  He  gave 
us  pardon,  and  he  sees  us  again,  and  repeats 
the  absolving  word  as  fresh  sins  cause  us 
grief.  He  has  revealed  to  us  our  acceptance 
before  God,  and  when  our  faith  in  that  bless 
ing  grows  a  little  dim,  he  comes  to  us  again 
and  again,  and  says,  "  Peace  be  unto  you  "  ; 
and  our  hearts  are  glad. 

Beloved,  all  our  past  mercies  are  tokens  of 
future  mercies.  If  Jesus  has  been  with  us,  he 
will  see  us  again.  Look  upon  no  former  fa 
vour  as  a  dead  and  buried  thing,  to  be  mourned 
over;  but  regard  it  as  a  seed  sown,  which  will 
grow,  and  push  its  head  up  from  the  dust,  and 
cry,  "  I  will  see  you  again."  Are  the  times 
dark  because  Jesus  is  not  with  us  as  he  used 
to  be?  Let  us  pluck  up  courage;  for  he  will 
not  be  long  away.  His  feet  are  as  those  of  a 
roe  or  young  hart,  and  they  will  soon  bring 
him  to  us.  Wherefore  let  us  begin  to  be  joy 
ous,  since  he  saith  to  us  even  now,  "  I  will  see 
you  again." 


Cbegue  3Booft.  213 


JULY  31. 

"And  call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble: 
I  will  deliver  thee}  and  thou  shalt  glorify 
me."  Ps.  1.  15. 


jl 


is  a  promise  indeed! 
Here  is  an  urgent  occasion  —  "  the 
day  of  trouble."  It  is  dark  at  noon  on 
such  a  day,  and  every  hour  seems  blacker  than 
the  one  which  came  before  it.  Then  is  this 
promise  in  season:  it  is  written  for  the  cloudy 
day. 

Here  is  condescending  advice,  "call  upon 
me."  We  ought  not  to  need  the  exhortation: 
it  should  be  our  constant  habit  all  the  day  and 
every  day.  What  a  mercy  to  have  liberty  to 
call  upon  God!  What  wisdom  to  make  good 
use  of  it!  How  foolish  to  go  running  about 
to  men!  The  Lord  invites  us  to  lay  our  case 
before  him,  and  surely  we  will  not  hesitate  to 
do  so. 

Here  is  reassuring  encouragement  :  "  I  will 
deliver  thee."  Whatever  the  trouble  may  be, 
the  Lord  makes  no  exceptions,  but  promises 
full,  sure,  happy  deliverance.  He  will  himself 
work  out  our  deliverance  by  his  own  hand. 
We  believe  it,  and  the  Lord  honours  faith. 

Here  is  an  ultimate  result  :  "  Thou  shalt 
glorify  me."  Ah!  that  we  will  do  most  abun 
dantly.  When  he  has  delivered  us  we  will 
loudly  praise  him;  and  as  he  is  sure  to  do  it, 
let  us  begin  to  glorify  him  at  once. 


214  _  3f  aitb's  Cbeque  3Booft. 

AUGUST  i. 

"And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between 
me  and  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their 
generations  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to 
be  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after 
thee."  —  Gen.  xvii.  7. 


LLORD,  thou  hast  made  a  covenant  with 
me,  thy  servant,  in  Christ  Jesus  my 
Lord;  and  now,  I  beseech  thee,  let  my 
children  be  included  in  its  gracious  provisions. 
Permit  me  to  believe  this  promise  as  made 
to  me  as  well  as  to  Abraham.  I  know  that 
my  children  are  born  in  sin,  and  shapen  in  in 
iquity,  even  as  those  of  other  men;  therefore, 
I  ask  nothing  on  the  ground  of  their  birth,  for 
well  I  know  that  "  that  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh  is  flesh,"  and  nothing  more.  Lord,  make 
them  to  be  born  under  thy  covenant  of  grace 
by  thy  Holy  Spirit! 

I  pray  for  my  descendants  throughout  all 
generations.  Be  thou  their  God  as  thou  wert 
mine.  My  highest  honour  is  that  thou  hast 
permitted  me  to  serve  thee;  may  my  offspring 
serve  thee  in  all  years  to  come.  O  God  of 
Abraham,  be  the  God  of  his  Isaac!  O  God 
of  Hannah,  accept  her  Samuel  ! 

If,  Lord,  thou  hast  favoured  me  in  my  fam 
ily,  I  pray  thee  remember  other  households 
of  thy  people  which  remain  unblest.  Be  the 
God  of  all  the  families  of  Israel.  Let  not  one 
of  those  who  fear  thy  name  be  tried  with  a 
godless  and  wicked  household,  for  thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ's  sake.  Amen. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBoofe,  _  215 

AUGUST  2. 

"Now  therefore  go,  and  I  will  be  zvith  thy 
mouth,  and  teach  thee  what  thou  shalt  say/' 
Ex.  iv.  12. 


a  true  servant  of  the  Lord  is 
slow  of  sPeech»  and  when  called  upon 
to  plead  for  his  Lord,  he  is  in  great 
confusion  lest  he  should  spoil  a  good  cause 
by  his  bad  advocacy.  In  such  a  case  it  is 
well  to  remember  that  the  Lord  made  the 
tongue  which  is  so  slow,  and  we  must  take 
care  that  we  do  not  blame  our  Maker.  It 
may  be  that  a  slow  tongue  is  not  so  great  an 
evil  as  a  fast  one,  and  fewness  of  words  may 
be  more  of  a  blessing  than  floods  of  verbiage. 
It  is  also  quite  certain  that  real  saving  power 
does  not  lie  in  human  rhetoric,  with  its  tropes, 
and  pretty  phrases,  and  grand  displays.  Lack 
of  fluency  is  not  so  great  a  lack  as  it  looks. 

If  God  be  with  our  mouth,  and  with  our 
mind,  we  shall  have  something  better  than 
the  sounding  brass  of  eloquence,  or  the  tin 
kling  cymbal  of  persuasion.  God's  teaching  is 
wisdom;  his  presence  is  power.  Pharaoh  had 
more  reason  to  be  afraid  of  stammering  Moses 
than  of  the  most  fluent  talker  in  Egypt;  for 
what  he  said  had  power  in  it;  he  spoke  of 
plagues  and  deaths.  If  the  Lord  be  with  us 
in  our  natural  weakness  we  shall  be  girt  with 
supernatural  power.  Therefore,  let  us  speak 
for  Jesus  boldly,  as  we  ought  to  speak. 


216  3faitbr6  Gbeque 


AUGUST  3. 

"But  if  the  priest  buy  any  soul  with  his 
money,  he  shall  eat  of  it,  and  he  that  is  born 
in  his  house:  they  shall  eat  of  his  meat." 
Lev.  xxii.  11. 


STRANGERS,  sojourners,  and  servants 
upon  hire  were  not  to  eat  of  holy  things. 
It  is  so  in  spiritual  matters  still.  But 
two  classes  were  free  at  the  sacred  table, 
those  who  were  bought  with  the  priest's 
money,  and  those  who  were  born  into  the 
priest's  house.  Bought  and  born,  these  were 
the  two  indisputable  proofs  of  a  right  to  holy 
things. 

Bought.  Our  great  High  Priest  has  bought 
with  a  price  all  those  who  put  their  trust  in 
him.  They  are  his  absolute  property  —  alto 
gether  the  Lord's.  Not  for  what  they  are  in 
themselves,  but  for  their  owner's  sake,  they 
are  admitted  into  the  same  privileges  which  he 
himself  enjoys,  and  "  they  shall  eat  of  his 
meat."  He  has  meat  to  eat  which  worldlings 
know  not  of.  "  Because  ye  belong  to  Christ," 
therefore  shall  ye  share  with  your  Lord. 

Born.  This  is  an  equally  sure  way  to  privi 
lege  ;  if  born  in  the  priest's  house  we  take  our 
place  with  the  rest  of  the  family.  Regenera 
tion  makes  us  fellow-heirs,  and  of  the  same 
body;  and,  therefore,  the  peace,  the  joy,  the 
glory,  which  the  Father  has  given  to  Christ, 
Christ  has  given  to  us.  Redemption  and  re 
generation  have  given  us  a  double  claim  to  the 
divine  permit  of  this  promise. 


3faitb's  Cbeaue  JBooft,  217 

AUGUST  4. 

The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee" 
Num.  vi.  24. 


first  clause  of  the  high-priest's  bene- 
diction  is  substantially  a  promise.  That 
blessing  which  our  great  High  Priest 
pronounces  upon  us  is  sure  to  come,  for  he 
speaks  the  mind  of  God. 

What  a  joy  to  abide  under  the  divine  bless 
ing!  This  puts  a  gracious  flavour  into  all 
things.  If  we  are  blessed,  then  all  our  pos 
sessions  and  enjoyments  are  blessed;  yea,  our 
losses  and  crosses,  and  even  our  disappoint 
ments  are  blessed.  God's  blessing  is  deep, 
emphatic,  effectual.  A  man's  blessing  may 
begin  and  end  in  v/ords;  but  the  blessing  of 
the  Lord  makes  rich  and  sanctifies.  The  best 
wish  we  can  have  for  our  dearest  friend  is 
not  "  May  prosperity  attend  thee,"  but  "  The 
Lord  bless  thee." 

It  is  equally  a  delightful  thing  to  be  kept  of 
God  ;  kept  by  him,  kept  near  him,  kept  in  him. 
They  are  kept  indeed  whom  God  keeps;  they 
are  preserved  from  evil,  they  are  reserved  unto 
boundless  happiness.  God's  keeping  goes 
with  his  blessing,  to  establish  it  and  cause  it 
to  endure. 

The  author  of  this  little  book  desires  that 
the  rich  blessing  and  sure  keeping  here  pro 
nounced  may  come  upon  every  reader  who 
may  at  this  moment  be  looking  at  these  lines. 
Should  the  author  be  living,  please  breathe 
the  text  to  God  as  a  prayer  for  his  servant. 


218  ffattb'0  Cbeque  3Boofc. 

AUGUST  5. 

"The  law  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart;  none 
of  his  steps  shall  slide." — Ps.  xxxvii.  31. 


-gj^UT  the  law  into  the  heart,  and  the  whole 
j|V  man  *s  right*  This  is  where  the  law 
•••  should  be ;  for  then  it  lies,  like  the  tables 
of  stone  in  the  ark,  in  the  place  appointed  for 
it.  In  the  head  it  puzzles,  on  the  back  it  bur 
dens,  in  the  heart  it  upholds. 

What  a  choice  word  is  here  used,  "  the  law 
of  his  God " !  When  we  know  the  Lord  as 
our  own  God  his  law  becomes  liberty  to  us. 
God  with  us  in  covenant  makes  us  eager  to 
obey  his  will  and  walk  in  his  commands.  Is 
the  precept  my  Father's  precept?  Then  I  de 
light  in  it. 

We  are  here  guaranteed  that  the  obedient- 
hearted  man  shall  be  sustained  in  every  step 
that  he  takes.  He  will  do  that  which  is  right, 
and  he  shall  therefore  do  that  which  is  wise. 
Holy  action  is  always  the  most  prudent, 
though  it  may  not  at  the  time  seem  to  be  so. 
We  are  moving  along  the  great  high  road  of 
God's  providence  and  grace  when  we  keep  to 
the  way  of  his  law.  The  Word  of  God  has 
never  misled  a  single  soul  yet ;  its  plain  direc 
tions  to  walk  humbly,  justly,  lovingly,  and  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  are  as  much  words  of 
wisdom  to  make  our  way  prosperous  as  rules 
of  holiness  to  keep  our  garments  clean.  He 
walks  surely  who  walks  righteously. 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  :fi3oofc.  219 

AUGUST  6. 

"Behold,  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  set  the 
land  before  thee:  go  up  and  possess  it,  as 
the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  said  unto 
thee;  fear  not,  neither  be  discouraged." 
Deut.  i.  21. 


is  a  heritage  of  grace  which  we 
ought  to  be  bold  enough  to  win  for  our 
own  possession.  All  that  one  believer 
has  gained  is  free  to  another.  We  may  be 
strong  in  faith,  fervent  in  love,  and  abundant 
in  labour;  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  it;  let 
us  go  up  and  take  possession.  The  sweetest 
experiences  and  the  brightest  grace  are  as 
much  for  us  as  for  any  of  our  brethren.  Je 
hovah  has  set  it  before  us;  no  one  can  deny 
our  right;  let  us  go  up  and  possess  it  in  his 
name. 

The  world  also  lies  before  us  to  be  conquered 
for  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  are  not  to  leave  any 
country  or  corner  of  it  unsubdued.  That 
slum  near  our  house  is  before  us,  not  to  baffle 
our  endeavours,  but  to  yield  to  them.  We 
have  only  to  summon  courage  enough  to  go 
forward,  and  we  shall  win  dark  homes  and 
hard  hearts  for  Jesus.  Let  us  never  leave  the 
people  in  a  lane  or  alley  to  die  because  we 
have  not  enough  faith  in  Jesus  and  his  gospel 
to  go  up  and  possess  the  land.  No  spot  is  too 
benighted,  no  person  is  so  profane  as  to  be 
beyond  the  power  of  grace.  Cowardice,  be 
gone!  Faith  marches  to  the  conquest. 


220  jfaftb's  Cbecjue  JBoofe. 

AUGUST  7. 

"Only  be  thou  strong  and  very  coura 
geous,  that  thou  mayest  observe  to  do  ac 
cording  to  all  the  law,  which  Moses  my  serv 
ant  commanded  thee:  turn  not  from  it  to  the 
right  hand  or  to  the  left,  that  thou  mayest 
prosper  whithersoever  thou  goest." 
Josh.  i.  7. 


ES,  the  Lord  will  be  with  us  in  our  holy 
war,  but  he  demands  of  us  that  we 
strictly  follow  his  rules.  Our  victories 
will  very  much  depend  upon  our  obeying  him 
with  all  our  heart,  throwing  strength  and  cour 
age  into  the  actions  of  our  faith.  If  we  are 
half-hearted  we  cannot  expect  more  than  half 
a  blessing. 

We  must  obey  the  Lord  with  care  and 
thoughtfulness.  "  Observe  to  do  "  is  the 
phrase  used,  and  it  is  full  of  meaning.  This 
is  referred  to  every  part  of  the  divine  will; 
we  must  obey  with  universal  readiness.  Our 
rule  of  conduct  is  "  according  to  all  the  law." 
We  may  not  pick  and  choose,  but  v/e  must 
take  the  Lord's  commands  as  they  come,  one 
and  all.  In  all  this  we  must  go  on  with  exact 
ness  and  constancy.  Ours  is  to  be  a  straight 
forward  course,  which  bends  neither  to  the 
right  nor  to  the  left.  We  are  not  to  err  by 
being  more  rigid  than  the  law,  nor  turn  out 
of  levity  to  a  more  free  and  easy  way.  With 
such  obedience  there  will  come  spiritual  pros 
perity.  O  Lord,  help  us  to  see  if  it  be  not 
so!  We  shall  not  test,  thy  promise  in  vain. 


ffattb'g  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  221 

AUGUST  8. 
The  Lord  God  will  help  me!'—  Isa.  1.  7. 


are  in  prophecy  the  words  of  Mes- 
siah  in  the  day  of  his  obedience  unto 
death,  when  he  gave  his  back  to  the 
smiters,  and  his  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked 
off  the  hair.  He  was  confident  in  divine  sup 
port,  and  trusted  in  Jehovah. 

O  my  soul,  thy  sorrows  are  as  the  small 
dust  of  the  balance  compared  with  thy  Lord's  ! 
Canst  thou  not  believe  that  the  Lord  God  will 
help  thee?  Thy  Lord  was  in  a  peculiar  po 
sition;  for  as  the  representative  of  sinful  men 
—  their  substitute  and  sacrifice  —  it  was  need 
ful  that  the  Father  should  leave  him,  and 
cause  him  to  come  under  desertion  of  soul. 
No  such  necessity  is  laid  upon  thee:  thou  art 
not  bound  to  cry,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me?"  Did  thy  Saviour  even  in  such  a  case 
still  rely  upon  God,  and  canst  not  thou?  He 
died  for  thee,  and  thus  made  it  impossible  that 
thou  shouldst  be  left  alone;  wherefore,  be  of 
good  cheer. 

In  this  day's  labours  or  trials  say,  "  The 
Lord  God  will  help  me."  Go  forth  boldly. 
Set  your  face  like  a  flint,  and  resolve  that  no 
faintness  or  shamefacedness  shall  come  near 
you.  If  God  helps,  who  can  hinder?  If  you 
are  sure  of  omnipotent  aid,  what  can  be  too 
heavy  for  you?  Begin  the  day  joyously,  and 
let  no  shade  of  doubt  come  between  thee  and 
the  eternal  sunshine. 


222  Jfattb's  Cbecjue  3Boofc. 

AUGUST  9. 

"Every  "branch  in  me  that  beareth  not 
fruit  he  taketh  away:  and  every  branch  that 
beareth  fruit,  he  \purgeth  it,  that  it  may 
bring  forth  more  fruit."  —  John  xv.  2. 


is  a  precious  promise  to  one  who 
lives  for  fruitfulness.  At  first  it  seems 
to  wear  a  sharp  aspect.  Must  the  fruit 
ful  bough  be  pruned?  Must  the  knife  cut 
even  the  best  and  most  useful?  No  doubt 
it  is  so,  for  very  much  of  our  Lord's  purging 
work  is  done  by  means  of  afflictions  of  one 
kind  or  another.  It  is  not  the  evil  but  the 
good  who  have  the  promise  of  tribulation  in 
this  life.  But,  then,  the  end  makes  more  than 
full  amends  for  the  painful  nature  of  the 
means.  If  we  may  bring  forth  more  fruit  for 
our  Lord,  we  will  not  mind  the  pruning  and 
the  loss  of  leafage. 

Still,  purging  is  sometimes  wrought  by  the 
Word  apart  from  trial,  and  this  takes  away 
whatever  appeared  rough  in  the  flavour  of  the 
promise.  We  shall  by  the  Word  be  made 
more  gracious  and  more  useful.  The  Lord, 
who  has  made  us,  in  a  measure,  fruit-bearing, 
will  operate  upon  us  till  we  reach  a  far  higher 
degree  of  fertility.  Is  not  this  a  great  joy? 
Truly  there  is  more  comfort  in  a  promise  of 
fruitfulness  than  if  we  had  been  warranted 
riches,  or  health,  or  honour. 

Lord  Jesus,  speedily  fulfil  thy  gracious  word 
to  me,  and  cause  me  to  abound  in  fruit  to  thy 
praise  ! 


jfaitb'g  Cbeque  ffooft,  _  223 

AUGUST  10. 

"The  Lord  maketh  poor,  and  maketh  rich: 
he  bringeth  low,  and  lifteth  up." 
I  Sam.  ii.  7. 


HLL  my  changes  come  from  him  who 
never  changes.  If  I  had  grown  rich,  I 
should  have  seen  his  hand  in  it,  and  I 
should  have  praised  him;  let  me  equally  see 
his  hand  if  I  am  made  poor,  and  let  me  as 
heartily  praise  him.  When  we  go  down  in 
the  world,  it  is  of  the  Lord,  and  so  we  may 
take  it  patiently:  when  we  rise  in  the  world, 
it  is  of  the  Lord,  and  we  may  accept  it  thank 
fully.  In  any  case,  the  Lord  hath  done  it,  and 
it  is  well. 

It  seems  that  Jehovah's  way  is  to  lower 
those  whom  he  means  to  raise,  and  to  strip 
those  whom  he  intends  to  clothe.  If  it  is  his 
way,  it  is  the  wisest  and  best  way.  If  I  am 
now  enduring  the  bringing  low  I  may  well  re 
joice,  because  I  see  in  it  the  preface  to  the 
lifting  up.  The  more  we  are  humbled  by 
grace,  the  more  we  shall  be  exalted  in  glory. 
That  impoverishment  which  will  be  overruled 
for  our  enrichment  is  to  be  welcomed. 

O  Lord,  thou  hast  taken  me  down  of  late, 
and  made  me  feel  my  insignificance  and  sin. 
It  is  not  a  pleasant  experience,  but  I  pray  thee 
make  it  a  profitable  one  to  me.  Oh,  that 
thou  wouldst  thus  fit  me  to  bear  a  greater 
weight  of  delight  and  of  usefulness;  and  when 
I  am  ready  for  it,  then  grant  it  to  me,  for 
Christ's  sake!  Amen. 


224  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe. 

AUGUST  ii. 

"Truly  my  soul  walteth  upon  God:  from 
him  cometh  my  salvation!'  —  Ps.  Ixii.  i. 


posture  !—  waiting  truly  and 
only  upon  the  Lord.  Be  this  our  con 
dition  all  this  day,  and  every  day. 
Waiting  his  leisure,  waiting  in  his  service, 
waiting  in  joyful  expectation,  waiting  in 
prayer  and  content.  When  the  very  soul  thus 
waits,  it  is  in  the  best  and  truest  condition 
of  a  creature  before  his  Creator,  a  servant  be 
fore  his  Master,  a  child  before  his  Father. 
We  allow  no  dictation  to  God,  nor  complain 
ing  of  him;  we  will  permit  no  petulance,  and 
no  distrust.  At  the  same  time,  we  practice 
no  running  before  the  cloud,  and  no  seeking 
to  others  for  aid:  neither  of  these  would  be 
waiting  upon  God.  God,  and  God  alone,  is 
the  expectation  of  our  hearts. 

Blessed  assurance  !  —  from  him  salvation  is 
coming;  it  is  on  the  road.  It  will  come  from 
him,  and  from  no  one  else.  He  shall  have 
all  the  glory  of  it,  for  he  alone  can  and  will 
perform  it.  And  he  will  perform  it  most 
surely  in  his  own  time  and  manner.  He  will 
save  from  doubt,  and  suffering,  and  slander, 
and  distress.  Though  we  see  no  sign  of  it  as 
yet,  we  are  satisfied  to  bide  the  Lord's  will, 
for  we  have  no  suspicion  of  his  love  and  faith 
fulness.  He  will  make  sure  work  of  it  before 
long,  and  we  will  praise  him  at  once  for  the 
coming  mercy. 


Gbeque  ;Soofc.  225 


AUGUST  12. 

"For  thou  art  my  lamp,  0  Lord:  and  the 
Lord  will  lighten  my  darkness/' 
2  Sam.  xxii.  29. 


HM  I  in  the  light?  Then  thou,  O  Lord, 
art  my  lamp.  Take  thee  away,  and  my 
joy  would  be  gone;  but  as  long  as  thou 
art  with  me,  I  can  do  without  the  torches  of 
time  and  the  candles  of  created  comfort. 
What  a  light  the  presence  of  God  casts  on 
ail  things!  We  heard  of  a  lighthouse  which 
could  be  seen  for  twenty  miles,  but  our  Je 
hovah  is  not  only  a  God  at  hand,  but  far  off 
is  he  seen,  even  in  the  enemy's  country.  O 
Lord,  I  am  as  happy  as  an  angel  when  thy 
love  fills  my  heart.  Thou  art  all  my  desire. 

Am  I  in  the  dark?  Then  thou,  O  Lord,  wilt 
lighten  my  darkness.  Before  long  things  will 
change.  Affairs  may  grow  more  and  more 
dreary,  and  cloud  may  be  piled  upon  cloud; 
but  if  it  grows  so  dark  that  I  cannot  see  my 
own  hand,  still  I  shall  see  the  hand  of  the 
Lord.  When  I  cannot  find  a  light  v/ithin  me, 
or  among  my  friends,  or  in  the  whole  world, 
the  Lord,  who  said  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and 
there  was  light,  can  say  the  same  again.  He 
will  speak  me  into  the  sunshine  yet.  I  shall 
not  die,  but  live.  The  day  is  already  breaking. 
This  sweet  text  shines  like  a  morning  star. 
I  shall  clap  my  hands  for  joy  ere  many  hours 
are  passed. 
15 


226 ffaltb's  Cbcque  JBoofe. 

AUGUST  13. 

"//  shall  come  to  pass,  that  before  they 
call,  I  will  answer;  and  while  they  are  yet 
speaking,  I  will  hear." — Isa.  Ixv.  24. 


UICK  work  this!  The  Lord  hears  us 
before  we  call,  and  often  answers  us  in 
the  same  speedy  manner.  Foreseeing 
our  needs,  and  our  prayers,  he  so  arranges 
providence  that  before  the  need  actually  arises 
he  has  supplied  it,  before  the  trial  assails  us 
he  has  armed  us  against  it.  This  is  the 
promptitude  of  omniscience,  and  we  have 
often  seen  it  exercised.  Before  we  dreamed 
of  the  affliction  which  was  coming,  the  strong 
consolation  which  was  to  sustain  us  under 
it  had  arrived.  What  a  prayer-answering  God 
we  have! 

The  second  clause  suggests  the  telephone. 
Though  God  be  in  heaven  and  we  upon  earth, 
yet  he  makes  our  word,  like  his  own  word,  to 
travel  very  swiftly.  When  we  pray  aright 
we  speak  into  the  ear  of  God.  Our  gracious 
Mediator  presents  our  petitions  at  once,  and 
the  great  Father  hears  them  and  smiles  upon 
them.  Grand  praying  this!  Who  would  not 
be  much  in  prayer  when  he  knows  that  he  has 
the  ear  of  the  King  of  kings?  This  day  I  will 
pray  in  faith,  not  only  believing  that  I  shall 
be  heard,  but  that  I  am  heard ;  not  only  that  I 
shall  be  answered,  but  that  I  have  the  answer 
already.  Holy  Spirit,  help  me  in  this! 


Gbeque  3Booft.  227 


AUGUST  14. 

"And  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  seed  of 
David,  but  not  for  ever." — i  Kings  xi.  39. 

jl 

tf  the  family  of  grace  there  is  discipline, 
and  that  discipline  is  severe  enough  to 
make  it  an  evil  and  bitter  thing  to  sin. 
Solomon,  turned  aside  by  his  foreign  wives, 
had  set  up  other  gods,  and  grievously  pro 
voked  the  God  of  his  father;  therefore,  ten 
parts  out  of  twelve  of  the  kingdom  were  rent 
away,  and  set  up  as  a  rival  state.  This  was  a 
sore  affliction  to  the  house  of  David,  and  it 
came  upon  that  dynasty  distinctly  from  the 
hand  of  God,  as  the  result  of  unholy  conduct. 
The  Lord  will  chasten  his  best  beloved  serv 
ants  if  they  cease  from  full  obedience  to  his 
laws:  perhaps  at  this  very  hour  such  chasten 
ing  is  upon  us.  Let  us  humbly  cry,  "  O  Lord, 
show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me." 
What  a  sweet  saving  clause  is  that  — "  but 
not  for  ever  " !  The  punishment  of  sin  is  ever 
lasting,  but  the  fatherly  chastisement  of  it  in 
a  child  of  God  is  but  for  a  season.  The  sick 
ness,  the  poverty,  the  depression  of  spirit,  will 
pass  away  when  they  have  had  their  intended 
effect.  Remember,  we  are  not  under  law,  but 
under  grace.  The  rod  may  make  us  smart, 
but  the  sword  shall  not  make  us  die.  Our 
present  grief  is  meant  to  bring  us  to  repent 
ance,  that  we  may  not  be  destroyed  with  the 
wicked. 


228  ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBooft. 

AUGUST  15. 

"And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name, 
that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may  be  glori 
fied  in  the  Son." — John  xiv.  13. 


is  not  every  believer  who  has  yet  learned 
to  pray  in  Christ's  name.  To  ask  not 
only  for  his  sake,  but  in  his  name,  as  au 
thorized  by  him,  is  a  high  order  of  prayer. 
We  would  not  dare  to  ask  for  some  things 
in  that  blessed  name,  for  it  would  be  a 
wretched  profanation  of  it ;  but  when  the  peti 
tion  is  so  clearly  right  that  we  dare  set  the 
name  of  Jesus  to  it,  then  it  must  be  granted. 

Prayer  is  all  the  more  sure  to  succeed  be 
cause  it  is  for  the  Father's  glory  through  the 
Son.  It  glorifies  his  truth,  his  faithfulness, 
his  power,  his  grace.  The  granting  of  prayer, 
when  offered  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  reveals  the 
Father's  love  to  him,  and  the  honour  which  he 
has  put  upon  him.  The  glory  of  Jesus  and 
of  the  Father  are  so  wrapped  up  together,  that 
the  grace  which  magnifies  the  one  magnifies 
the  other.  The  channel  is  made  famous 
through  the  fulness  of  the  fountain,  and  the 
fountain  is  honoured  through  the  channel  by 
which  it  flows.  If  the  answering  of  our 
prayers  would  dishonour  our  Lord,  we  would 
not  pray;  but  since  in  this  thing  he  is  glori 
fied,  we  will  pray  without  ceasing  in  that  dear 
name  in  which  God  and  his  people  have  a  fel 
lowship  of  delight. 


Jfaitb's  Cbeqne  JBooft*  229 

AUGUST  16. 

"He  that  cover  eth  his  sins  shall  not  pros 
per:  but  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh 
them  shall  have  mercy."  —  Prov.  xxviii.  13. 


MERE  is  the  way  of  mercy  for  a  guilty 
and  repenting  sinner.     He  must  cease 
from  the  habit  of  covering  sin.     This 
is  attempted  by  falsehood,  which  denies  sin; 
by  hypocrisy,  which  conceals  it;  by  boasting, 
which   justifies    it;    and   by   loud   profession, 
which  tries  to  make  amends  for  it. 

The  sinner's  business  is  to  confess  and  for 
sake.  The  two  must  go  together.  Confes 
sion  must  be  honestly  made  to  the  Lord  him 
self  ;  and  it  must  include  within  itself  acknowl 
edgment  of  the  wrong,  sense  of  its  evil,  and 
the  abhorrence  of  it.  We  must  not  throw  the 
fault  upon  others,  nor  blame  circumstances, 
nor  plead  natural  weakness.  We  must  make 
a  clean  breast  of  it,  and  plead  guilty  to  the 
indictment.  There  can  be  no  mercy  till  this  is 
done. 

Furthermore,  we  must  forsake  the  evil: 
having  owned  our  fault,  we  must  disown  all 
present  and  future  intent  to  abide  in  it.  We 
cannot  remain  in  rebellion  and  yet  dwell  with 
the  King's  Majesty.  The  habit  of  evil  must 
be  quitted,  together  with  all  places,  compan 
ions,  pursuits,  and  books  which  might  lead 
us  astray.  Not  for  confession,  nor  for  refor 
mation,  but  in  connection  with  them,  we  find 
pardon  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus. 


230  ffaitb's  Cbcque  JBoofc. 

AUGUST  17. 

"And  he  answered,  Fear  not:  for  they 
that  be  with  ^ls  are  more  than  they  that  be 
with  them."  —  2  Kings  vi.  16. 


MORSES  and  chariots,  and  a  great  host, 
shut  up  the  prophet  in  Dothan.     His 
young     servant     was     alarmed.      How 
could  they  escape  from  such  a  body  of  armed 
men?     But  the  prophet  had  eyes  which  his 
servant  had  not,  and  he  could  see  a  greater 
host  with  far  superior  weapons  guarding  him 
from  all  harm.     Horses  of  fire  are  mightier 
than  horses  of  flesh,  and  chariots  of  fire  are 
far  preferable  to  chariots  of  iron. 

Even  so  is  it  at  this  hour.  The  adversaries 
of  truth  are  many,  influential,  learned,  and 
crafty;  and  truth  fares  ill  at  their  hands;  and 
yet  the  man  of  God  has  no  cause  for  trepida 
tion.  Agencies,  seen  and  unseen,  of  the  most 
potent  kind,  are  on  the  side  of  righteousness. 
God  has  armies  in  ambush  which  will  reveal 
themselves  in  the  hour  of  need.  The  forces 
which  are  on  the  side  of  the  good  and  the 
true  far  outweigh  the  powers  of  evil.  There 
fore,  let  us  keep  our  spirits  up,  and  walk  with 
the  gait  of  men  who  possess  a  cheering  se 
cret,  which  has  lifted  them  above  all  fear. 
We  are  on  the  winning  side.  The  battle  may 
be  sharp,  but  we  know  how  it  will  end.  Faith, 
having  God  with  her,  is  in  a  clear  majority: 
"  They  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they 
that  be  with  them.'* 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft,  _  231 

AUGUST  18. 

thou  seek  him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee." 
I  Chron.  xxviii.  9. 


ME  need  our  God!  he  is  to  be  had  for 
the  seeking  ;  and  he  will  not  deny  him 
self  to  any  one  of  us  if  we  personally 
seek  his  face.  It  is  not,  if  thou  deserve  him,  or 
purchase  his  favour,  but  merely  if  thou  "  seek  " 
him.  Those  who  already  know  the  Lord  must 
go  on  seeking  his  face  by  prayer,  by  diligent 
service,  and  by  holy  gratitude  :  to  such  he  will 
not  refuse  his  favour  and  fellowship.  Those 
who,  as  yet,  have  not  known  him  to  their  soul's 
rest  should  at  once  commence  seeking,  and 
never  cease  till  they  find  him  as  their  Saviour, 
their  Friend,  their  Father,  and  their  God. 

What  strong  assurance  this  promise  gives  to 
the  seeker  !  "  He  that  seeketh  findeth."  You, 
yes  you,  if  you  seek  your  God,  shall  find  him. 
When  you  find  him  you  have  found  life,  par 
don,  sanctification,  preservation,  and  glory. 
Will  you  not  seek,  and  seek  on,  since  you 
shall  not  seek  in  vain?  Dear  friend,  seek  the 
Lord  at  once.  Here  is  the  place,  and  now  is 
the  time.  Bend  that  stiff  knee  ;  yes,  bend  that 
stiff  er  neck,  and  cry  out  for  God,  for  the  living 
God.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  seek  cleansing 
and  justification.  You  shall  not  be  refused. 
Here  is  David's  testimony  to  his  son  Solo 
mon,  and  it  is  the  writer's  personal  witness  to 
the  reader.  Believe  it  and  act  upon  it,  for 
Christ's  sake. 


232  jfaftb's  Cbeque  3Boofc. 

AUGUST  19. 

"So  that  a  man  shall  say,  Verily  there  is 
a  reward  for  the  righteous:  verily  he  is  a 
God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth."  —  Ps.  Iviii.  n. 


OD'S  judgments  in  this  life  are  not  al 
ways  clearly  to  be  seen,  for  in  many 
cases  one  event  happeneth  alike  to  all. 
This  is  the  state  of  probation,  not  of  punish 
ment  or  reward.  Yet  at  times  God  works  ter 
rible  things  in  righteousness,  and  even  the 
careless  are  compelled  to  own  his  hand. 

Even  in  this  life  righteousness  has  that  kind 
of  reward  which  it  prefers  above  all  others, 
namely,  the  smile  of  God,  which  creates  a 
quiet  conscience.  Sometimes  other  recom 
penses  follow,  for  God  will  be  in  no  man's 
debt.  But,  at  the  same  time,  the  chief  reward 
of  the  righteous  lies  in  the  hereafter. 

Meanwhile,  on  a  large  scale,  we  mark  the 
presence  of  the  great  Ruler  among  the  nations. 
He  breaks  in  pieces  oppressive  thrones,  and 
punishes  guilty  peoples.  No  one  can  study 
the  history  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires  with 
out  perceiving  that  there  is  a  power  which 
makes  for  righteousness,  and,  in  the  end, 
brings  iniquity  before  its  bar,  and  condemns 
it  with  unsparing  justice.  Sin  shall  not  go 
unpunished,  and  goodness  shall  not  remain 
unrewarded.  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must 
do  right.  Therefore,  let  us  fear  before  him, 
and  no  more  dread  the  power  of  the  wicked. 


ffattb'g  Cbegue  JBoofe,  _  233 

AUGUST  20. 

"He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six   troubles: 
yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee." 
Job  v.  19. 


in  this  spoke  the  truth  of  God. 
We  may  have  as  many  troubles  as  .the 
work-days  of  the  week,  but  the  God  who 
worked  on  those  six  days  will  work  for  us  till 
our  deliverance  is  complete.  We  shall  rest 
with  him,  and  in  him  on  our  Sabbath.  The 
rapid  succession  of  trials  is  one  of  the  sorest 
tests  of  faith.  Before  we  have  recovered  from 
one  blow,  it  is  followed  by  another  and  an 
other  till  we  are  staggered.  Still,  the  equally 
quick  succession  of  deliverances  is  exceedingly 
cheering.  New  songs  are  rung  out  upon  the 
anvil  by  the  hammer  of  affliction,  till  we  see  in 
the  spiritual  world  the  antitype  of  "  the  Har 
monious  Blacksmith."  Our  confidence  is,  that 
when  the  Lord  makes  our  trials  six,  six  they 
will  be,  and  no  more. 

It  may  be  that  we  have  no  rest-day,  for 
seven  troubles  come  upon  us.  What  then? 
"  In  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee." 
Evil  may  roar  at  us,  but  it  shall  be  kept  at 
more  than  arm's  length,  and  shall  not  even 
touch  us.  Its  hot  breath  may  distress  us,  but 
its  little  finger  cannot  be  laid  upon  us. 

With  our  loins  girt  about  us  we  will  meet 
the  six  or  the  seven  troubles,  and  leave  fear 
to  those  who  have  no  Father,  no  Saviour,  and 
no  Sanctifier. 


234  3Faftb'0  Gbeque 


AUGUST  21. 

"For  his  anger  endureth  but  a  moment; 

in  his  favour  is  life:  weeping  may  endure 

for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning." 

Ps.  xxx.  5. 

<£ 

H  MOMENT  under  our  Father's  anger 
seems  very  long,  and  yet  it  is  but  a 
moment  after  all.  If  we  grieve  his 
Spirit  we  cannot  look  for  his  smile;  but  he  is 
a  God  ready  to  pardon,  and  he  soon  puts  aside 
all  remembrance  of  our  faults.  When  we 
faint  and  are  ready  to  die  because  of  his  frown, 
his  favour  puts  new  life  into  us. 

This  verse  has  another  note  of  the  semi 
quaver  kind.  Our  weeping  night  soon  turns 
into  joyous  day.  Brevity  is  the  mark  of  mercy 
in  the  hour  of  the  chastisement  of  believers. 
The  Lord  loves  not  to  use  the  rod  on  his 
chosen;  he  gives  a  blow  or  two,  and  all  is 
over;  yea,  and  the  life  and  the  joy,  which  fol 
low  the  anger  and  the  weeping,  more  than 
make  amends  for  the  salutary  sorrow. 

Come,  my  heart,  begin  thy  hallelujahs! 
Weep  not  all  through  the  night,  but  wipe  thine 
eyes  in  anticipation  of  the  morning.  These 
tears  are  dews  which  mean  us  as  much  good 
as  the  sunbeams  of  the  morrow.  Tears  clear 
the  eyes  for  the  sight  of  God  in  his  grace; 
and  make  the  vision  of  his  favour  more  pre 
cious.  A  night  of  sorrow  supplies  those 
shades  of  the  picture  by  which  the  high  lights 
are  brought  out  with  distinctness.  All  is  well. 


3Faitbr0  Gbeque  JBoofc.  235 

AUGUST  22. 

"Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise 
thee:  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  re 
strain."  —  Ps.  Ixxvi.  10. 


MICKED  men  will  be  wrathful.  Their 
anger  we  must  endure  as  the  badge  of 
our  calling,  the  token  of  our  separa 
tion  from  them:  if  we  were  of  the  world  the 
world  would  love  its  own.  Our  comfort  is 
that  the  wrath  of  man  shall  be  made  to  re 
dound  to  the  glory  of  God.  When  in  their 
wrath  the  wicked  crucified  the  Son  of  God 
they  were  unwittingly  fulfilling  the  divine  pur 
pose,  and  in  a  thousand  cases  the  wilfulness  of 
the  ungodly  is  doing  the  same.  They  think 
themselves  free,  but  like  convicts  in  chains 
they  are  unconsciously  working  out  the  de 
crees  of  the  Almighty. 

The  devices  of  the  wicked  are  overruled  for 
their  defeat.  They  act  in  a  suicidal  way,  and 
baffle  their  own  plottings.  Nothing  will  come 
of  their  wrath  which  can  do  us  real  harm. 
When  they  burned  the  martyrs  the  smoke 
which  blew  from  the  stake  sickened  men  of 
Popery  more  than  anything  else. 

Meanwhile,  the  Lord  has  a  muzzle  and  a 
chain  for  bears.  He  restrains  the  more  furi 
ous  wrath  of  the  enemy.  He  is  like  a  miller 
who  holds  back  the  mass  of  the  water  in  the 
stream,  and  what  he  does  allow  to  flow  he 
uses  for  the  turning  of  his  wheel.  Let  us 
not  sigh,  but  sing.  All  is  well,  however  hard 
the  wind  blows. 


236 


AUGUST  23. 

"I  love  them  that  love  me;  and  those  that 
seek  me  early  shall  find  me."  —  Prov.  viii.  17. 
£ 

MISDOM  loves  her  lovers,  and  seeks  her 
seekers.  He  is  already  wise  who 
seeks  to  be  wise,  and  he  has  almost 
found  wisdom  who  diligently  seeks  her. 
What  is  true  of  wisdom  in  general  is  specially 
true  of  wisdom  embodied  in  our  Lord  Jesus. 
Him  we  are  to  love  and  to  seek,  and  in  return 
we  shall  enjoy  his  love,  and  find  him. 

Our  business  is  to  seek  Jesus  early  in  life. 
Happy  are  the  young  whose  morning  is  spent 
with  Jesus!  It  is  never  too  soon  to  seek  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Early  seekers  make  certain  find 
ers.  We  should  seek  him  early  by  diligence. 
Thriving  tradesmen  are  early  risers,  and  thriv 
ing  saints  seek  Jesus  early.  Those  who  find 
Jesus  to  their  enrichment  give  their  hearts 
to  seeking  him.  We  must  seek  him  first,  and 
thus  earliest.  Above  all  things  Jesus.  Jesus 
first,  and  nothing  else  even  as  a  bad  second. 

The  blessing  is  that  he  will  be  found.  He 
reveals  himself  more  and  more  clearly  to  our 
search.  He  gives  himself  up  more  fully  to 
our  fellowship.  Happy  men  who  seek  one 
who,  when  he  is  found,  remains  with  them 
for  ever,  a  treasure  growingly  precious  to  their 
hearts  and  understandings. 

Lord  Jesus,  I  have  found  thee;  be  found  of 
me  to  an  unutterable  degree  of  joyous  satis 
faction. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  237 

AUGUST  24. 

"For  it  is  written,  I  will  destroy  the  wis 
dom  of  the  wise,  and  will  bring  to  nothing 
the  understanding  of  the  prudent/' 
I  Cor.  i.  19. 
Jl 


verse  is  a  threatening  so  far  as  the 
worldly-wise  are  concerned,  but  to  the 
simple  believer  it  is  a  promise.  The 
professedly  learned  are  for  ever  trying  to  bring 
to  nothing  the  faith  of  the  humble  believer, 
but  they  fail  in  their  attempts.  Their  argu 
ments  break  down,  their  theories  fall  under 
their  own  weight,  their  deep-laid  plots  dis 
cover  themselves  before  their  purpose  is  ac 
complished.  The  old  gospel  is  not  extinct  yet, 
nor  will  it  be  while  the  Lord  liveth.  If  it 
could  have  been  exterminated  it  would  have 
perished  from  off  the  earth  long  ago. 

We  cannot  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise, 
nor  need  we  attempt  it,  for  the  work  is  in  far 
better  hands.  The  Lord  himself  says,  "  I 
will,"  and  he  never  resolves  in  vain.  Twice 
does  he  in  this  verse  declare  his  purpose,  and 
we  may  rest  assured  that  he  will  not  turn 
aside  from  it. 

What  clean  work  the  Lord  makes  of  philos 
ophy  and  "  modern  thought  "  when  he  puts 
his  hand  to  it  !  He  brings  the  fine  appearance 
down  to  nothing;  be  utterly  destroys  the 
wood,  hay,  and  stubble.  It  is  written  that 
so  it  shall  be,  and  so  shall  it  be.  Lord,  make 
short  work  of  it.  Amen,  and  Amen. 


238  jfaitb'6  Cbeque 


" 


AUGUST  25. 

I  will  feed  my  Hock,  and  I  will  cause 
them  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord  God." 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  15. 


mNDER  the  divine  shepherdry  saints  are 
fed  to  the  full.  Theirs  is  not  a  windy, 
unsatisfying  mess  of  mere  human 
"  thought " ;  but  the  Lord  feeds  them  upon  the 
solid,  substantial  truth  of  divine  revelation. 
There  is  real  nutriment  for  the  soul  in  Scrip 
ture  brought  home  to  the  heart  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Jesus,  himself,  is  the  true  life-sus 
taining  food  of  believers.  Here  our  Great 
Shepherd  promises  that  such  sacred  nourish 
ment  shall  be  given  us  by  his  own  self.  If, 
on  the  Sabbath,  our  earthly  shepherd  is  empty- 
handed,  the  Lord  is  not. 

When  filled  with  holy  truth  the  mind  rests. 
Those  whom  Jehovah  feeds  are  at  peace.  No 
dog  shall  worry  them,  no  wolf  shall  devour 
them,  no  restless  propensities  shall  disturb 
them.  They  shall  lie  down  and  digest  the 
food  which  they  have  enjoyed.  The  doctrines 
of  grace  are  not  only  sustaining,  but  consol 
ing  :  in  them  we  have  the  means  for  building  up 
and  lying  down.  If  preachers  do  not  give  us 
rest,  let  us  look  to  the  Lord  for  it. 

This  day  may  the  Lord  cause  us  to  feed  in 
the  pastures  of  the  Word,  and  make  us  to  lie 
down  in  them.  May  no  folly,  and  no  worry, 
but  Meditation  and  Peace  mark  this  day. 


Cbegue  3Booft.  239 


AUGUST  26. 

"I  will  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle/' 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  22. 


SOME  are  fat  and  flourishing,  and  there 
fore  they  are  unkind  to  the  feeble.  This 
is  a  grievous  sin,  and  causes  much  sorrow. 
Those  thrustings  with  side  and  shoulder,  those 
pushings  of  the  diseased  with  the  horn,  are  a 
sad  means  of  offence  in  the  assemblies  of  pro 
fessing  believers.  The  Lord  takes  note  of 
these  proud  and  unkind  deeds,  and  he  is 
greatly  angered  by  them,  for  he  loves  the 
weak. 

Is  the  reader  one  of  the  despised?  Is  he  a 
mourner  in  Zion,  and  a  marked  man  because 
of  his  tender  conscience?  Do  his  brethren 
judge  him  harshly?  Let  him  not  resent  their 
conduct  ;  above  all,  let  him  not  push  and  thrust 
in  return.  Let  him  leave  the  matter  in  the 
Lord's  hands.  He  is  the  Judge.  Why  should 
we  wish  to  intrude  upon  his  office?  He  will 
decide  much  more  righteously  than  we  can. 
His  time  for  judgment  is  the  best,  and  we 
need  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  hasten  it  on. 

Let  the  hard-hearted  oppressor  tremble. 
Even  though  he  may  ride  rough-shod  over 
others  with  impunity  for  the  present,  all  his 
proud  speeches  are  noted,  and  for  every  one 
of  them  account  must  be  given  before  the  bar 
of  the  Great  Judge. 

Patience,  my  soul!  Patience!  the  Lord 
knoweth  thy  grief.  Thy  Jesus  hath  pity  upon 
thee! 


240  JFaitb's  Cbeque  3Boofc, 

AUGUST  27. 

"I  have   chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of 
affliction" — Isa.  xlviii.  10. 


HIS  has  long  been  the  motto  fixed  be- 
fore  our  eye  upon  the  wall  of  our  bed 
chamber,  and  in  many  ways  it  has  also 
been  written  on  our  heart.  It  is  no  mean 
thing  to  be  chosen  of  God.  God's  choice 
makes  chosen  men  choice  men.  Better  to  be 
the  elect  of  God  than  the  elect  of  a  whole 
nation.  So  eminent  is  this  privilege,  that 
whatever  drawback  may  be  joined  to  it  we 
very  joyfully  accept  it,  even  as  the  Jew  ate  the 
bitter  herbs  for  the  sake  of  the  Paschal  Lamb. 
We  choose  the  furnace,  since  God  chooses  us 
in  it. 

We  are  chosen  as  an  afflicted  people,  and 
not  as  a  prosperous  people,  chosen  not  in 
the  palace,  but  in  the  furnace.  In  the  furnace 
beauty  is  marred,  fashion  is  destroyed,  strength 
is  melted,  glory  is  consumed,  and  yet  here 
eternal  love  reveals  its  secrets,  and  declares 
its  choice.  So  has  it  been  in  our  case.  In 
times  of  severest  trial  God  has  made  to  us 
our  calling  and  election  plain,  and  we  have 
made  it  sure:  then  have  we  chosen  the  Lord 
to  be  our  God,  and  he  has  shown  that  we  are 
assuredly  his  chosen.  Therefore,  if  to-day  the 
furnace  be  heated  seven  times  hotter,  we  will 
not  dread  it,  for  the  glorious  Son  of  God  will 
walk  with  us  amid  the  glowing  coals. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 241 

AUGUST  28. 

"As  for  me,  I  will  call  upon  God;  and  the 
Lord  shall  save  me." 

Ps.  Iv.  16. 


ES,  I  must  and  will  pray.  What  else 
can  I  do?  What  better  can  I  do? 
Betrayed,  forsaken,  grieved,  baffled,  O 
my  Lord,  I  will  call  upon  thee.  My  Ziklag 
is  in  ashes,  and  men  speak  of  stoning  me ;  but 
I  encourage  my  heart  in  the  Lord,  who  will 
bear  me  through  this  trial  as  he  has  borne  me 
through  so  many  others.  Jehovah  shall  save 
me ;  I  am  sure  he  will,  and  I  declare  my  faith. 

The  Lord  and  no  one  else  shall  save  me. 
I  desire  no  other  helper,  and  would  not  trust 
in  an  arm  of  flesh  even  if  I  could.  I  will  cry 
to  him  evening,  and  morning,  and  noon,  and  I 
will  cry  to  no  one  else,  for  he  is  All-sufficient. 

How  he  will  save  me  I  cannot  guess;  but 
he  will  do  it,  I  know.  He  will  do  it  in  the 
best  and  surest  way,  and  he  will  do  it  in  the 
largest,  truest,  and  fullest  sense.  Out  of  this 
trouble  and  all  future  troubles  the  great  I  AM 
will  bring  me  as  surely  as  he  lives;  and  when 
death  comes,  and  all  the  mysteries  of  eternity 
follow  thereon,  still  will  this  be  true :  "  the 
Lord  shall  save  me."  This  shall  be  my  song 
all  through  this  autumn  day.  Is  it  not  as  a 
ripe  apple  from  the  tree  of  life?  I  will  feed 
upon  it.  How  sweet  it  is  to  my  taste ! 
16 


242 ffaitb'0  Cbequc  JBooft. 

AUGUST  29. 

"Their  soul  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden." 
Jer.  xxxi.  12. 

Ji 

,  to  have  one's  soul  under  heavenly  cul 
tivation;  no  longer  a  wilderness,  but  a 
garden  of  the  Lord!  Enclosed  from 
the  waste,  walled  around  by  grace,  planted 
by  instruction,  visited  by  love,  weeded  by 
heavenly  discipline,  and  guarded  by  divine 
power,  one's  favoured  soul  is  prepared  to 
yield  fruit  unto  the  Lord. 

But  a  garden  may  become  parched  for  want 
of  water,  and  then  all  its  herbs  decline,  and 
are  ready  to  die.  O  my  soul,  how  soon  would 
this  be  the  case  were  the  Lord  to  leave  thee! 
In  the  East  a  garden  without  water  soon 
ceases  to  be  a  garden  at  all:  nothing  can 
come  to  perfection,  grow  or  even  live.  When 
irrigation  is  kept  up  the  result  is  charming. 
Oh,  to  have  one's  soul  watered  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  uniformly  —  every  part  of  the  garden 
having  its  own  stream;  plentifully  —  a  suf 
ficient  refreshment  coming  to  every  tree  and 
herb,  however  thirsty  by  nature  it  may  be; 
continually  —  each  hour  bringing  not  only  its 
heat,  but  its  refreshment ;  wisely  —  each  plant 
receiving  just  what  it  needs.  In  a  garden  you 
can  see  by  the  verdure  where  the  water  flows, 
and  you  can  soon  perceive  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  comes. 

O  Lord,  water  me  this  day,  and  cause  me 
to  yield  thee  a  full  reward,  for  Jesus'  sake. 
Amen. 


243 


AUGUST  30. 

"Although  my  house  be  not  so  with  God; 
yet  he  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting 
covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure:  for 
it  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire,  al 
though  he  make  it  not  to  grow." 
2  Sam.  xxiii.  5. 
Jl 


is  not  so  much  one  promise  as  an 
aggregate  of  promises  —  a  box  of 
pearls.  The  covenant  is  the  ark  which 
contains  all  things. 

These  are  the  last  words  of  David,  but 
they  may  be  mine  to-day.  Here  is  a  sigh: 
things  are  not  with  me  and  mine  as  I  could 
wish;  there  are  trials,  cares,  and  sins.  These 
make  the  pillow  hard. 

Here  is  a  solace  —  "  He  hath  made  with  me 
an  everlasting  covenant."  Jehovah  has 
pledged  himself  to  me,  and  sealed  the  com 
pact  with  the  blood  of  Jesus.  I  am  bound 
to  my  God,  and  my  God  to  me. 

This  brings  into  prominence  a  security, 
since  this  covenant  is  everlasting,  well  or 
dered  and  sure.  There  is  nothing  to  fear 
from  the  lapse  of  time,  the  failure  of  some  for 
gotten  point,  or  the  natural  uncertainty  of 
things.  The  covenant  is  a  rocky  foundation 
to  build  on  for  life  or  for  death. 

O  my  soul,  turn  thou  this  day  to  thy  Lord 
Jesus,  whom  the  great  Lord  has  given  to  be 
a  covenant  to  the  people.  Take  him  to  be 
thine  all  in  all. 


244  ffaftb's  Cbecjue 


AUGUST  31. 

"But  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for 
ever.  And  this  is  the  word  which  by  the 
gospel  is  preached  unto  you/'  —  i  Pet.  i.  25. 


HLL  human  teaching  and,  indeed,  all  hu 
man  beings,  shall  pass  away  as  the  grass 
of  the  meadow  ;  but  we  are  here  assured 
that  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  of  a  very  dif 
ferent  character,  for  it  shall  endure  for  ever. 

We  have  here  a  divine  gospel;  for  what 
word  can  endure  for  ever  but  that  which  is 
spoken  by  the  eternal  God? 

We  have  here  an  ever-living  gospel,  as  full 
of  vitality  as  when  it  first  came  from  the  lip 
of  God;  as  strong  to  convince  and  convert, 
to  regenerate  and  console,  to  sustain  and  sanc 
tify,  as  ever  it  was  in  its  first  days  of  won 
der-working. 

We  have  an  unchanging  gospel,  which  is 
not  to-day  green  grass,  and  to-morrow  dry 
hay;  but  always  the  abiding  truth  of  the  im 
mutable  Jehovah.  Opinions  alter,  but  truth 
certified  by  God  can  no  more  change  than  the 
God  who  uttered  it. 

Here,  then,  we  have  a  gospel  to  rejoice  in, 
a  word  of  the  Lord  upon  which  we  may  lean 
all  our  weight.  "  For  ever  "  includes  life, 
death,  judgment,  and  eternity.  Glory  be  to 
God  in  Christ  Jesus  for  everlasting  consola 
tion.  Feed  on  the  word  to-day,  and  all  the 
days  of  thy  life. 


Jfaftb's  Gbeque  JBoofc.  245 

SEPTEMBER  i. 

"//  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall 
abide  in  my  love." — John  xv.  10. 


things  cannot  be  parted  —  abid- 
ing  in  obedience,  and  abiding  in  the  love 
of  Jesus.  A  life  under  the  rule  of  Christ 
can  alone  prove  that  we  are  the  objects  of 
our  Lord's  delight.  We  must  keep  our  Lord's 
command  if  we  would  bask  in  his  love.  If  we 
live  in  sin  we  cannot  live  in  the  love  of  Christ. 
Without  the  holiness  which  pleases  God,  we 
cannot  please  Jesus.  He  who  cares  nothing 
for  holiness  knows  nothing  of  the  love  of  Je 
sus. 

Conscious  enjoyment  of  our  Lord's  love  is 
a  delicate  thing.  It  is  far  more  sensitive  to 
sin  and  holiness  than  mercury  is  to  cold  and 
heat.  When  we  are  tender  of  heart,  and  care 
ful  in  thought,  lip,  and  life  to  honour  our 
Lord  Jesus,  then  we  receive  tokens  of  his 
love  without  number.  If  we  desire  to  perpet 
uate  such  bliss  we  must  perpetuate  holiness. 
The  Lord  Jesus  will  not  hide  his  face  from  us 
unless  we  hide  our  face  from  him.  Sin  makes 
the  cloud  which  darkens  our  Sun:  if  we  will 
be  watchfully  obedient  and  completely  conse 
crated,  we  may  walk  in  the  light,  as  God  is 
in  the  light,  and  have  as  sure  an  abiding  in 
the  love  of  Jesus  as  Jesus  has  in  the  love  of 
the  Father.  Here  is  a  sweet  promise  with 
a  solemn  "  if."  Lord,  let  me  have  this  "  if  " 
in  my  hand;  for  as  a  key  it  opens  this  casket. 


246  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft 

SEPTEMBER  2. 

"Then  shall  zve  know,  if  we  follow  on  to 
know  the  Lord."  —  Hos.  vi.  3. 


mOT  all  at  once,  but  by  degrees,  shall  we 
attain  to  holy  knowledge,  and  our  busi 
ness  is  to  persevere  and  learn  by  little 
and  little.  We  need  not  despair,  though  our 
progress  may  be  slow,  for  we  shall  yet  know. 
The  Lord,  who  has  become  our  teacher,  will 
not  give  us  up,  however  slow  of  understand 
ing  we  may  be;  for  it  is  not  for  his  honour 
that  any  degree  of  human  folly  should  baffle 
his  skill.  The  Lord  delights  to  make  the  sim 
ple  wise. 

Our  duty  is  to  keep  to  our  main  topic,  and 
follow  on  to  know,  not  this  peculiar  doctrine 
nor  that,  but  Jehovah  himself.  To  know  Fa 
ther,  Son,  and  Spirit,  the  Triune  God,  this 
is  life  eternal:  let  us  keep  to  this,  for  in  this 
way  we  shall  gain  complete  instruction.  By 
following  on  to  know  the  Lord,  we  learn  heal 
ing  after  being  torn,  binding  up  after  smit 
ing,  and  life  after  death.  Experience  has  its 
perfect  work  when  the  heart  follows  the  track 
way  of  the  Almighty  Lord. 

My  soul,  keep  thou  close  to  Jesus,  follow  on 
to  know  God  in  Jesus,  and  so  shalt  thou  come 
to  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  which  is  the  most 
excellent  of  all  the  sciences.  The  Holy  Ghost 
will  lead  thee  into  all  truth.  Is  not  this  his 
gracious  office?  Rely  upon  him  to  fulfil  it. 


jfaitb'g  Cbeque  3Booft» 247 

SEPTEMBER  3. 

"And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord, 
when  I  have  opened  your  graves,  O  my  peo 
ple,  and  brought  you  up  out  of  your  graves." 
Ezek.  xxxvii.  13. 
Jl 

*€FNDEED  it  must  be  so:  those  who  receive 
life  from  the  dead  are  sure  to  recognize 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  such  a  resurrec 
tion.     This  is  the  greatest  and  most  remark 
able  of  all  changes  that  a  man  can  undergo 
—  to  be  brought  out  of  the  grave  of  spiritual 
death,  and  made  to  rejoice  in  the  light  and  lib 
erty  of  spiritual  life.     None  could  work  this 
but  the  Lord  and  giver  of  life. 

Ah  me!  how  well  do  I  remember  when  I 
was  lying  in  the  valley  full  of  dry  bones,  as 
dry  as  any  of  them!  Blessed  was  the  day 
when  free  and  sovereign  grace  sent  the  man 
of  God  to  prophesy  upon  me!  Glory  be  to 
God  for  the  stirring  which  that  word  of  faith 
caused  among  the  dry  bones.  More  blessed 
still  was  that  heavenly  breath  from  the  four 
winds  which  made  me  live!  Now  know  I 
the  quickening  Spirit  of  the  ever-living  Jeho 
vah.  Truly  Jehovah  is  the  living  God,  for  he 
made  me  live.  My  new  life  even  in  its  pin- 
ings  and  sorrowings  is  clear  proof  to  me  that 
the  Lord  can  kill  and  make  alive.  He  is  the 
only  God.  He  is  all  that  is  great,  gracious, 
and  glorious,  and  my  quickened  soul  adores 
him  as  the  great  I  AM.  All  glory  be  unto 
his  sacred  name!  As  long  as  I  live  I  will 
praise  him. 


248  ffaitb's  Gbeque 


SEPTEMBER  4. 

"But  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of 
Judah,  and  will  save  them  by  the  Lord  their 
God,  and  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by 
sword,  nor  by,  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by 
horsemen"  —  Hosea  i.  7. 


RECIOIJS  word!  Jehovah  himself  will 
deliver  his  people  in  the  greatness  of  his 
mercy,  but  he  will  not  do  it  by  the  or 
dinary  means.  Men  are  slow  to  render  to 
God  the  glory  due  unto  his  name.  If  they  go 
to  battle  with  sword  and  bow,  and  win  the 
victory,  they  ought  to  praise  their  God;  yet 
they  do  not,  but  begin  to  magnify  their  own 
right  arm,  and  glory  in  their  horses  and  horse 
men.  For  this  reason  our  Jehovah  often  de 
termines  to  save  his  people  without  second 
means,  that  all  the  honour  may  be  to  himself 
alone. 

Look,  then,  my  heart,  to  the  Lord  alone, 
and  not  to  man.  Expect  to  see  God  all  the 
more  clearly  when  there  is  no  one  else  to 
look  to.  If  I  have  no  friend,  no  adviser,  no 
one  at  my  back,  let  me  be  none  the  less  con 
fident  if  I  can  feel  that  the  Lord  himself  is 
on  my  side;  yea,  let  me  be  glad  if  he  gives 
victory  without  battle,  as  the  text  seems  to 
imply.  Why  do  I  ask  for  horses  and  horse 
men  if  Jehovah  himself  has  mercy  upon  me, 
and  lifts  up  his  arm  for  my  defence?  Why 
need  I  bow  or  sword  if  God  will  save?  Let 
me  trust,  and  not  be  afraid,  from  this  day 
forth  and  for  evermore.  Amen. 


ffaitb'g  Gbeque  JBooft. 249 

SEPTEMBER  5. 

The  Lord  will  be  with  you" 
2  Chron.  xx.  17. 

Jl 

was  a  great  mercy  for  Jehoshaphat, 
for  a  great  multitude  had  come  out 
against  him ;  and  it  will  be  a  great  mercy 
for  me,  for  I  have  great  need,  and  I  have 
no  might  or  wisdom.  If  the  Lord  be  with  me, 
it  matters  little  who  may  desert  me.  If  the 
Lord  be  with  me,  I  shall  conquer  in  the  bat 
tle  of  life,  and  the  greater  my  trials  the  more 
glorious  will  be  my  victory.  How  can  I  be 
sure  that  the  Lord  is  with  me? 

For  certain  he  is  with  me  if  I  am  with 
him.  If  I  trust  in  his  faithfulness,  believe 
his  words,  and  obey  his  commands,  he  is  as 
suredly  with  me.  If  I  am  on  Satan's  side 
God  is  against  me,  and  cannot  be  otherwise; 
but  if  I  live  to  honour  God  I  may  be  sure 
that  he  will  honour  me. 

I  am  quite  sure  that  God  is  with  me  if  Jesus 
is  my  sole  and  only  Saviour.  If  I  have  placed 
my  soul  in  the  hands  of  God's  Only-begotten 
Son,  then  I  may  be  sure  that  the  Father  will 
put  forth  all  his  power  to  preserve  me,  that 
his  Son  may  not  be  dishonoured. 

Oh  for  faith  to  take  hold  upon  the  short 
but  sweet  text  for  to-day!  O  Lord,  fulfil  this 
word  to  thy  servant!  Be  with  me  in  the 
house,  in  the  street,  in  the  field,  in  the  shop, 
in  company,  and  alone.  Be  thou  also  with  all 
thy  people. 


250  ffaftb'5  Cbeque  JBoofc. 

SEPTEMBER  6. 

'Wait  on  the  Lord:  be  of  good  courage, 
and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart:  wait, 
I  say,  on  the  Lord."  —  Ps.  xxvii.  14. 

jl 


Wait  •  ket  y°ur  waging  be  on 
the  Lord!  He  is  worth  waiting  for. 
He  never  disappoints  the  waiting 
soul. 

While  waiting  keep  up  your  spirits.  Ex 
pect  a  great  deliverance,  and  be  ready  to  praise 
God  for  it. 

The  promise  which  should  cheer  you  is  in 
the  middle  of  the  verse  —  "  He  shall  strengthen 
thine  heart."  This  goes  at  once  to  the  place 
where  you  need  help.  If  the  heart  be  sound, 
all  the  rest  of  the  system  will  work  well. 
The  heart  wants  calming  and  cheering;  and 
both  of  these  will  come  if  it  be  strengthened. 
A  forceful  heart  rest  and  rejoices,  and  throbs 
force  into  the  whole  man. 

No  one  else  can  get  at  that  secret  urn  of 
life,  the  heart,  so  as  to  pour  strength  into 
it.  He  alone  who  made  it  can  make  it  strong. 
God  is  full  of  strength,  and,  therefore,  he  can 
impart  it  to  those  who  need  it.  Oh,  be  brave  ; 
for  the  Lord  will  impart  his  strength  to  you, 
and  you  shall  be  calm  in  tempest,  and  glad  in 
sorrow. 

He  who  penned  these  lines  can  write  as  Da 
vid  did  —  "  Wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord."  I  do, 
indeed,  say  it.  I  know  by  long  and  deep  ex 
perience  that  it  is  good  for  me  to  wait  upon 
the  Lord. 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofe.  251 

SEPTEMBER  7. 

"It  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  the  place 
where  it  was  said  unto  them,   Ye  are  not 
my  people,  there  it  shall  be  said  unto  them, 
Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God." 
Hosea  i.  10. 


SOVEREIGN   grace   can  make   strangers 
into  sons,  and  the  Lord  here  declares  his 
purpose   to   deal   thus   with   rebels,   and 
make  them  know  what  he  has  done.     Beloved 
reader,  the  Lord  has  done  this  in  my  case; 
has  he  done  the  like  for  you?     Then  let  us 
join  hands  and  hearts  in  praising  his  adorable 
name. 

Some  of  us  were  so  decidedly  ungodly  that 
the  Lord's  Word  most  truly  said  to  our  con 
science  and  heart,  "  Ye  are  not  my  people." 
In  the  house  of  God,  and  in  our  own  homes, 
when  we  read  the  Bible,  this  was  the  voice 
of  God's  Spirit  in  our  soul,  "  Ye  are  not  my 
people."  Truly  a  sad  condemning  voice  it 
was.  But  now,  in  the  same  places,  from  the 
same  ministry  and  Scripture,  we  hear  a  voice, 
which  saith,  "  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living 
God."  Can  we  be  grateful  enough  for  this? 
Is  it  not  wonderful?  Does  it  not  give  us 
hope  for  others?  Who  is  beyond  the  reach 
of  almighty  grace?  How  can  we  despair  of 
any,  since  the  Lord  has  wrought  so  marvel 
lous  a  change  in  us? 

He  who  has  kept  this  one  great  promise  will 
keep  every  other;  wherefore,  let  us  go  for 
ward  with  songs  of  adoration  and  confidence. 


252  ffaitb's  Cheque 


SEPTEMBER  8. 

"A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and 
the  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench." 
Is.  xlii.  3. 

Jl 


I  may  reckon  upon  tender  treat- 
ment  from  my  Lord.  Indeed,  I  feel  my 
self  to  be  at  least  as  weak,  as  pliant, 
as  worthless  as  a  reed.  Someone  said,  "  I* 
don't  care  a  rush  for  you  "  ;  and  the  speech, 
though  unkind,  was  not  untrue.  Alas!  I  am 
worse  than  a  reed  when  it  grows  by  the  river, 
for  that  at  least  can  hold  up  its  head.  I  am 
bruised,  sorely,  sadly  bruised.  There  is  no 
music  in  me  now;  there  is  a  rift  which  lets 
out  all  the  melody.  Ah,  me!  Yet  Jesus  will 
not  break  me;  and  if  he  will  not,  then  I  mind 
little  what  others  try  to  do.  O  sweet  and 
compassionate  Lord,  I  nestle  down  beneath 
thy  protection,  and  forget  my  bruises! 

Truly  I  am  also  fit  to  be  likened  to  "  the 
smoking  flax,"  whose  light  is  gone,  and  only- 
its  smoke  remains.  I  fear  I  am  rather  a  nui 
sance  than  a  benefit.  My  fears  tell  me  that 
the  devil  has  blown  out  my  light,  and  left  me 
an  obnoxious  smoke,  and  that  my  Lord  will 
soon  put  an  extinguisher  upon  me.  Yet  I 
perceive  that  though  there  were  snuffers  under 
the  law,  there  were  no  extinguishers;  and  Je 
sus  will  not  quench  me;  therefore,  I  am  hope 
ful.  Lord,  kindle  me  anew,  and  cause  me  to 
shine  forth  to  thy  glory,  and  to  the  extolling 
of  thy  tenderness. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  353oofe»  _  253 

SEPTEMBER  9. 

"Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  akvay." 
Prov.  xxviii.  14. 

Jl 


fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  and 
the  foundation  of  all  true  religion. 
Without  a  solemn  awe  and  reverence  of 
God  there  is  no  foothold  for  the  more  brilliant 
virtues.  He  whose  soul  does  not  worship  will 
never  live  in  holiness. 

He  is  happy  who  feels  a  jealous  fear  of  do 
ing  wrong.  Holy  fear  looks  not  only  before  it 
leaps,  but  even  before  it  moves.  It  is  afraid 
of  error,  afraid  of  neglecting  duty,  afraid  of 
committing  sin.  It  fears  ill  company,  lose 
talk,  and  questionable  policy.  This  does  not 
make  a  man  wretched,  but  it  brings  him  hap 
piness.  The  watchful  sentinel  is  happier  than 
the  soldier  who  sleeps  at  his  post.  He  who 
foreseeth  evil  and  escapes  it  is  happier  than 
he  who  walks  carelessly  on  and  is  destroyed. 

Fear  of  God  is  a  quiet  grace  which  leads 
a  man  along  a  choice  road,  of  which  it  is 
written,  "  No  lion  shall  be  there,  neither  shall 
any  ravenous  beast  go  up  thereon."  Fear  of 
the  very  appearance  of  evil  is  a  purifying 
principle,  which  enables  a  man,  through  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  keep  his  garments 
unspotted  from  the  world.  In  both  senses  he 
that  "  feareth  alway  "  is  made  happy.  Solo 
mon  had  tried  both  worldliness  and  holy  fear: 
in  the  one  he  found  vanity,  in  the  other  hap 
piness.  Let  us  not  repeat  his  trial,  but  abide 
by  his  verdict. 


254  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3Booft>  _ 

SEPTEMBER  10. 

"Blessed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou  earnest 
in,  and  blessed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou 
goest  out."  —  Deut.  xxviii.  6. 

Jl 


blessings  of  the  law  are  not  cancelled. 
Jesus  confirmed  the  promise  when  he 
bore  the  penalty.  If  I  keep  the  com 
mands  of  my  Lord,  I  may  appropriate  this 
promise  without  question. 

This  day  I  will  come  into  my  house  with 
out  fear  of  evil  tidings,  and  I  will  come  into 
my  closet  expecting  to  hear  good  news  from 
my  Lord.  I  will  not  be  afraid  to  come  in  unto 
myself  by  self-examination,  nor  to  come  in 
to  my  affairs  by  a  diligent  inspection  of  my 
business.  I  have  a  good  deal  of  work  to  do 
indoors,  within  my  own  soul;  oh  for  a  bless 
ing  upon  it  all,  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
who  has  promised  to  abide  with  me. 

I  must  also  go  out.  Timidity  makes  me 
wish  that  I  could  stay  within  doors,  and  never 
go  into  the  sinful  world  again.  But  I  must 
go  out  in  my  calling,  and  I  must  go  out  that 
I  may  be  helpful  to  my  brethren,  and  useful 
to  the  ungodly.  I  must  be  a  defender  of  the 
faith  and  an  assailant  of  evil.  Oh  for  a  bless 
ing  upon  my  going  out  this  day!  Lord,  let 
me  go  where  thou  leadest,  on  thy  errands, 
and  in  the  power  of  thy  Spirit. 

Lord  Jesus,  turn  in  with  me  and  be  my 
guest;  and  then  walk  out  with  me,  and  cause 
my  heart  to  burn  whilst  thou  speakest  with 
me  by  the  way. 


Cbeque  JBooft.  255 


SEPTEMBER  n. 

"It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke 
in  his  youth."  —  Lam.  iii.  27. 


is  as  good  as  a  promise.  It  has  been 
good,  it  is  good,  and  it  will  be  good  for 
me  to  bear  the  yoke. 

Early  in  life  I  had  to  feel  the  weight  of 
conviction,  and  ever  since  it  has  proved  a  soul- 
enriching  burden.  Should  I  have  loved  the 
gospel  so  well  had  I  not  learned  by  deep  ex 
perience  the  need  of  salvation  by  grace?  Jabez 
was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren  be 
cause  his  mother  bare  him  with  sorrow,  and 
those  who  suffer  much  in  being  born  unto  God 
make  strong  believers  in  sovereign  grace. 

The  yoke  of  censure  is  an  irksome  one,  but 
it  prepares  a  man  for  future  honour.  He  is 
not  fit  to  be  a  leader  who  has  not  run  the 
gauntlet  of  contempt.  Praise  intoxicates  if  it 
be  not  preceded  by  abuse.  Men  who  rise  to 
eminence  without  a  struggle  usually  fall  into 
dishonour. 

The  yoke  of  affliction,  disappointment,  and 
excessive  labour  is  by  no  means  to  be  sought 
for;  but  when  the  Lord  lays  it  on  us  in  our 
youth  it  frequently  develops  a  character  which 
glorifies  God  and  blesses  the  church. 

Come,  my  soul,  bow  thy  neck;  take  up  thy 
cross.  It  was  good  for  thee  when  young,  it 
will  not  harm  thee  now.  For  Jesus'  sake, 
shoulder  it  cheerfully. 


256  3f  aitb's  Gbeque  ffiooft. 

SEPTEMBER  12. 

"Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy  house" 
Acts  xvi.  31. 


gospel  for  a  man  with  a  sword  at 
his  throat  is  the  gospel  for  me.  This 
would  suit  me  if  I  were  dying,  and  it 
is  all  that  I  need  while  I  am  living.  I  look 
away  from  self,  and  sin,  and  all  idea  of  per 
sonal  merit,  and  I  trust  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the 
Saviour  whom  God  has  given.  I  believe  in 
him,  I  rest  on  him,  I  accept  him  to  be  my  all 
in  all.  Lord,  I  am  saved,  and  I  shall  be  saved 
to  all  eternity,  for  I  believe  in  Jesus.  Blessed 
be  thy  name  for  this.  May  I  daily  prove  by 
my  life  that  I  am  saved  from  selfishness,  and 
worldliness,  and  every  form  of  evil. 

But  those  last  words  about  my  "house": 
Lord,  I  would  not  run  away  with  half  a  prom 
ise  when  thou  dost  give  a  whole  one.  I  be 
seech  thee,  save  all  my  family.  Save  the  near 
est  and  dearest.  Convert  the  children,  and 
the  grandchildren,  if  I  have  any.  Be  gra 
cious  to  my  servants,  and  all  who  dwell  under 
my  roof,  or  work  for  me.  Thou  makest  this 
promise  to  me  personally  if  I  believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  ;  I  beseech  thee  to  do  as  thou  hast 
said. 

I  would  go  over  in  my  prayer  every  day 
the  names  of  all  my  brothers  and  sisters,  pa 
rents,  children,  friends,  relatives,  servants, 
and  give  thee  no  rest  till  that  word  is  fulfilled, 
"and  thy  house." 


ffaftb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 257 

SEPTEMBER  13. 

"His  heavens  shall  drop   down   dew" 
Deut.  xxxiii.  28. 

Jl 

MHAT  the  dew  in  the  East  is  to  the 
world  of  nature,  that  is  the  influence 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  realm  of  grace. 
How  greatly  do  I  need  it!  Without  the 
Spirit  of  God  I  am  a  dry  and  withered  thing. 
I  droop,  I  fade,  I  die.  How  sweetly  does 
this  dew  refresh  me!  When  once  favoured 
with  it  I  feel  happy,  lively,  vigorous,  elevated. 
I  want  nothing  more.  The  Holy  Spirit  brings 
me  life,  and  all  that  life  requires.  All  else 
without  the  dew  of  the  Spirit  is  less  than 
nothing  to  me:  I  hear,  I  read,  I  pray,  I  sing, 
I  go  to  the  table  of  communion,  and  I  find 
no  blessing  there  until  the  Holy  Ghost  visits 
me.  But  when  he  bedews  me,  every  means 
of  grace  is  sweet  and  profitable. 

What  a  promise  is  this  for  me !  "  His  heav 
ens  shall  drop  down  dew."  I  shall  be  visited 
with  grace.  I  shall  not  be  left  to  my  natural 
drought,  or  to  the  world's  burning  heat,  or 
to  the  sirocco  of  Satanic  temptation.  Oh, 
that  I  may  at  this  very  hour  feel  the  gentle, 
silent,  saturating  dew  of  the  Lord!  Why 
should  I  not?  He  who  has  made  me  to  live 
as  the  grass  lives  in  the  weadow,  will  treat 
me  as  he  treats  the  grass:  he  will  refresh  me 
from  above.  Grass  cannot  call  for  dew  as  I 
do.  Surely,  the  Lord  who  visits  the  unpray- 
ing  plant  will  answer  to  his  pleading  child. 
17 


ffaitb'g  Cheque  JPooft. 


SEPTEMBER  14. 

"Blessed  is  the  man  that  endiireth  tempta 
tion:  for  when  he  is  tried,  lie  shall  receive  the 
crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promised 
to  them  that  love  him."  —  James  i.  12. 


blessed  while  he  is  enduring  the 
eye  can   see  this   till  it  has 


\  L*ES,  he  is  bl 
U/  trial.     No 

£-^  been  anointed  with  heavenly  eye-salve. 
But  he  must  endure  it,  and  neither  rebel 
against  God,  nor  turn  aside  from  his  integrity. 
He  is  blessed  who  has  gone  through  the  fire, 
and  has  not  been  consumed  as  a  counterfeit. 

When  the  test  is  over,  then  comes  the' hall 
mark  of  divine  approval  — "  the  crown  of  life." 
As  if  the  Lord  said,  "  Let  him  live ;  he  has 
been  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  he  is  not 
found  wanting."  Life  is  the  reward :  not  mere 
being;  but  holy,  happy,  true  existence,  the 
realization  of  the  divine  purpose  concerning 
us.  Already  a  higher  form  of  spiritual  life  and 
enjoyment  crowns  those  who  have  safely 
passed  through  fiercest  trials  of  faith  and 
love. 

The  Lord  hath  promised  the  crown  of  life 
to  those  who  love  him.  Only  lovers  of  the 
Lord  will  hold  out  in  the  hour  of  trial;  the 
rest  will  either  sink,  or  sulk,  or  slink  back 
to  the  world.  Come,  my  heart,  dost  thou  love 
thy  Lord?  Truly?  Deeply?  Wholly?  Then 
that  love  will  be  tried;  but  many  waters  will 
not  quench  it,  neither  will  the  floods  drown 
it.  Lord,  let  thy  love  nourish  mine  to  the 
end. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  259 

SEPTEMBER  15. 

"And  a  man  shall  be  as  an  hiding-place 
from  the  wind,  and  a  covert  from  the  tem 
pest."  —  Isa.  xxxii.  2. 


MHO  this  man  is  we  all  know.  Who 
could  he  be  but  the  Second  Man,  the 
Lord  from  heaven,  the  Man  of  sor 
rows,  the  Son  of  man?  What  a  hiding-place 
he  has  been  to  his  people!  He  bears  the  full 
force,  of  the  wind  himself,  and  so  he  shelters 
those  I  who  hide  themselves  in  him.  We  have 
thus  escaped  the  wrath  of  God,  and  we  shall 
thus  escape  the  anger  of  men,  the  cares  of  this 
life,  and  the  dread  of  death.  Why  do  we 
stand  in  the  wind  when  we  may  so  readily 
and  so  surely  get  out  of  it  by  hiding  behind 
our  Lord?  Let  us  this  day  run  to  him,  and 
be  at  peace. 

Often  the  common  wind  of  trouble  rises  in 
its  force  and  becomes  a  tempest,  sweeping 
everything  before  it.  Things  which  looked 
firm  and  stable  rock  in  the  blast,  and  many 
and  great  are  the  falls  among  our  carnal  con 
fidences.  Our  Lord  Jesus,  the  glorious  Man, 
is  a  covert  which  is  never  blown  down.  In 
him  we  mark  the  tempest  sweeping  by,  but 
we  ourselves  rest  in  delightful  serenity. 

This  day  let  us  just  stow  ourselves  away 
in  our  hiding-place,  and  sit  and  sing  under 
the  protection  of  our  covert.  Blessed  Jesus! 
Blessed  Jesus!  How  we  love  thee!  Well  we 
may,  for  thou  art  to  us  a  shelter  in  the  time 
of  storm. 


260 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe, 

SEPTEMBER  16. 

"And  whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto 
one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold  water 
only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I  say 
unto  you,  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  re 
ward!' — Matt.  x.  42. 


MELL,  I  can  do  as  much  as  that.    I 
can  do  a  kind  act  towards  the  Lord's 
servant.     The    Lord    knows    I    love 
them  all,  and  would  count  it  an  honour  to 
wash  their  feet.     For  the  sake  of  their  Mas 
ter  I  love  the  disciples. 

How  gracious  of  the  Lord  to  mention  so 
insignificant  an  action — "to  give  to  drink  a 
cup  of  cold  water  only"!  This  I  can  do, 
however  poor:  this  I  may  do,  however  lowly: 
this  I  will  do  right  cheerfully.  This,  which 
seems  so  little,  the  Lord  notices  —  notices 
when  done  to  the  least  of  his  followers.  Evi 
dently  it  is  not  the  cost,  nor  the  skill,  nor 
the  quantity,  that  he  looks  at,  but  the  motive: 
that  which  we  do  to  a  disciple,  because  he 
is  a  disciple,  his  Lord  observes,  and  recom 
penses.  He  does  not  reward  us  for  the  merit 
of  what  we  do,  but  according  to  the  riches  of 
his  grace. 

I  give  a  cup  of  cold  water,  and  he  makes 
me  to  drink  of  living  water.  I  give  to  one 
of  his  little  ones,  and  he  treats  me  as  one  of 
them.  Jesus  finds  an  apology  for  his  liberality 
in  that  which  his  grace  has  led  me  to  do, 
and  he  says,  "  He  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his 
reward." 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3Booft»  _  261 

SEPTEMBER  17. 

"The  righteous  shall  nourish  like  the  palm 
tree:  he  shall  grow  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon." 
Ps.  xcii.  12. 


trees  are  not  trained  and  pruned 
by  man  :  palms  and  cedars  are  "  trees 
of  the  Lord,"  and  it  is  by  his  care  that 
they  flourish;  even  so  it  is  with  the  saints  of 
the  Lord,  they  are  his  own  care.  These  trees 
are  evergreen  and  are  beautiful  objects  at 
all  seasons  of  the  year.  Believers  are  not 
sometimes  holy  and  sometimes  ungodly:  they 
stand  in  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  under  all 
weathers.  Everywhere  these  trees  are  note 
worthy:  no  one  can  gaze  upon  a  landscape 
in  which  there  are  either  palms  or  cedars  with 
out  his  attention  being  fixed  upon  these  royal 
growths.  The  followers  of  Jesus  are  the  ob 
served  of  all  observers:  like  a  city  set  on  a 
hill  they  cannot  be  hid. 

The  child  of  God  flourishes  like  a  palm  tree, 
which  pushes  all  its  strength  upward  in  one 
erect  column  without  a  single  branch.  It  is 
a  pillar  with  a  glorious  capital.  It  has  no 
growth  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  but  sends 
all  its  force  heavenward,  and  bears  its  fruit 
as  near  the  sky  as  possible.  Lord,  fulfil  this 
type  in  me. 

The  cedar  braves  all  storms,  and  grows  near 
the  eternal  snows,  the  Lord  himself  filling  it 
with  a  sap  which  keeps  its  heart  warm  and 
its  boughs  strong.  Lord,  so  let  it  be  with  me, 
I  pray  thee.  Amen. 


262  _  ffattb's  Cbeque  ffiooft. 

SEPTEMBER  18. 

"And  of  Benjamin  he  said,  The  beloved 
of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him; 
and  the  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  day 
long,  and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoul 
ders."  —  Deut.  xxxiii.  12. 


S,  there  is  no  safety  like  that  which 
comes  of  dwelling  near  to  God.  For 
his  best  beloved  the  Lord  can  find  no 
surer  or  safer  place.  O  Lord,  let  me  always 
abide  under  thy  shadow,  close  to  thy  wounded 
side.  Nearer  and  nearer  would  I  come  to 
thee,  my  Lord;  and  when  once  specially  near 
thee,  I  would  abide  there  for  ever. 

What  a  covering  is  that  which  the  Lord 
gives  to  his  chosen!  Not  a  fair  roof  shall 
cover  him,  nor  a  bomb-proof  casement,  nor 
even  an  angel's  wing,  but  Jehovah  himself. 
Nothing  can  come  at  us  when  we  are  thus 
covered.  This  covering  the  Lord  will  grant 
us  all  the  day  long,  however  long  the  day. 
Lord,  let  me  abide  this  day  consciously  be 
neath  this  canopy  of  love,  this  pavilion  of 
sovereign  power. 

Does  the  third  clause  mean  that  the  Lord 
in  his  temple  would  dwell  among  the  moun 
tains  of  Benjamin,  or  that  the  Lord  would  be 
where  Benjamin's  burden  should  be  placed,  or 
does  it  mean  that  we  are  borne  upon  the  shoul 
ders  of  the  Eternal?  In  any  case,  the  Lord 
is  the  support  and  strength  of  his  saints. 
Lord,  let  me  ever  enjoy  thy  help,  and  then  my 
arms  will  be  sufficient  for  me. 


jfaitb'g  Cbeque  3Booft»  _  263 

SEPTEMBER  19. 

"The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is 
mighty;  he  will  save,  he  will  rejoice  over  thee 
with  joy;  he  will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  joy 
over  thee  with  singing."  —  Zeph.  iii.  17. 
Jl 


a  word  is  this  !  Jehovah  God 
in  the  centre  of  his  people  in  all  the 
majesty  of  his  power!  This  pres 
ence  alone  suffices  to  inspire  us  with  peace 
and  hope.  Treasures  of  boundless  might  are 
stored  in  our  Jehovah,  and  he  dwells  in  his 
church,  therefore  may  his  people  shout  for 

joy- 

We  not  only  have  his  presence,  but  he  is 
engaged  upon  his  choice  work  of  salvation. 
"  He  will  save."  He  is  always  saving  :  he 
takes  his  name  of  Jesus  from  it.  Let  us  not 
fear  any  danger,  for  he  is  mighty  to  save. 

Nor  is  this  all.  He  abides  evermore  the 
same  ;  he  loves,  he  finds  rest  in  loving,  he  will 
not  cease  to  love.  His  love  gives  him  joy. 
He  even  finds  a  theme  for  song  in  his  beloved. 
This  is  exceedingly  wonderful.  When  God 
wrought  creation  he  did  not  sing,  but  simply 
said,  "  It  is  very  good  "  ;  but  when  he  came 
to  redemption,  then  the  sacred  Trinity  felt 
a  joy  to  be  expressed  in  song.  Think  of  it, 
and  be  astonished!  Jehovah  Jesus  sings  a 
marriage  song  over  his  chosen  bride.  She  is 
to  him  his  love,  his  joy,  his  rest,  his  song. 
O  Lord  Jesus,  by  thine  immeasurable  love  to 
us  teach  us  to  love  thee,  to  rejoice  in  thee, 
and  to  sing  unto  thee  our  life-psalm. 


264  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

SEPTEMBER  20. 

"Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day 
of  thy  power/'  —  Ps.  ex.  3. 


be  the  God  of  grace  that  it  is 
so!  He  has  a  people  whom  he  has 
chosen  from  of  old  to  be  his  peculiar 
portion.  These  by  nature  have  wills  as  stub 
born  as  the  rest  of  the  f  reward  sons  of  Adam; 
but  when  the  day  of  his  power  comes,  and 
grace  displays  its  omnipotence,  they  become 
willing  to  repent,  and  to  believe  in  Jesus. 
None  are  saved  unwillingly,  but  the  will  is 
made  sweetly  to  yield  itself.  What  a  won 
drous  power  is  this,  which  never  violates  the 
will,  and  yet  rules  it  !  God  does  not  break  the 
lock,  but  he  opens  it  by  a  master-key  which 
he  alone  can  handle. 

Now  are  we  willing  to  be,  to  do,  or  to  suf 
fer  as  the  Lord  wills.  If  at  any  time  we  grow 
rebellious  he  has  but  to  come  to  us  with  power, 
and  straightway  we  run  in  the  way  of  his 
commands  with  all  our  hearts.  May  this  be 
a  day  of  power  with  me  as  to  some  noble  ef 
fort  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  my 
fellow-men!  Lord,  I  am  willing;  may  I  not 
hope  that  this  is  a  day  of  thy  power?  I  am 
wholly  at  thy  disposal;  willing,  yea,  eager, 
to  be  used  of  thee  for  thy  holy  purposes.  O 
Lord,  let  me  not  have  to  cry,  "To  will  is 
present  with  me,  but  how  to  perform  that 
which  I  would,  I  find  not  "  ;  but  give  me  power 
as  thou  givest  me  will. 


jfaitb'g  Cheque  3Boofe.  _  265 

SEPTEMBER  21. 

"Knowing   that   tribulation   worketh   pa 
tience/'  —  Rom.  v.  3. 


is  a  promise  in  essence  if  not  in 
form.  We  have  need  of  patience,  and 
here  we  see  the  way  of  getting  it.  It 
is  only  by  enduring  that  we  learn  to  endure, 
even  as  by  swimming  men  learn  to  swim.  You 
could  not  learn  that  art  on  dry  land,  nor 
learn  patience  without  trouble.  Is  it  not 
worth  while  to  suffer  tribulation  for  the  sake 
of  gaining  that  beautiful  equanimity  of  mind 
which  quietly  acquiesces  in  all  the  will  of 
God? 

Yet  our  text  sets  forth  a  singular  fact, 
which  is  not  according  to  nature,  but  is  su 
pernatural.  Tribulation  in  and  of  itself  work 
eth  petulance,  unbelief,  and  rebellion.  It  is 
only  by  the  sacred  alchemy  of  grace  that  it 
is  made  to  work  in  us  patience.  We  do  not 
thresh  the  wheat  to  lay  the  dust:  yet  the  flail 
of  tribulation  does  this  upon  God's  floor.  We 
do  not  toss  a  man  about  in  order  to  give  him 
rest,  and  yet  so  the  Lord  dealeth  with  his 
children.  Truly  this  is  not  the  manner  of 
man,  but  greatly  redounds  to  the  glory  of  God. 

Oh,  for  grace  to  let  my  trials  bless  me! 
Why  should  I  wish  to  stay  their  gracious 
operation?  Lord,  I  ask  thee  to  remove  my  af 
fliction,  but  I  beseech  thee  ten  times  more  to 
remove  my  impatience.  Precious  Lord  Jesus, 
with  thy  cross  engrave  the  image  of  thy  pa 
tience  on  my  heart. 


266  _  jf  aitb'g  Qbecjue  3Booft» 

SEPTEMBER  22. 

"But  there  the  glorious  Lord  will  be  unto 
us  a  place   of  broad  rivers   and   streams; 
wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars,  neither 
shall  gallant  ship  pass  thereby/' 
Isa.  xxxiii.  n. 
Jl 


Lord  will  be  to  us  the  greatest  good 
without  any  of  the  drawbacks  which 
seem  necessarily  to  attend  the  best 
earthly  things.  If  a  city  is  favoured  with 
broad  rivers,  it  is  liable  to  be  attacked  by 
galleys  with  oars,  and  other  ships  of  war. 
But  when  the  Lord  represents  the  abundance 
of  his  bounty  under  this  figure,  he  takes  care 
expressly  to  shut  out  the  fear  which  the  meta 
phor  might  suggest.  Blessed  be  his  love! 

Lord,  if  thou  send  me  wealth  like  broad 
rivers,  do  not  let  the  galley  with  oars  come 
up  in  the  shape  of  worldliness  or  pride.  If 
thou  grant  me  abundant  health  and  happy 
spirits,  do  not  let  "  the  gallant  ship  "  of  carnal 
ease  comes  sailing  up  the  flowing  flood.  If 
I  have  success  in  holy  service,  broad  as  the 
German  Rhine,  yet  let  me  never  find  the  gal 
ley  of  self-conceit  and  self-confidence  floating 
on  the  waves  of  my  usefulness.  Should  I  be 
so  supremely  happy  as  to  enjoy  the  light  of 
thy  countenance  year  after  year,  yet  let  me 
never  despise  thy  feeble  saints,  nor  allow  the 
vain  notion  of  my  own  perfection  to  sail  up 
the  broad  rivers  of  my  full  assurance.  Lord, 
give  me  that  blessing  which  maketh  rich,  and 
neither  addeth  sorrow,  nor  aideth  sin. 


ffaitb's  Gbeque  JBoofc.  267 

SEPTEMBER  23. 

"For,  lo,  I  will  command,  and  I  will  sift 
the  house  of  Israel  among  all  nations,  like  as 
corn  is  sifted  in  a  sieve,  yet  shall  not  the  least 
grain  fall  upon  the  earth." — Amos  ix.  9. 


sifting  process  is  going  on  still. 
Wherever  we  go,  we  are  still  being  win 
nowed  and  sifted.  In  all  countries  God's 
people  are  being  tried  "  like  as  corn  is  sifted 
in  a  sieve."  Sometimes  the  devil  holds  the 
sieve,  and  tosses  us  up  and  down  at  a  great 
rate,  with  the  earnest  desire  to  get  rid  of  us 
for  ever.  Unbelief  is  not  slow  to  agitate  our 
heart  and  mind  with  its  restless  fears.  The 
world  lends  a  willing  hand  at  the  same  process, 
and  shakes  us  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  with 
great  vigour.  Worst  of  all,  the  church,  so 
largely  apostate  as  it  is,  comes  in  to  give  a 
more  furious  force  to  the  sifting  process. 

Well,  well!  let  it  go  on.  Thus  is  the  chaff 
severed  from  the  wheat.  Thus  is  the  wheat 
delivered  from  dust  and  chaff.  And  how  great 
is  the  mercy  which  comes  to  us  in  the  text, 
"  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the 
earth  " !  All  shall  be  preserved  that  is  good, 
true,  gracious.  Not  one  of  the  least  of  be 
lievers  shall  be  lost,  neither  shall  any  believer 
lose  anything  worth  calling  a  loss.  We  shall 
be  so  kept  in  the  sifting  that  it  shall  be  a  real 
gain  to  us  through  Christ  Jesus. 


268  ffaitb's  Cheque 


SEPTEMBER  24. 

"And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every 
thing  that  liveth,  which  rnoveth,  whitherso 
ever  the  rivers  shall  come,  shall  live." 
Ezek.  xlvii.  9. 


living  waters,  in  the  prophet's  vision, 
flowed  into  the  Dead  Sea,  and  carried 
life  with  them,  even  into  that  stagnant 
lake.  Where  grace  goes,  spiritual  life  is  the 
immediate  and  the  everlasting  consequence. 
Grace  proceeds  sovereignly  according  to  the 
will  of  God,  even  as  a  river  in  all  its  windings 
follows  its  own  sweet  will;  and  wherever  it 
conies  it  does  not  wait  for  life  to  come  to  it, 
but  it  creates  life  by  its  own  quickening  flow. 
Oh  that  it  would  pour  along  our  streets,  and 
flood  our  slums!  Oh  that  it  would  now  come 
into  my  house,  and  rise  till  every  chamber 
were  made  to  swim  with  it  !  Lord,  let  the  liv 
ing  water  flow  to  my  family  and  my  friends, 
and  let  it  not  pass  me  by.  I  hope  I  have 
drunk  of  it  already;  but  I  desire  to  bathe  in 
it,  yea,  to  swim  in  it.  O  my  Saviour,  I  need 
life  more  abundantly.  Come  to  me,  I  pray 
thee,  till  every  part  of  my  nature  is  vividly 
energetic  and  intensely  active.  Living  God, 
I  pray  thee,  fill  me  with  thine  own  life. 

I  am  a  poor,  dry  stick;  come  and  make  me 
so  to  live  that,  like  Aaron's  rod,  I  may  bud 
and  blossom  and  bring  forth  fruit  unto  thy 
glory.  Quicken  me,  for  the  sake  of  my  Lord 
Jesus.  Amen. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  3Boofc.  269 

SEPTEMBER  25. 

"//  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  kill  us,  he 
would  not  have  received  a  burnt  offering  and 
a  meat  offering  at  our  hands,  neither  would 
he  have  shewed  us  all  these  things." 

Judges  xiii.  23. 

Jl 


is  a  sort  of  promise  deduced  by  logic. 
It  is  an  inference  fairly  drawn  from  as 
certained  facts.  It  was  not  likely  that 
the  Lord  had  revealed  to  Manoah  and  his  wife 
that  a  son  would  be  born  to  them,  and  yet 
had  it  in  his  heart  to  destroy  them.  The  wife 
reasoned  well,  and  we  shall  do  well  if  we 
follow  her  line  of  argument. 

The  Father  has  accepted  the  great  sacrifice 
of  Calvary,  and  has  declared  himself  well 
pleased  therewith;  how  can  he  now  be  pleased 
to  kill  us?  Why  a  substitute  if  the  sinner 
must  still  perish?  The  accepted  sacrifice  of 
Jesus  puts  an  end  to  fear. 

The  Lord  has  shown  us  our  election,  our 
adoption,  our  union  to  Christ,  our  marriage  to 
the  Well-beloved:  how  can  he  now  destroy 
us?  The  promises  are  loaded  with  blessings, 
which  necessitate  our  being  preserved  unto 
eternal  life.  It  is  not  possible  for  the  Lord  to 
cast  us  away,  and  yet  fulfil  his  covenant.  The 
past  assures  us,  and  the  future  reassures  us. 
We  shall  not  die,  but  live;  for  we  have  seen 
Jesus,  and  in  him  we  have  seen  the  Father  by 
the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Because 
of  this  life-giving  sight  we  must  live  for  ever. 


270  ffaitb'a  Cbeque 


SEPTEMBER  26. 

"Lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  alone,  and  shall 
not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations" 
Num.  xxiii.  9. 


MHO  would  wish  to  dwell  among  the 
nations,  and  to  be  numbered  with 
them?  Why,  even  the  professing 
church  is  such  that  to  follow  the  Lord  fully 
within  its  bounds  is  very  difficult.  There  is 
such  a  mingling  and  mixing  that  one  often 
sighs  for  "  a  lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness." 

Certain  it  is  that  the  Lord  would  have  his 
people  follow  a  separated  path  as  to  the  world, 
and  come  out  decidedly  and  distinctly  from 
it.  We  are  set  apart  by  the  divine  decree, 
purchase,  and  calling,  and  our  inward  experi 
ence  has  made  us  greatly  to  differ  from  men 
of  the  world;  and  therefore  our  place  is  not 
in  their  Vanity  Fair,  nor  in  their  City  of  De 
struction,  but  in  the  narrow  way  where  all 
true  pilgrims  must  follow  their  Lord. 

This  may  not  only  reconcile  us  to  the 
world's  cold  shoulder  and  sneers,  but  even 
cause  us  to  accept  them  with  pleasure  as 
being  a  part  of  our  covenant  portion.  Our 
names  are  not  in  the  same  book,  we  are  not 
of  the  same  seed,  we  are  not  bound  for  the 
same  place,  neither  are  we  trusting  to  the 
same  guide,  therefore  it  is  well  that  we  are 
not  of  their  number.  Only  let  us  be  found 
in  the  number  of  the  redeemed,  and  we  are 
content  to  be  odd  and  solitary  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter. 


Jfaitb'0  Gbeque  JSooft*  271 

SEPTEMBER  27. 

"For  thou  wilt  light  my  candle." 
Ps.  xviii.  28. 


+fTT  may  be  that  my  soul  sits  in  darkness; 
and  if  this  be  of  a  spiritual  kind,  no  hu 
man  power  can  bring  me  light.  Blessed 
be  God!  he  can  enlighten  my  darkness,  and 
at  once  light  my  candle.  Even  though  I  may 
be  surrounded  by  a  "  darkness  which  might  be 
felt,"  yet  he  can  break  the  gloom,  and  imme 
diately  make  it  bright  around  me. 

The  mercy  is,  that  if  he  lights  the  candle 
none  can  blow  it  out,  neither  will  it  go  out 
for  lack  of  substance,  nor  burn  out  of  itself 
through  the  lapse  of  hours.  The  lights  which 
the  Lord  kindled  in  the  beginning  are  shining 
still.  The  Lord's  lamps  may  need  trimming, 
but  he  does  not  put  them  out. 

Let  me,  then,  like  the  nightingale,  sing  in 
the  dark.  Expectation  shall  furnish  me  with 
music,  and  hope  shall  pitch  the  tune.  Soon  I 
shall  rejoice  in  a  candle  of  God's  lighting.  I 
am  dull  and  dreary  just  now.  Perhaps  it  is 
the  weather,  or  bodily  weakness,  or  the  sur 
prise  of  a  sudden  trouble;  but  whatever  has 
made  the  darkness,  it  is  God  alone  who  will 
bring  the  light.  My  eyes  are  unto  him  alone. 
I  shall  soon  have  the  candle  of  the  Lord  shin 
ing  about  me ;  and,  further  on  in  his  own  good 
time,  I  shall  be  where  they  need  no  candle, 
neither  light  of  the  sun.  Hallelujah! 


272  _  ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBoofr, 

SEPTEMBER  28. 

"There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the 
people  of  God."  —  Heb.  iv.  9. 


has  provided  a  Sabbath,  and  some 
must  enter  into  it.  Those  to  whom  it 
was  first  preached  entered  not  in  be 
cause  of  unbelief;  therefore,  that  Sabbath  re 
mains  for  the  people  of  God.  David  sang  of 
it;  but  he  had  to  touch  the  minor  key,  for 
Israel  refused  the  rest  of  God.  Joshua  could 
not  give  it,  nor  Canaan  yield  it:  it  remains 
for  believers. 

Come,  then,  let  us  labour  to  enter  into  this 
rest.  Let  us  quit  the  weary  toil  of  sin  and 
self.  Let  us  cease  from  all  confidence,  even 
in  those  works  of  which  it  might  be  said, 
"They  are  very  good."  Have  we  any  such? 
Still,  let  us  cease  from  our  own  works,  as 
God  did  from  his.  Now  let  us  find  solace  in 
the  finished  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Every 
thing  is  fully  done:  justice  demands  no  more. 
Great  peace  is  our  portion  in  Christ  Jesus. 

As  to  providential  matters,  the  work  of  grace 
in  the  soul,  and  the  work  of  the  Lord  in  the 
souls  of  others,  let  us  cast  these  burdens  upon 
the  Lord,  and  rest  in  him.  When  the  Lord 
gives  us  a  yoke  to  bear,  he  does  so  that  by 
taking  it  up  we  may  find  rest.  By  faith  we 
labour  to  enter  into  the  rest  of  God,  and  we 
renounce  all  rest  in  self-satisfaction  or  indo 
lence.  Jesus  himself  is  perfect  rest,  and  we 
are  filled  to  the  brim  in  him. 


afaftb's  Gbeque  ;jBoofc.  273 

SEPTEMBER  29. 

"He  shall  glorify  me:  he  shall  receive  of 
mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you!' 
John  xvi.  14. 


Holy  Ghost  himself  cannot  better 
glorify  the  Lord  Jesus  than  by  showing 
to  us  Christ's  own  things.  Jesus  is  his 
own  best  commendation.  There  is  no  adorn 
ing  him  except  with  his  own  gold. 

The  Comforter  shows  us  that  which  he  has 
received  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  We  never  see 
anything  aright  till  he  reveals  it.  He  has  a 
way  of  opening  our  minds,  and  of  opening  the 
Scriptures,  and  by  this  double  process  he  sets 
forth  our  Lord  to  us.  There  is  much  art  in 
setting  forth  a  matter,  and  that  art  belongs 
in  the  highest  degree  to  the  Spirit  of  truth. 
He  shows  us  the  things  themselves.  This 
is  a  great  privilege,  as  those  know  who  have 
enjoyed  the  hallowed  vision. 

Let  us  seek  the  illumination  of  the  Spirit; 
not  to  gratify  our  curiosity,  nor  even  to  bring 
us  personal  comfort,  so  much  as  to  glorify  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Oh  to  have  worthy  ideas  of  him  ! 
Grovelling  notions  dishonour  our  precious 
Lord.  Oh  to  have  such  vivid  impressions  of 
his  person,  and  work,  and  glory,  that  we  may 
with  heart  and  soul  cry  out  to  his  praise! 
Where  there  is  a  heart  enriched  by  the  Holy 
Ghost's  teaching  there  will  be  a  Saviour  glor 
ified  beyond  expression.  Come,  Holy  Spirit, 
heavenly  light,  and  show  us  Jesus  our  Lord. 
18 


274  3faitb's  Cbeque  3Boofc. 

SEPTEMBER  30. 

"Open  thy  mouth  wide{  and  I  will  nil  it" 
Ps.  Ixxxi.  10. 

Ji 

MHAT  an  encouragement  to  pray! 
Our  human  notions  would  lead  us 
to  ask  small  things  because  our  de- 
servings  are  so  small;  but  the  Lord  would 
have  us  request  great  blessings.  Prayer 
should  be  as  simple  a  matter  as  the  opening 
of  the  mouth;  it  should  be  a  natural,  uncon 
strained  utterance.  When  a  man  is  earnest 
he  opens  his  mouth  wide,  and  our  text  urges 
us  to  be  fervent  in  our  supplications. 

Yet  it  also  means  that  we  may  make  bold 
with  God,  and  ask  many  and  large  blessings 
at  his  hands.  Read  the  whole  verse,  and  see 
the  argument :  "  I  am  Jehovah,  thy  God, 
which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt: 
open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it."  Be 
cause  the  Lord  has  given  us  so  much  he  in 
vites  us  to  ask  for  more,  yea,  to  expect  more. 

See  how  the  little  birds  in  their  nests  seem 
to  be  all  mouth  when  the  mother  comes  to 
feed  them.  Let  it  be  the  same  with  us.  Let 
us  take  in  grace  at  every  door.  Let  us  drink 
it  in  as  a  sponge  sucks  up  the  water  in  which 
it  lies.  God  is  ready  to  fill  us  if  we  are  only 
ready  to  be  filled.  Let  our  needs  make  us 
open  our  mouths;  let  our  faintness  cause  us 
to  open  our  mouths  and  pant;  yea,  let  our 
alarm  make  us  open  our  mouths  with  a  child's 
cry.  The  opened  mouth  shall  be  filled  by  the 
Lord  himself.  So  be  it  unto  us  this  day.  k 


ffaitb's  Cbegue  JBooft,  _  275 

OCTOBER  i. 

"He  hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear 
him:  he  will  ev'er  be  mindful  of  his  cove 
nant"  —  Ps.  cxi.  5. 


who  fear  God  need  not  fear  want. 
Through  all  these  long  years  the  Lord 
has  always  found  meat  for  his  own  chil 
dren,  whether  they  have  been  in  the  wilder 
ness,  or  by  the  brook  Cherith,  or  in  captivity, 
or  in  the  midst  of  famine.  Hitherto  the  Lord 
has  given  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread,  and 
we  doubt  not  that  he  will  continue  to  feed 
us  till  we  want  no  more. 

As  to  the  higher  and  greater  blessings  of 
the  covenant  of  grace,  he  will  never  cease 
to  supply  them  as  our  case  demands.  He  is 
mindful  that  he  made  the  covenant,  and  never 
acts  as  if  he  regretted  it.  He  is  mindful  of 
it  when  we  provoke  him  to  destroy  us.  He 
is  mindful  to  love  us,  keep  us,  and  comfort 
us,  even  as  he  engaged  to  do.  He  is  mind 
ful  of  every  jot  and  tittle  of  his  engagements, 
never  suffering  one  of  his  words  to  fall  to  the 
ground. 

We  are  sadly  unmindful  of  our  God,  but  he 
is  graciously  mindful  of  us.  He  cannot  for 
get  his  Son  who  is  the  Surety  of  the  Covenant, 
nor  his  Holy  Spirit  who  actively  carries  out 
the  covenant;  nor  his  own  honour,  which  is 
bound  up  with  the  covenant.  Hence  the  foun 
dation  of  God  standeth  sure,  and  no  believer 
shall  lose  his  divine  inheritance,  which  is  his 
by  a  covenant  of  salt. 


276 ffaltb'0  Cbeque  JBooft, 

OCTOBER  2. 

"And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  die: 

and  God  will  surely  visit  you,  and  bring  you 

out  of  this  land  unto   the  land  which  he 

sware  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob.'' 

Gen.  1.  24. 


OSEPH  had  been  an  incarnate  providence 
to  his  brethren.  All  our  Josephs  die, 
and  a  thousand  comforts  die  with  them. 
Egypt  was  never  the  same  to  Israel  after 
Joseph  was  dead,  nor  can  the  world  again  be 
to  some  of  us  what  it  was  when  our  beloved 
ones  were  alive. 

But  see  how  the  pain  of  that  sad  death  was 
alleviated!  They  had  a  promise  that  the  liv 
ing  God  would  visit  them.  A  visit  from  Je 
hovah!  What  a  favour!  What  a  consola 
tion!  What  a  heaven  below!  O  Lord,  visit 
us  this  day;  though  indeed  we  are  not  worthy 
that  thou  shouldest  come  under  our  roof. 

But  more  was  promised:  the  Lord  would 
bring  them  out.  They  would  find  in  Egypt 
a  cold  welcome  when  Joseph  was  dead ;  nay,  it 
would  become  to  them  a  house  of  bondage. 
But  it  was  not  to  be  so  for  ever;  they  would 
come  out  of  it  by  a  divine  deliverance,  and 
march  to  the  land  of  promise.  We  shall  not 
weep  here  for  ever.  We  shall  be  called  home 
to  the  glory-land  to  join  our  dear  ones. 
Wherefore,  "comfort  one  another  with  these 
words." 


tfattb'8  Cheque  JBoofc.  277 

OCTOBER  3. 

"As  for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in 
righteousness:  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I 
awake,  with  thy  likeness." — Ps.  xvii.  15. 


portion  of  other  men  fills  their  bodies, 
and  enriches  their  children,  but  the  por 
tion  of  the  believer  is  of  another  sort. 
Men  of  the  world  have  their  treasure  in  this 
world,  but  men  of  the  world  to  come  look 
higher  and  further. 

Our  possession  is  twofold.  We  have  God's 
presence  here  and  his  likeness  hereafter. 
Here  we  behold  the  face  of  the  Lord  in  right 
eousness,  for  we  are  justified  in  Christ  Je 
sus.  Oh,  the  joy  of  beholding  the  face  of  a 
reconciled  God !  The  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  Jesus  Christ  yields  us  heaven  below,  and 
it  will  be  to  us  the  heaven  of  heaven  above. 

But  seeing  does  not  end  it:  we  are  to  be 
changed  into  that  which  we  gaze  upon.  We 
shall  sleep  a  while  and  then  wake  up  to  find 
ourselves  as  mirrors  which  reflect  the  beauties 
of  our  Lord.  Faith  sees  God  with  a  trans 
forming  look.  The  heart  receives  the  image 
of  Jesus  into  its  own  depths,  till  the  character 
of  Jesus  is  imprinted  on  the  soul.  This  is  sat 
isfaction.  To  see  God  and  to  be  like  him  — 
what  more  can  I  desire?  David's  assured 
confidence  is  here  by  the  Holy  Ghost  made 
to  be  the  Lord's  promise.  I  believe  it.  I 
expect  it.  Lord,  vouchsafe  it.  Amen. 


278  _  ffaitb'6  Cbeque  JBoofu 

OCTOBER  4. 

"And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  —  John  xii.  32. 


COME,  ye  workers,  be  encouraged.  You 
fear  that  you  cannot  draw  a  congrega 
tion.  Try  the  preaching  of  a  crucified, 
risen,  and  ascended  Saviour;  for  this  is  the 
greatest  "  draw  "  that  was  ever  yet  manifested 
among  men.  What  drew  you  to  Christ  but 
Christ?  What  draws  you  to  him  now  but  his 
own  blessed  self?  If  you  have  been  drawn 
to  religion  by  anything  else,  you  will  soon 
be  drawn  away  from  it;  but  Jesus  has  held 
you,  and  will  hold  you  even  to  the  end.  Why, 
then,  doubt  his  power  to  draw  others?  Go 
with  the  name  of  Jesus  to  those  who  have 
hitherto  been  stubborn,  and  see  if  it  does  not 
draw  them. 

No  sort  of  man  is  beyond  this  drawing 
power.  Old  and  young,  rich  and  poor,  ig 
norant  and  learned,  depraved  or  amiable  — 
all  men  shall  feel  the  attractive  force.  Jesus 
is  the  one  magnet.  Let  us  not  think  of  any 
other.  Music  will  not  draw  to  Jesus,  neither 
will  eloquence,  logic,  ceremonial,  or  noise. 
Jesus  himself  must  draw  men  to  himself;  and 
Jesus  is  quite  equal  to  the  work  in  every 
case.  Be  not  tempted  by  the  quackeries  of 
the  day;  but  as  workers  for  the  Lord  work 
in  his  own  way,  and  draw  with  the  Lord's  own 
cords.  Draw  to  Christ,  and  draw  by  Christ, 
for  then  Christ  will  draw  by  you. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBooft.  279 

OCTOBER  5. 

"And  the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  the 
midst  of  many  people  as  a  dew  from  the 
Lord,  as  the  shozvers  upon  the  grass,  that 
tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the 
sons  of  men."  —  Mich.  v.  7. 


+ffF  this  be  true  of  the  literal  Israel,  much 

more   is  it  true   of  the   spiritual   Israel, 

the    believing    people    of    God.     When 

saints  are  what  they  should  be,  they  are  an 

incalculable  blessing  to  those   among  whom 

they  are  scattered. 

They  are  as  the  dew;  for  in  a  quiet,  unob 
trusive  manner  they  refresh  those  around 
them.  Silently  but  effectually  they  minister 
to  the  life,  growth,  and  joy  of  those  who  dwell 
with  them.  Coming  fresh  from  heaven,  glis 
tening  like  diamonds  in  the  sun,  gracious  men 
and  women  attend  to  the  feeble  and  insignifi 
cant  till  each  blade  of  grass  has  its  own  drop 
of  dew.  Little  as  individuals,  they  are,  when 
united,  all-sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  love 
which  the  Lord  fulfils  through  them.  Dew- 
drops  accomplish  the  refreshing  of  broad 
acres.  Lord,  make  us  like  the  dew! 

Godly  people  are  as  showers  which  come  at 
God's  bidding  without  man's  leave  and  license. 
They  work  for  God  whether  men  desire  it  or 
not;  they  no  more  ask  human  permission 
than  the  rain  does.  Lord,  make  us  thus 
boldly  prompt,  and  free  in  thy  service  wher 
ever  our  lot  is  cast. 


280  _  ffaitb's  Cbeque  JBooft. 

OCTOBER  6. 

"Howbeit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is 
come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth!' 
John  xvi.  13. 


is  like  a  vast  cavern  into  which 
we  desire  to  enter,  but  we  are  not  able 
to  traverse  it  alone.  At  the  entrance  it 
is  clear  and  bright;  but  if  we  would  go  fur 
ther  and  explore  its  innermost  recesses,  we 
must  have  a  guide,  or  we  shall  lose  ourselves. 
The  Holy  Spirit,  who  knows  all  truth  per 
fectly,  is  the  appointed  guide  of  all  true  be 
lievers,  and  he  conducts  them  as  they  are 
able  to  bear  it,  from  one  inner  chamber  to 
another,  so  that  they  behold  the  deep  things 
of  God,  and  his  secret  is  made  plain  to  them. 
What  a  promise  is  this  for  the  humbly  en 
quiring  mind!  We  desire  to  know  the  truth, 
and  to  enter  into  it.  We  are  conscious  of  our 
own  aptness  to  err,  and  we  feel  the  urgent 
need  of  a  guide.  We  rejoice  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  come  and  abides  among  us.  He 
condescends  to  act  as  a  guide  to  us,  and  we 
gladly  accept  his  leadership.  "  All  truth  "  we 
wish  to  learn,  that  we  may  not  be  one-sided 
and  out  of  balance.  We  would  not  be  will 
ingly  ignorant  of  any  part  of  revelation  lest 
thereby  we  should  miss  blessing,  or  incur 
sin.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  come  that  he  may 
guide  us  into  all  truth:  let  us  with  obedient 
hearts  hearken  to  his  words  and  follow  his 
lead. 


Cbeque  JBooft.  281 


OCTOBER  7. 

"He  goeth  before  you-  into  Galilee:  there 
shall  ye  see  him,  as  he  said  unto  you." 
Mark  xvi.  7. 
J* 

MHERE  he  appointed  to  meet  his  disci 
ples,  there  he  would  be  in  due  time. 
Jesus  keeps  his  tryst.  If  he  prom 
ises  to  meet  us  at  the  mercy-seat,  or  in  public 
worship,  or  in  the  ordinances,  we  may  depend 
upon  it  that  he  will  be  there.  We  may  wick 
edly  stay  away  from  the  appointed  meeting- 
place,  but  he  never  does.  He  says,  "  Where 
two  or  three  are  met  together  in  my  name, 
there  am  I  "  ;  he  says  not  "  There  will  I  be," 
but,  "  I  am  there  already/* 

Jesus  is  always  first  in  fellowship  :  "  He 
goeth  before  you."  His  heart  is  with  his  peo 
ple,  his  delight  is  in  them,  he  is  never  slow 
to  meet  them.  In  all  fellowship  he  goeth  be 
fore  us. 

But  he  reveals  himself  to  those  who  come 
after  him:  "There  shall  ye  see  him."  Joyful 
sight!  We  care  not  to  see  the  greatest  of 
mere  men,  but  to  see  HIM  is  to  be  filled  with 
joy  and  peace.  And  we  shall  see  him,  for  he 
promises  to  come  to  those  who  believe  in  him, 
and  to  manifest  himself  to  them.  Rest  as 
sured  that  it  will  be  so,  for  he  does  every 
thing  according  to  his  word  of  promise  :  "  As 
he  said  unto  you."  Catch  at  those  last  words, 
and  be  assured  that  to  the  end  he  will  do 
for  you  "  as  he  said  unto  you," 


282  ffaitb's  Cbcque  ffiooft. 

OCTOBER  8. 

"Thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken" 
Isa.  Ixii.  4. 


is  a  dreary  word.  It 
sounds  like  a  knell.  It  is  the  record 
of  sharpest  sorrows,  and  the  prophecy 
of  direst  ills.  An  abyss  of  misery  yawns  in 
that  word  "  Forsaken."  Forsaken  by  one 
who  pledged  his  honour!  Forsaken  by  a 
friend  so  long  tried  and  trusted!  Forsaken 
by  a  dear  relative!  Forsaken  by  father  and 
mother!  Forsaken  by  all!  This  is  woe  in 
deed,  and  yet  it  may  be  patiently  borne  if  the 
Lord  will  take  us  up. 

But  what  must  it  be  to  feel  forsaken  of 
God?  Think  of  that  bitterest  of  cries,  "  My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 
Have  we  ever  in  any  degree  tasted  the  worm 
wood  and  the  gall  of  "  Forsaken,"  in  that 
sense?  If  so,  let  us  beseech  our  Lord  to 
save  us  from  any  repetition  of  so  unspeakable 
a  sorrow.  Oh  that  such  darkness  may  never 
return  !  Men  in  malice  said  to  a  saint,  "  God 
hath  forsaken  him;  persecute  and  take  him." 
But  it  was  always  false.  The  Lord's  loving 
favour  shall  compel  our  cruel  foes  to  eat  their 
own  words,  or,  at  least,  to  hold  their  tongues. 

The  reverse  of  all  this  is  that  superlative 
word,  Hephzibah  —  "the  Lord  delighteth  in 
thee."  This  turns  weeping  into  dancing. 
Let  those  who  dreamed  that  they  were  for 
saken  hear  the  Lord  say,  "  I  will  never  leave 
thee  nor  forsake  thee." 


3faftbrs  Cbeque  JBoofe.  283 

OCTOBER  9. 

"And  the  priest  shall  put  some  of  the  blood 
upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense 
before  the  Lord." — Lev.  iv.  7. 


altar  of  incense  is  the  place  where 
saints  present  their  prayers  and  praises; 
and  it  is  delightful  to  think  of  it  as 
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  the  great  sacrifice. 
This  it  is  which  makes  all  our  worship  ac 
ceptable  with  Jehovah:  he  sees  the  blood  of 
his  own  Son,  and  therefore  accepts  our  hom 
age. 

It  is  well  for  us  to  fix  our  eyes  upon  the 
blood  of  the  one  offering  for  sin.  Sin  min 
gles  even  with  our  holy  things,  and  our  best 
repentance,  faith,  prayer,  and  thanksgiving 
could  not  be  received  of  God  were  it  not  for 
the  merit  of  the  atoning  sacrifice.  Many  sneer 
at  "  the  blood ;"  but  to  us  it  is  the  foundation 
of  comfort  and  hope.  That  which  is  on  the 
horns  of  the  altar  is  meant  to  be  prominently 
before  our  eyes  when  we  draw  near  to  God. 
The  blood  gives  strength  to  prayer,  and  hence 
it  is  on  the  altar's  horns.  It  is  "  before  the 
Lord,"  and  therefore  it  ought  to  be  before 
us.  It  is  on  the  altar  before  we  bring  the 
incense;  it  is  there  to  sanctify  our  offerings 
and  gifts. 

Come,  let  us  pray  with  confidence,  since  the 
victim  is  offered,  the  merit  has  been  pleaded, 
the  blood  is  within  the  veil,  and  the  prayers 
of  believers  must  be  sweet  unto  the  Lord. 


284  afaitb'0  Cbeque  Boofe. 

OCTOBER  10. 

'7  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and 
no  man  can  shut  it." — Rev.  iii.  8. 


SAINTS  who  remain  faithful  to  the  truth 
of  God  have  an  open  door  before  them. 
My  soul,  thou  hast  resolved  to  live  and 
die  by  that  which  the  Lord  has  revealed  in 
his  Word,  and  therefore  before  thee  stands 
this  open  door. 

I  will  enter  in  by  the  open  door  of  com 
munion  with  God.  Who  shall  say  me  nay? 
Jesus  has  removed  my  sin,  and  given  me 
his  righteousness,  therefore  I  may  freely  enter. 
Lord,  I  do  so  by  thy  grace. 

I  have  also  before  me  an  open  door  into 
the  mysteries  of  the  Word.  I  may  enter  into 
the  deep  things  of  God.  Election,  Union  to 
Christ,  the  Second  Advent  —  all  these  are  be 
fore  me,  and  I  may  enjoy  them.  No  promise 
or  dictrine  is  now  locked  up  against  me. 

An  open  door  of  access  is  before  me  in  pri 
vate,  and  an  open  door  of  usefulness  in  pub 
lic.  God  will  hear  me,  God  will  use  me.  A 
door  is  opened  for  my  onward  march  to  the 
church  above,  and  for  my  daily  fellowship 
with  saints  below.  Some  may  try  to  shut  me 
up  or  shut  me  out,  but  all  in  vain. 

Soon  shall  I  see  an  open  door  into  heaven: 
the  pearl  gate  will  be  my  way  of  entrance, 
and  then  I  shall  go  in  unto  my  Lord  and 
King,  and  be  with  God  eternally  shut  in. 


jfattb's  Cbeque  3Boofc*  285 

OCTOBER   n. 

"And  1  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord: 
and  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  his 
name,  saith  the  Lord."  —  Zech.  x.  12. 


H  SOLACE  for  sick  saints.  They  have 
grown  faint,  and  they  fear  that  they 
shall  never  rise  from  the  bed  of  doubt 
and  fear;  but  the  great  Physician  can  both 
remove  the  disease,  and  take  away  the  weak 
ness  which  has  come  of  it.  He  will  strengthen 
the  feeble.  This  he  will  do  in  the  best  pos 
sible  way,  for  it  shall  be  "  in  Jehovah."  Our 
strength  is  far  better  in  God  than  in  self.  In 
the  Lord  it  causes  fellowship,  in  ourselves  it 
would  create  pride.  In  ourselves  it  would 
be  sadly  limited,  but  in  God  it  knows  no 
bound. 

When  strength  is  given,  the  believer  uses 
it.  He  walks  up  and  down  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  What  an  enjoyment  it  is  to  walk 
abroad  after  illness,  and  what  a  delight  to 
be  strong  in  the  Lord  after  a  season  of  pros 
tration!  The  Lord  gives  his  people  liberty 
to  walk  up  and  down,  and  an  inward  leisure 
to  exercise  that  liberty.  He  makes  gentlemen 
of  us:  we  are  not  slaves  who  know  no  rest, 
and  see  no  sights,  but  we  are  free  to  travel 
at  our  ease  throughout  Immanuel's  land. 

Come,  my  heart,  be  thou  no  more  sick  and 
sorry.  Jesus  bids  thee  be  strong,  and  walk 
with  God  in  holy  contemplation.  Obey  his 
word  of  love. 


286  afaftb's  Cbeque  3Boofc. 

OCTOBER  12. 

"A  nd  the  Lord  thy  God  will  circumcise 

thine  heart,  and  the  heart  of  thy  seed,  to 

love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart, 

and  iwth  all  thy  soul,  that  thou  mayest  live" 

Deut.  xxx.  6. 


MERE  we  read  of  the  true  circumcision. 
Note  the  author  of  it:  "The  Lord 
thy  God."  He  alone  can  deal  effect 
ually  with  our  heart,  and  take  away  its  carnal 
ity  and  pollution.  To  make  us  love  God  with 
all  our  heart  and  soul  is  a  miracle  of  grace 
which  only  the  Holy  Ghost  can  work.  We 
must  look  to  the  Lord  alone  for  this,  and 
never  be  satisfied  with  anything  short  of  it. 

Note  where  this  circumcision  is  wrought. 
It  is  not  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  spirit.  It  is 
the  essential  mark  of  the  covenant  of  grace. 
Love  to  God  is  the  indelible  token  of  the 
chosen  seed;  by  this  secret  seal  the  election 
of  grace  is  certified  to  the  believer.  We  must 
see  to  it  that  we  trust  in  no  outward  ritual, 
but  are  sealed  in  heart  by  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

Note  what  the  result  is  —  "  that  thou  mayest 
live."  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  In 
the  overcoming  of  the  flesh  we  find  life  and 
peace.  If  we  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit, 
we  shall  live.  Oh  that  Jehovah,  our  God, 
may  complete  his  gracious  work  upon  our 
inner  natures,  that  in  the  fullest  and  highest 
sense  we  may  live  unto  the  Lord. 


jfaftb'0  Gbcque  ;&oofe.  287 

OCTOBER  13. 

"If  my  people,  which  are  called  by  my 
name,  shall  humble  themselves,  and  pray, 
and  seek  my  face,  and  turn  from  their 
wicked  ways;  then  will  I  hear  from  heaven, 
and  will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  heal 
their  land."  —  2  Chron.  vii.  14. 


by  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we 
are  nevertheless  erring  men  and  women. 
What  a  mercy  it  is  that  our  God  is  ready 
to  forgive  !  Whenever  we  sin  let  us  hasten  to 
the  mercy-seat  of  our  God,  seeking  pardon. 

We  are  to  humble  ourselves.  Should  we  not 
be  humbled  by  the  fact  that  after  receiving 
so  much  love  we  yet  transgress?  O  Lord, 
we  bow  before  thee  in  the  dust,  and  own  our 
grievous  ingratitude.  Oh  the  infamy  of  sin! 
Oh  the  sevenfold  infamy  of  it  in  persons  so 
favoured  as  we  have  been! 

Next,  we  are  to  pray  for  mercy,  for  cleans 
ing,  for  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin. 
O  Lord,  hear  us  and  shut  not  out  our  cry. 

In  this  prayer  we  are  to  seek  the  Lord's 
face.  He  has  left  us  because  of  our  faults, 
and  we  must  entreat  him  to  return.  O  Lord, 
look  on  us  in  thy  Son  Jesus,  and  smile  upon 
thy  servants. 

With  this  must  go  our  own  turning  from 
evil  God  cannot  turn  to  us  unless  we  turn 
from  sin. 

Then  comes  the  triple  promise  of  hearing, 
pardon,  and  healing.  Our  Father,  grant  us 
these  at  once,  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake. 


288 ffaitb'g  Cbegue  3Sooft» 

OCTOBER   14. 

"Whosoever   therefore   shall   confess   me 
before  men,  him  will  I  confess  also  before 
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven!' 
Matt.  x.  32. 
# 

^RACIOUS  promise !  It  is  a  great  joy  to 
me  to  confess  my  Lord.  Whatever  my 
faults  may  be,  I  am  not  ashamed  of 
Jesus,  nor  do  I  fear  to  declare  the  doctrines 
of  his  cross.  O  Lord,  I  have  not  hid  thy 
righteousness  within  my  heart. 

Sweet  is  the  prospect  which  the  text  sets 
before  me!  Friends  forsake  and  enemies  ex 
ult,  but  the  Lord  does  not  disown  his  servant. 
Doubtless  my  Lord  will  own  me  even  here, 
and  give  me  new  tokens  of  his  favourable  re 
gard.  But  there  comes  a  day  when  I  must 
stand  before  the  Great  Father.  What  bliss  to 
think  that  Jesus  will  confess  me  then!  He 
will  say,  "  This  man  truly  trusted  me  and  was 
willing  to  be  reproached  for  my  name's  sake; 
and  therefore  I  acknowledge  him  as  mine." 
The  other  day  a  great  man  was  made  a  knight, 
and  the  Queen  handed  him  a  jewelled  garter; 
but  what  of  that?  It  will  be  an  honour  be 
yond  all  honours  for  the  Lord  Jesus  to  con 
fess  us  in  the  presence  of  the  divine  Majesty 
in  the  heavens.  Never  let  me  be  ashamed  to 
own  my  Lord.  Never  let  me  indulge  a  cow 
ardly  silence,  or  allow  a  faint-hearted  com 
promise.  Shall  I  blush  to  own  him  who  prom 
ises  to  own  me? 


ffaftb's  Cbcque  3Booft»  289 

OCTOBER   15. 

"As  the  living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I 
live  by  the  Father:  so  he  that  eateth  me, 
even  he  shall  live  by  me!3 — John  vi.  57. 


ME  live  by  virtue  of  our  union  with  the 
Son  of  God.  As  God-man  Mediator, 
the  Lord  Jesus  lives  by  the  self-exist 
ent  Father  who  has  sent  him,  and  in  the 
same  manner  we  live  by  the  Saviour  who  has 
quickened  us.  He  who  is  the  source  of  our 
life  is  also  the  sustenance  of  it.  Living  is  sus 
tained  by  feeding.  We  must  support  the  spir 
itual  life  by  spiritual  food,  and  that  spiritual 
food  is  the  Lord  Jesus  —  not  his  life,  or  death, 
or  offices,  or  work,  or  word  alone,  but  himself, 
as  including  all  these.  On  Jesus,  himself,  we 
feed. 

This  is  set  forth  to  us  in  the  Lord's  Supper, 
but  it  is  actually  enjoyed  by  us  when  we  med 
itate  upon  our  Lord,  believe  in  him  with 
appropriating  faith,  take  him  into  ourselves  by 
love,  and  assimilate  him  by  the  power  of  the 
inner  life.  We  know  what  it  is  to  feed  on 
Jesus,  but  we  cannot  speak  it  or  write  it. 
Our  wisest  course  is  to  practice  it,  and  to 
do  so  more  and  more.  We  are  entreated  to 
eat  abundantly,  and  it  will  be  to  our  infinite 
profit  to  do  so  when  Jesus  is  our  meat  and 
our  drink. 

Lord,   I   thank   thee  that  this,  which  is   a 
necessity  of  my  new  life,  is  also  its  greatest 
delight.     So  I  do  at  this  hour  feed  on  thee. 
19 


ago  ffattb'g  flbegue 


OCTOBER   16. 

Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 
John  xiv.  19. 


has  made  the  life  of  believers  in 
him  as  certain  as  his  own.  As  sure  as 
the  head  lives  the  members  live  also.  If 
Jesus  has  not  risen  from  the  dead,  then  are 
we  dead  in  our  sins  ;  but  since  he  has  risen,  all 
believers  are  risen  in  him.  His  death  has  put 
away  our  transgressions,  and  loosed  the  bonds 
which  held  us  under  the  death  sentence.  His 
resurrection  proves  our  justification:  we  are 
absolved,  and  mercy  saith,  "  The  Lord  hath 
put  away  thy  sin,  thou  shalt  not  die." 

Jesus  has  made  the  life  of  his  people  as 
eternal  as  his  own.  How  can  they  die  as  long 
as  he  lives,  seeing  they  are  one  with  him? 
Because  he  dieth  no  more,  and  death  hath  no 
more  dominion  over  him,  so  they  shall  no 
more  return  to  the  graves  of  their  old  sins, 
but  shall  live  unto  the  Lord  in  newness  of 
life.  O  believer,  when,  under  great  tempta 
tion,  thou  fearest  that  thou  shalt  one  day  fall 
by  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  let  this  reassure 
thee.  Thou  shalt  never  lose  thy  spiritual  life, 
for  it  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  Thou  dost 
not  doubt  the  immortality  of  thy  Lord  ;  there 
fore,  do  not  think  that  he  will  let  thee  die, 
since  thou  art  one  with  him.  The  argument 
for  thy  life  is  his  life,  and  of  that  thou  canst 
have  no  fear;  wherefore  rest  in  thy  living 
Lord. 


ffaftb's  Gbeque  JBoofe.  291 

OCTOBER   17. 

"He  that  feareth  the  commandment  shall 
be  rewarded." — Prov.  xiii.  13. 


HOLY  awe  of  God's  word  is  at  a  great 
discount.     Men  think  themselves  wiser 
than  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  sit  in 
judgment  upon  it.     "  So  did  not  I,  because  of 
the   fear   of   God."     We   accept   the   inspired 
Book  as  infallible,  and  prove  our  esteem  by 
our   obedience.     We    have    no    terror   of    the 
Word,  but  we  have  a  filial  awe  of  it.     We 
are  not  in  fear  of  its  penalties,  because  we 
have  a  fear  of  its  commands. 

This  holy  fear  of  the  commandment  pro 
duces  the  restfulness  of  humility,  which  is  far 
sweeter  than  the  recklessness  of  pride.  It  be 
comes  a  guide  to  us  in  our  movements;  a 
drag  when  we  are  going  down-hill,  and  a  stim 
ulus  when  we  are  climbing  it.  Preserved 
from  evil  and  led  into  righteousness  by  our 
reverence  of  the  command,  we  gain  a  quiet 
conscience,  which  is  a  well  of  wine;  a  sense 
of  freedom  from  responsibility,  which  is  as 
life  from  the  dead;  and  a  confidence  of  pkas- 
ing  God,  which  is  heaven  below.  The'  un 
godly  may  ridicule  our  deep  reverence  for  the 
Word  of  the  Lord;  but  what  of  that?  The 
prize  of  our  high  calling  is  a  sufficient  consola 
tion  for  us.  The  rewards  of  obedience  make 
us  scorn  the  scorning  of  the  scorner. 


292  3faltb'0  Cbeaue 

—  , 

OCTOBER   18. 


. 

"They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy.' 
Ps.  cxxvi.  5. 


MEEPING  times  are  suitable  for  sow 
ing:  we  do  not  want  the  ground  to 
be  too  dry.  Seed  steeped  in  the  tears 
of  earnest  anxiety  will  come  up  all  the  sooner. 
The  salt  of  prayerful  tears  will  give  the  good 
seed  a  flavour  which  will  preserve  it  from  the 
worm:  truth  spoken  in  awful  earnestness  has 
a  double  life  about  it.  Instead  of  stopping  our 
sowing  because  of  our  weeping,  let  us  re 
double  our  efforts  because  the  season  is  so 
propitious. 

Our  heavenly  seed  could  not  fitly  be  sown 
laughing.  Deep  sorrow  and  concern  for  the 
souls  of  others  are  a  far  more  fit  accompani 
ment  of  godly  teaching  than  anything  like 
levity.  We  have  heard  of  men  who  went  to 
war  with  a  light  heart,  but  they  were  beaten; 
and  it  is  mostly  so  with  those  who  sow  in  the 
same  style. 

Come,  then,  my  heart,  sow  on  in  thy  weep 
ing,  for  thou  hast  the  promise  of  a  joyful 
harvest.  Thou  shalt  reap.  Thou,  thyself, 
shalt  see  some  result  of  thy  labour.  This 
shall  come  to  thee  in  so  large  a  measure  as  to 
give  thee  joy,  which  a  poor,  withered,  and 
scanty  harvest  would  not  do.  When  thine 
eyes  are  dim  with  silver  tears,  think  of  the 
golden  corn.  Bear  cheerfully  the  present  toil 
and  disappointment;  for  the  harvest  day  will 
fully  recompense  thee. 


jfaltb'0  Cbcque  asooft.  293 

OCTOBER   19. 

'7  will  correct  thee  in  measure." 
Jer.  xxx.  ii. 


be  left  uncorrected  would  be  a  fatal 
sign:  it  would  prove  that  the  Lord  had 
said,  "  He  is  given  unto  idols,  let  him 
alone."  God  grant  that  such  may  never  be 
our  portion!  Uninterrupted  prosperity  is  a 
thing  to  cause  fear  and  trembling.  As  many 
as  God  tenderly  loves  he  rebukes  and  chastens : 
those  for  whom  he  has  no  esteem  he  allows  to 
fatten  themselves  without  fear,  like  bullocks 
for  the  slaughter.  It  is  in  love  that  our  heav 
enly  Father  uses  the  rod  upon  his  children. 
Yet  see,  the  correction  is  "  in  measure  " :  he 
gives  us  love  without  measure,  but  chastise 
ment  "  in  measure."  As  under  the  old  law 
no  Israelite  could  receive  more  than  the 
"  forty  stripes  save  one,"  which  ensured  care 
ful  counting  and  limited  suffering,  so  is  it 
with  each  afflicted  member  of  the  household 
of  faith  —  every  stroke  is  counted.  It  is  the 
measure  of  wisdom,  the  measure  of  sympathy, 
the  measure  of  love,  by  which  our  chastise 
ment  is  regulated.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  rebel 
against  appointments  so  divine.  Lord,  if  thou 
standest  by  to  measure  the  bitter  drops  into 
my  cup,  it  is  for  me  cheerfully  to  take  that 
cup  from  thy  hand,  and  drink  according  to  thy 
directions,  saying,  "  Thy  will  be  done." 


294  ffaitb's  Gbeque  3Booft. 

OCTOBER  20. 

"He  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins." 
Matt.  i.  21. 

Jl 

%ORD,  save  me  from  my  sins.  By  thy 
name  of  Jesus  I  am  encouraged  thus  to 
pray.  Save  me  from  my  past  sins,  that 
the  habit  of  them  may  not  hold  me  captive. 
Save  me  from  my  constitutional  sins,  that  I 
may  not  be  the  slave  of  my  own  weaknesses. 
Save  me  from  the  sins  which  are  continually 
under  my  eye,  that  I  may  not  lose  my  horror 
of  them.  Save  me  from  secret  sins;  sins  un- 
perceived  by  me  from  my  want  of  light. 
Save  me  from  sudden  and  surprising  sins: 
let  me  not  be  carried  off  my  feet  by  a  rush  of 
temptation.  Save  me,  Lord,  from  every  sin. 
Let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over  me. 
Thou  alone  canst  do  this.  I  cannot  snap 
my  own  chains  or  slay  my  own  enemies. 
Thou  knowest  temptation,  for  thou  wast 
tempted.  Thou  knowest  sin,  for  thou  didst 
bear  the  weight  of  it.  Thou  knowest  how  to 
succour  me  in  my  hour  of  conflict.  Thou 
canst  save  me  from  sinning,  and  save  me  when 
I  have  sinned.  It  is  promised  in  thy  very 
name  that  thou  wilt  do  this,  and  I  pray  thee 
let  me  this  day  verify  the  prophecy.  Let  me 
not  give  way  to  temper,  or  pride,  or  despond 
ency,  or  any  form  of  evil ;  but  do  thou  save  me 
unto  holiness  of  life,  that  thy  name  of  Jesus 
may  be  glorified  in  me  abundantly. 


ffaitb'g  Cbegue  JBooft, 295 

OCTOBER  21. 

"A  little  one  shall  become  a  thousand,  and 
a  small  one  a  strong  nation:  I  the  Lord  will 
hasten  it  in  his  time." — Isa.  Ix.  22. 
Jl 

MORKS  for  the  Lord  often  begin  on  a 
small  scale,  and  they  are  none  the 
worse  for  this.  Feebleness  educates 
faith,  brings  God  near,  and  wins  glory  for  his 
name.  Prize  promises  of  increase.  Mustard 
seed  is  the  smallest  among  seeds,  and  yet  it 
becomes  a  tree-like  plant,  with  branches  which 
lodge  the  birds  of  heaven.  We  may  begin 
with  one,  and  that  "  a  little  one,"  and  yet  it 
will  "  become  a  thousand."  The  Lord  is  great 
at  the  multiplication  table.  How  often  did  he 
say  to  his  lone  servant,  "  I  will  multiply 
thee  " !  Trust  in  the  Lord,  ye  ones  and  twos ; 
for  he  will  be  in  the  midst  of  you  if  you  are 
gathered  in  his  name. 

"  A  small  one."  What  can  be  more  des 
picable  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  count 
heads  and  weigh  forces !  yet  this  is  the  nucleus 
of  a  great  nation.  Only  one  star  shines  out  at 
first  in  the  evening,  but  soon  the  sky  is 
crowded  with  countless  lights. 

Nor  need  we  think  the  prospect  of  increase 
to  be  remote,  for  the  promise  is,  "  I  Jehovah 
will  hasten  it  in  his  time."  There  will  be  no 
premature  haste,  like  that  which  we  see  at 
excited  meetings;  it  will  be  all  in  due  time; 
but  yet  there  will  be  no  delay.  When  the 
Lord  hastens,  his  speed  is  glorious. 


296  3faftb's  Cbeque  JSooft* 

OCTOBER  22. 

"Thou,  0  Lord  God,  hast  spoken  it:  and 
with  thy  blessing  let  the  house  of  thy  servant 
be  blessed  for  ever."  —  2  Sam.  vii.  29. 


is  a  promise  pleaded,  and  so  it 
yields  double  instruction  to  us.  Any 
thing  which  the  Lord  God  has  spoken  we 
should  receive  as  surely  true,  and  then  plead 
is  at  the  throne. 

Oh,  how  sweet  to  quote  what  our  own  God 
has  spoken  !  How  precious  to  use  a  "  there 
fore  "  which  the  promise  suggests,  as  David 
does  in  this  verse! 

We  do  not  pray  because  we  doubt,  but  be 
cause  we  believe.  To  pray  unbelievingly  is 
unbecoming  in  the  Lord's  children.  No,  Lord, 
we  cannot  doubt  thee:  we  are  persuaded  that 
every  word  of  thine  is  a  sure  foundation  for 
the  boldest  expectation.  We  come  to  thee 
and  say,  "  Do  as  thou  hast  said."  Bless  thy 
servant's  house.  Heal  our  sick;  save  our  hes 
itating  ones;  restore  those  who  wander;  con 
firm  those  who  live  in  thy  fear.  Lord,  give 
us  food  and  raiment  according  to  thy  word. 
Prosper  our  undertakings;  especially  succeed 
our  endeavours  to  make  known  thy  gospel  in 
our  neighbourhood.  Make  our  servants  thy 
servants,  our  children  thy  children.  Let  the 
blessing  flow  on  to  future  generations,  and  as 
long  as  any  of  our  race  remains  on  earth  may 
they  remain  true  to  thee.  O  Lord  God  "let 
the  house  of  thy  servant  be  blessed." 


3f  aitb's  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  297 

OCTOBER  23. 

"Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,   and 
gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart." 
Ps.  xcvii.  ii. 


4|V%IGHTEOUSNESS  is  often  costly  to  the 
ll\  man  w^°  keeps  to  it  at  all  hazards,  but 
in  the  end  it  will  bear  its  own  expenses, 
and  return  an  infinite  profit.  A  holy  life  is 
like  sowing  seed:  much  is  going  out,  and  ap 
parently  it  is  buried  in  the  soil,  never  to  be 
gathered  up  again.  We  are  mistaken  when 
we  look  for  an  immediate  harvest;  but  the 
error  is  very  natural,  for  it  seems  impossible 
to  bury  light.  Yet  light  is  "  sown,"  says  the 
text.  It  lies  latent  :  none  can  see  it,  it  is  sown. 
We  are  quite  sure  that  it  must  one  day  mani 
fest  itself. 

Full  sure  are  we  that  the  Lord  has  set  a 
harvest  for  the  sowers  of  light,  and  they  shall 
reap  it,  each  man  for  himself.  Then  shall 
come  their  gladness.  Sheaves  of  joy  for  seeds 
of  light.  Their  heart  was  upright  before  the 
Lord,  though  men  gave  them  no  credit  for  it, 
but  even  censured  them:  they  were  righteous, 
though  those  about  them  denounced  them  as 
censorious.  They  had  to  wait,  as  husband 
men  wait  for  the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth: 
but  the  light  was  sown  for  them,  and  gladness 
was  being  prepared  by  the  Lord  of  the  harvest. 
Courage,  brothers!  we  need  not  be  in  a 
hurry.  Let  us  in  patience  possess  our  souls, 
for  soon  shall  our  souls  possess  light  and  glad 
ness. 


298 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

OCTOBER  24. 

"And  I  will  make  thee  unto  this  people  a 
fenced  brazen  wall:  and  they  shall  fight 
against  thee,  but  they  shall  not  'prevail 
against  thee:  for  I  am  with  thee  to  save  thee 
and  to  deliver  thee,  saith  the  Lord." — Jer. 
xv.  20.  ^ 

STABILITY  in  the  fear  and  faith  of  God 
will  make  a  man  like  a  wall  of  brass, 
which  no  one  can  batter  down  or  break. 
Only  the  Lord  can  make  such;  but  we  need 
such  men  in  the  church,  and  in  the  world,  but 
specially  in  the  pulpit. 

Against  uncompromising  men  of  truth  this 
age  of  shams  will  fight  tooth  and  nail.  Noth 
ing  seems  to  offend  Satan  and  his  seed  like  de 
cision.  They  attack  holy  firmness  even  as 
the  Assyrians  besieged  fenced  cities.  The 
joy  is  that  they  cannot  prevail  against  those 
whom  God  has  made  strong  in  his  strength. 
Carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine, 
others  only  need  to  be  blown  upon,  and  away 
they  go;  but  those  who  love  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  because  they  possess  the  grace  of  the 
doctrines,  stand  like  rocks  in  the  midst  of  rag 
ing  seas. 

Whence  this  stability?  "I  am  with  thee, 
saith  the  Lord " :  that  is  the  true  answer. 
Jehovah  will  save  and  deliver  faithful  souls 
from  all  the  assaults  of  the  adversary.  Hosts 
are  against  us,  but  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  with 
us.  We  dare  not  budge  an  inch ;  for  the  Lord 
himself  holds  us  in  our  place,  and  there  we 
will  abide  for  ever. 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  3Boofc.  299 

OCTOBER  25. 

"But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God, 
and  his  righteousness;  and  all  these  things 
shall  be  added  unto  you." — Matt.  vi.  33. 


SEE  how  the  Bible  opens:     "  In  the  begin 
ning  God."     Let  your  life  open  in  the 
same  way.     Seek  with  your  whole  soul, 
first  and  foremost,  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  the 
place  of  your  citizenship,  and  his  righteousness 
as  the  character  of  your  life.     As  for  the  rest, 
it  will  come  from  the  Lord  himself  without 
your  being  anxious  concerning  it.     All  that  is 
needful  for  this  life  and  godliness  "  shall  be 
added  unto  you." 

What  a  promise  this  is!  Food,  raiment, 
home,  and  so  forth,  God  undertakes  to  add  to 
you  while  you  seek  him.  You  mind  his  busi 
ness,  and  he  will  mind  yours.  If  you  want 
paper  and  string,  you  get  them  given  in  when 
you  buy  more  important  goods ;  and  just  so  all 
that  we  need  of  earthly  things  we  shall  have 
thrown  in  with  the  kingdom.  He  who  is  an 
heir  of  salvation  shall  not  die  of  starvation; 
and  lie  who  clothes  his  soul  with  the  righteous 
ness  of  God  cannot  be  left  of  the  Lord  with  a 
naked  body.  Away  with  carking  care.  Set 
all  your  mind  upon  seeing  the  Lord.  Covet- 
ousness  is  poverty,  and  anxiety  is  misery: 
trust  in  God  is  an  estate,  and  likeness  to  God 
is  a  heavenly  inheritance.  Lord,  I  seek  thee, 
be  found  of  me. 


300  3faitbra  Cbeaue 


OCTOBER  26. 

"For  the  elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be 
shortened."  —  Matt.  xxiv.  22. 


the  sake  of  his  elect  the  Lord  with 
holds  many  judgments,  and  shortens 
others.  In  great  tribulations  the  fire 
•would  devour  all  were  it  not  that  out  of  re 
gard  to  his  elect  the  Lord  damps  the  flame. 
Thus,  while  he  saves  his  elect  for  the  sake  of 
Jesus,  he  also  preserves  the  race  for  the  sake 
of  his  chosen. 

What  an  honour  is  thus  put  upon  saints! 
How  diligently  they  ought  to  use  their  in 
fluence  with  their  Lord!  He  will  hear  their 
prayers  for  sinners,  and  bless  their  efforts  for 
their  salvation.  He  blesses  believers  that 
they  may  be  a  blessing  to  those  who  are  in  un 
belief.  Many  a  sinner  lives  because  of  the 
prayers  of  a  mother,  or  wife,  or  daughter,  to 
whom  the  Lord  has  respect. 

Have  we  used  aright  the  singular  power 
with  which  the  Lord  entrusts  us?  Do  we 
pray  for  our  country,  for  other  lands,  and  for 
the  age?  Do  we,  in  times  of  war,  famine,  pes 
tilence,  stand  out  as  intercessors,  pleading  that 
the  days  may  be  shortened?  Do  we  lament 
before  God  the  outbursts  of  infidelity,  error, 
and  licentiousness?  Do  we  beseech  our  Lord 
Jesus  to  shorten  the  reign  of  sin  by  hastening 
his  own  glorious  appearing?  Let  us  get  to 
our  knees,  and  never  rest  till  Christ  appeareth. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBooft*  301 

OCTOBER  27. 

"His  servants  shall  serve  him:  and  they 
shall  see  his  face;  and  his  name  shall  be  in 
their  foreheads."  —  Rev.  xxii.  3,  4. 


choice  blessings  will  be  ours  in 
the  glory  land. 

"  His  servants  shall  serve  him."  No 
other  lords  shall  oppress  us,  no  other  service 
shall  distress  us.  We  shall  serve  Jesus  al 
ways,  perfectly,  without  weariness,  and  with 
out  error.  This  is  heaven  to  a  saint:  in  all 
things  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ,  and  to  be 
owned  by  him  as  his  servant,  is  our  soul's 
high  ambition  for  eternity. 

"  And  they  shall  see  his  face."  This  makes 
the  service  delightful:  indeed,  it  is  the  pres 
ent  reward  of  service.  We  shall  know  our 
Lord,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  To 
see  the  face  of  Jesus  is  the  utmost  favour 
that  the  most  faithful  servant  of  the  Lord 
can  ask.  What  more  could  Moses  ask  than 
—  "  Let  me  see  thy  face  "  ? 

"  And  his  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads." 
They  gaze  upon  their  Lord  till  his  name  is 
photographed  upon  their  brows.  They  are 
acknowledged  by  him,  and  they  acknowledge 
him.  The  secret  mark  of  inward  grace  de 
velops  into  the  public  sign-manual  of  con 
fessed  relationship. 

O  Lord,  give  us  these  three  things  in  their 
beginnings  here,  that  we  may  possess  them 
in  their  fulness  in  thine  own  abode  of  bliss! 


302  _  ffaitb'g  Cheque  JBooft, 

OCTOBER  28. 

"And  it  shall  be  forgiven  them;  for  it  is 
ignorance."  —  Num.  xv.  25. 
Jl 


of  our  ignorance  we  are  not 
fully  aware  of  our  sins  of  ignorance. 
Yet  we  may  be  sure  they  are  many,  in 
the  form  both  of  commission  and  omission. 
We  may  be  doing  in  all  sincerity,  as  a  service 
to  God,  that  which  he  has  never  commanded, 
and  can  never  accept. 

The  Lord  knows  these  sins  of  ignorance 
every  one.  This  may  well  alarm  us,  since  in 
justice  he  will  require  these  trespasses  at 
our  hand;  but  on  the  other  hand,  faith  spies 
comfort  in  this  fact,  for  the  Lord  will  see 
to  it  that  stains  unseen  by  us  shall  yet  be 
washed  away.  He  sees  the  sin  that  he  may 
cease  to  see  it  by  casting  it  behind  his  back. 

Our  great  comfort  is  that  Jesus,  the  true 
priest,  has  made  atonement  for  all  the  con 
gregation  of  the  children  of  Israel.  That 
atonement  secures  the  pardon  of  unknown 
sins.  His  precious  blood  cleanses  us  from 
all  sin.  Whether  our  eyes  have  seen  it  and 
wept  over  it,  or  not,  God  has  seen  it,  Christ 
has  atoned  for  it,  the  Spirit  bears  witness  to 
the  pardon  of  it,  and  so  we  have  a  threefold 
peace. 

O  my  Father,  I  praise  thy  divine  knowl 
edge,  which  not  only  perceives  my  iniquities, 
but  provides  an  atonement  which  delivers  me 
from  the  guilt  of  them,  even  before  I  know 
that  I  am  guilty. 


3fattb'0  Cbeque  JBoofc.  303 

OCTOBER  29. 

"And  I  will  put  a  division  between  my 
people  and  thy  people:  to-morrow  shall  this 
sign  be."  —  Ex.  viii.  23. 

Jl 


has  a  people,  and  the  Lord 
has  a  people.  These  may  dwell  to- 
gether,  and  seem  to  fare  alike,  but  there 
is  a  division  between  them,  and  the  Lord 
will  make  it  apparent.  Not  for  ever  shall  one 
event  happen  alike  to  all,  but  there  shall  be 
great  difference  between  the  men  of  the  world 
and  the  people  of  Jehovah's  choice. 

This  may  happen  in  the  time  of  judgments, 
when  the  Lord  becomes  the  sanctuary  of  his 
saints.  It  is  very  conspicuous  in  the  conver 
sion  of  believers  when  their  sin  is  put  away, 
while  unbelievers  remain  under  condemnation. 
From  that  moment  they  become  a  distinct 
race,  come  under  a  new  discipline,  and  enjoy 
new  blessings.  Their  homes,  henceforth,  are 
free  from  the  grievous  swarms  of  evils  which 
defile  and  torment  the  Egyptians.  They  are 
kept  from  the  pollution  of  lust,  the  bite  of 
care,  the  corruption  of  falsehood,  and  the 
cruel  torment  of  hatred,  which  devour  many 
families. 

Rest  assured,  tried  believer,  that  though 
you  have  your  troubles  you  are  saved  from 
swarms  of  worse  ones,  which  infest  the  homes 
and  hearts  of  the  servants  of  the  world's 
Prince.  The  Lord  has  put  a  division;  see  to 
it  that  you  keep  up  the  division  in  spirit,  aim, 
character  and  company. 


3Q4 ffattb'g  Cbegue  JBooft, 

OCTOBER  30. 

"Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon 
you,  and  ye  shall  be  clean:  from  all  your 
filthiness,   and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I 
cleanse  you.3' — Ez.  xxxvi.  25. 
J* 

MHAT  an  exceeding  joy  is  this!  He 
who  has  purified  us  with  the  blood 
of  Jesus  will  also  cleanse  us  by  the 
water  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  God  hath  said  it, 
and  so  it  must  be,  "  Ye  shall  be  clean." 
Lord,  we  feel  and  mourn  our  uncleanness, 
and  it  is  cheering  to  be  assured  by  thine  own 
mouth  that  we  shall  be  clean.  Oh  that  thou 
wouldst  make  a  speedy  work  of  it! 

He  will  deliver  us  from  our  worst  sins. 
The  uprisings  of  unbelief,  and  the  deceitful 
lusts  which  war  against  the  soul,  the  vile 
thoughts  of  pride,  and  the  suggestions  of  Sa 
tan  to  blaspheme  the  sacred  name  —  all  these 
shall  be  so  purged  away  as  never  to  return. 

He  will  also  cleanse  us  from  all  our  idols, 
whether  of  gold  or  of  clay:  our  impure  loves, 
and  our  excessive  love  of  that  which  in  itself 
is  pure.  That  which  we  have  idolized  shall 
either  be  broken  from  us,  or  we  shall  be 
broken  off  from  it. 

It  is  God  who  speaks  of  what  he  himself 
will  do.  Therefore  is  this  word  established 
and  sure,  and  we  may  boldly  look  for  that 
which  it  guarantees  to  us.  Cleansing  is  a 
covenant  blessing,  and  the  covenant  is  or 
dered  in  all  things  and  sure. 


JFaitb's  Cbeque  3Booft.  305 

OCTOBER  31. 

'7  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the 
zvorks  of  the  Lord." — Ps.  cxviii.  17. 


HFAIR  assurance  this!     It  was  no  doubt 
based  upon  a  promise,  inwardly  whis 
pered  in  the  Psalmist's  heart,  which  he 
seized   upon   and   enjoyed.     Is   my   case   like 
that  of  David?     Am  I  depressed  because  the 
enemy  exults  over  me?    Are  there  multitudes 
against  me,  and  few  on  my  side?     Does  un 
belief  bid  me  lie  down  and  die  in  despair  — 
a  defeated,   dishonoured  man?     Do  my  ene 
mies  begin  to  dig  my  grave? 

What  then?  Shall  I  yield  to  the  whisper 
of  fear,  and  give  up  the  battle,  and  with  it 
give  up  all  hope?  Far  from  it.  There  is  life 
in  me  yet :  "  I  shall  not  die."  Vigour  will 
return  and  remove  my  weakness :  "  I  shall 
live."  The  Lord  lives,  and  I  shall  live  also. 
My  mouth  shall  again  be  opened :  "  I  shall 
declare  the  works  of  Jehovah."  Yes,  and  I 
shall  speak  of  the  present  trouble  as  another 
instance  of  the  wonder-working  faithfulness 
and  love  of  the  Lord  my  God.  Those  who 
would  gladly  measure  me  for  my  coffin  had 
better  wait  a  bit ;  for  "  the  Lord  hath  chas 
tened  me  sore,  but  he  hath  not  given  me  over 
unto  death."  Glory  be  to  his  name  for  ever! 
I  am  immortal  till  my  work  is  done.  Till  the 
Lord  wills  it  no  vault  can  close  upon  me. 
20 


306  ffaitb's  Cbcque  JBoofc. 

NOVEMBER   i. 

"Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also 
will  do  it." — i  Thess.  v.  24. 

& 

HAT  will  he  do?  He  will  sanctify  us 
wholly.  See  the  previous  verse.  He 
will  carry  on  the  work  of  purification 
till  we  are  perfect  in  every  part.  He  will 
preserve  our  "  whole  spirit,  and  soul,  and 
body,  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  He  will  not  allow  us  to  fall 
from  grace,  nor  come  under  the  dominion  of 
sin.  What  great  favours  are  these!  Well 
may  we  adore  the  giver  of  such  unspeakable 
gifts. 

Who  will  do  this?  The  Lord  who  has 
called  us  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous 
light,  out  of  death  in  sin  into  eternal  life  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Only  he  can  do  this:  such  per 
fection  and  preservation  can  only  come  from 
the  God  of  all  grace. 

Why  will  he  do  it?  Because  he  is  "  faith 
ful  " —  faithful  to  his  own  promise  which  is 
pledged  to  save  the  believer;  faithful  to  his 
Son,  whose  reward  it  is  that  his  people  shall 
be  presented  to  him  faultless;  faithful  to  the 
work  which  he  has  commenced  in  us  by  our 
effectual  calling.  It  is  not  their  own  faithful 
ness,  but  the  Lord's  own  faithfulness,  on 
which  the  saints  rely. 

Come,  my  soul,  here  is  a  grand  feast  to  be 
gin  a  dull  month  with.  There  may  be  fogs 
without,  but  there  should  be  sunshine  within. 


3faUb'6  Cheque  3Booft»  _  307 

NOVEMBER  2. 

"No  good  thing  will  he  withhold  from    ' 
them  that  walk  uprightly."  —  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  n. 


pleasing  things  the  Lord  may 
withhold,  but  "no  good  thing."  He 
is  the  best  judge  of  what  is  good  for 
us.  Some  things  are  assuredly  good,  and 
these  we  may  have  for  the  asking  through  Je 
sus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Holiness  is  a  good  thing,  and  this  he  will 
work  in  us  freely.  Victory  over  evil  tenden 
cies,  strong  tempers,  and  evil  habits,  he  will 
gladly  grant,  and  we  ought  not  to  remain 
without  it. 

Full  assurance  he  will  bestow,  and  near 
communion  with  himself,  and  access  into  all 
truth,  and  boldness  with  prevalence  at  the 
mercy  seat.  If  we  have  not  these,  it  is  from 
want  of  faith  to  receive  and  not  from  any  un 
willingness  of  God  to  give.  A  calm,  a  heav 
enly  frame,  great  patience,  and  fervent  love  — 
all  these  will  he  give  to  holy  diligence. 

But  note  well  that  we  must  "  walk  up 
rightly."  There  must  be  no  cross  purposes 
and  crooked  dealings;  no  hypocrisy  nor  de 
ceit.  If  we  walk  foully  God  cannot  give  us 
favours,  for  that  would  be  a  premium  upon 
sin.  The  way  of  uprightness  is  the  way  of 
heavenly  wealth  —  wealth  so  large  as  to  in 
clude  every  good  thing. 

What  a  promise  to  plead  in  prayer!  Let  us 
get  to  our  knees. 


so8  JFattb's  Cbeque 


NOVEMBER  3 

"For  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  appointed 
time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not 
lie:  though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it;  because  it 
will  surely  come,  it  will  not  tarry." 
Hab.  ii.  3. 
Jl 


may  seem  slow,  but  it  is  sure. 
The  Lord  in  unfailing  wisdom  has  ap 
pointed  a  time  for  the  outgoings  of  his 
gracious  power,  and  God's  time  is  the 
best  time.  We  are  in  a  hurry;  the  vision  of 
the  blessing  excites  our  desire,  and  hastens 
our  longings;  but  the  Lord  will  keep  his  ap 
pointments.  He  never  is  before  his  time;  he 
never  is  behind. 

God's  word  is  here  spoken  of  as  a  living 
thing  which  will  speak,  and  will  come.  It 
is  never  a  dead  letter,  as  we  are  tempted  to 
fear  when  we  have  long  watched  for  its  ful 
filment.  The  living  word  is  on  the  way  from 
the  living  God,  and  though  it  may  seem  to 
linger,  it  is  not  in  reality  doing  so.  God's 
train  is  not  behind  time.  It  is  only  a  matter 
of  patience,  and  we  shall  soon  see  for  our 
selves  the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord.  No  prom 
ise  of  his  shall  fail  ;  "  it  will  not  lie."  No 
promise  of  his  will  be  lost  in  silence  ;  "  it  shall 
speak."  What  comfort  it  will  speak  to  the 
believing  ear!  No  promise  of  his  shall  need 
to  be  renewed  like  a  bill  which  could  not  be 
paid  on  the  day  in  which  it  fell  due  —  "  it 
will  not  tarry." 


Cbegue  ffooft,  309 


NOVEMBER  4. 

"And  he  said,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Make 
this  valley  full  of  ditches.  For  thus  saith 
the  Lord,  Ye  shall  not  see  wind,  neither 
shall  ye  see  rain;  yet  that  valley  shall  be 
filled  with  water,  that  ye  may  drink,  both 
ye,  and  your  cattle,  and  your  beasts." 
2  Kings  iii.  16,  17. 


armies  were  perishing  of  thirst, 
and  the  Lord  interposed.  Although  he 
sent  neither  cloud  nor  rain,  yet  he  sup 
plied  an  abundance  of  water.  He  is  not  de 
pendent  upon  ordinary  methods,  but  can  sur 
prise  his  people  with  novelties  of  wisdom  and 
power.  Thus  are  we  made  to  see  more  of 
God  than  ordinary  processes  could  have  re 
vealed.  Although  the  Lord  may  not  appear 
for  us  in  the  way  we  expect,  or  desire,  or 
suppose,  yet  he  will  in  some  way  or  other 
provide  for  us.  It  is  a  great  blessing  for  us 
to  be  raised  above  looking  to  secondary 
causes,  so  that  we  may  gaze  into  the  face 
of  the  great  First  Cause. 

Have  we  this  day  grace  enough  to  make 
trenches  into  which  the  divine  blessing  may 
flow?  Alas!  we  too  often  fail  in  the  exhibi 
tion  of  true  and  practical  faith.  Let  us  this 
day  be  on  the  outlook  for  answers  to  prayer. 
As  the  child  who  went  to  a  meeting  to  pray 
for  rain  took  an  umbrella  with  her,  so  let  us 
truly  and  practically  expect  the  Lord  to  bless 
us.  Let  us  make  the  valley  full  of  ditches 
and  expect  to  see  them  all  filled. 


310  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe, 

NOVEMBER  5. 

"I  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  I 
be  always  wroth:  for  the  spirit  should  fail 
before  me,  and  the  souls  which  I  have 
made!'  —  Isa.  Ivii.  16. 


heavenly  Father  seeks  our  instruc 
tion,  not  our  destruction.  His  conten 
tion  with  us  has  a  kind  intention  to 
wards  us.  He  will  not  be  always  in  arms 
against  us.  We  think  the  Lord  is  long  in  his 
chastisements,  but  that  is  because  we  are  short 
in  our  patience.  His  compassion  endureth 
for  ever,  but  not  his  contention.  The  night 
may  drag  its  weary  length  along,  but  it  must 
in  the  end  give  place  to  cheerful  day.  As 
contention  is  only  for  a  season,  so  the  wrath 
which  leads  to  it  is  only  for  a  small  moment. 
The  Lord  loves  his  chosen  too  well  to  be  al 
ways  angry  with  them. 

If  he  were  to  deal  with  us  always  as  he 
does  sometimes  we  should  faint  outright,  and 
go  down  hopelessly  to  the  gates  of  Meath. 
Courage,  dear  heart!  the  Lord  will  soon  end 
his  chiding.  Bear  up,  for  the  Lord  will  bear 
you  up,  and  bear  you  through.  He  who  made 
you  knows  how  frail  you  are,  and  how  little 
you  can  bear.  He  will  handle  tenderly  that 
which  he  has  fashioned  so  delicately.  There 
fore,  be  not  afraid  because  of  the  painful  pres 
ent,  for  it  hastens  to  a  happy  future.  He  that 
smote  you  will  heal  you  ;  his  little  wrath  shall 
be  followed  by  great  mercies. 


Cbeque  JBooft.  311 


NOVEMBER  6. 

"Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord;  and  he 
shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart" 
Ps.  xxxvii.  4. 


in  God  has  a  transforming 
power,  and  lifts  a  man  above  the  gross 
desires  of  our  fallen  nature.  Delight  in 
Jehovah  is  not  only  sweet  in  itself,  but  it 
sweetens  the  whole  soul,  till  the  longings  of 
the  heart  become  such  that  the  Lord  can 
safely  promise  to  fulfil  them.  Is  not  that  a 
grand  delight  which  moulds  our  desires  till 
they  are  like  the  desires  of  God? 

Our  foolish  way  is  to  desire,  and  then  set  to 
work  to  compass  what  we  desire.  We  do  not 
go  to  work  in  God's  way,  which  is  to  seek 
him  first,  and  then  expect  all  things  to  be 
added  unto  us.  If  we  will  let  our  heart  be 
filled  with  God  till  it  runs  over  with  delight, 
then  the  Lord  himself  will  take  care  that 
we  shall  not  want  any  good  thing.  Instead 
of  going  abroad  for  joys  let  us  stay  at  home 
with  God,  and  drink  waters  out  of  our  own 
fountain.  He  can  do  for  us  far  more  than 
all  our  friends.  It  is  better  to  be  content 
with  God  alone  than  to  go  about  fretting  and 
pining  for  the  paltry  trifles  of  time  and  sense. 
For  a  while  we  may  have  disappointments; 
but  if  these  bring  us  nearer  to  the  Lord,  they 
are  things  to  be  prized  exceedingly,  for  they 
will  in  the  end  secure  to  us  the  fulfilment  of 
all  our  right  desires. 


312 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  38ooft« 

NOVEMBER  7. 

"He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted." 

Luke  xviii.  14. 

Jl 

ought  not  to  be  difficult  for  us  to  hum 
ble  ourselves,  for  what  have  we  to  be 
proud  of?  We  ought  to  take  the  lowest 
place  without  being  told  to  do  so.  If  we  are 
sensible  and  honest  we  shall  be  little  in  our 
own  eyes.  Especially  before  the  Lord  in 
prayer  we  shall  shrink  to  nothing.  There  we 
cannot  speak  of  merit,  for  we  have  none:  our 
one  and  only  appeal  must  be  to  mercy: 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

Here  is  a  cheering  word  from  the  throne. 
We  shall  be  exalted  by  the  Lord  if  we  hum 
ble  ourselves.  For  us  the  way  upward  is 
downhill.  When  we  are  stripped  of  self  we 
are  clothed  with  humility,  and  this  is  the  best 
of  wear.  The  Lord  will  exalt  us  in  peace  and 
happiness  of  mind ;  he  will  exalt  us  into  knowl 
edge  of  his  Word  and  fellowship  with  him 
self;  he  will  exalt  us  in  the  enjoyment  of  sure 
pardon  and  justification.  The  Lord  puts  his 
honours  upon  those  who  can  wear  them  to 
the  honour  of  the  giver.  He  gives  usefulness, 
acceptance,  and  influence  to  those  who  will 
not  be  puffed  up  by  them,  but  will  be  abased 
by  a  sense  of  greater  responsibility.  Neither 
God  nor  man  will  care  to  lift  up  a  man  who 
lifts  up  himself;  but  both  God  and  good  men 
unite  to  honour  modest  worth. 

O  Lord,  sink  me  in  self  that  I  may  rise  in 
thee.  i 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JSooft*  313 

NOVEMBER  8. 

"My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee:  for  my 
strength  is  made  pe.-fect  in  weakness.3' 
2  Cor.  xii.  9. 

Jl 


weakness  should  be  prized  as  mak 
ing  room  for  divine  strength.  We 
might  never  have  known  the  power  of 
grace  if  we  had  not  felt  the  weakness  of 
nature.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  for  the  thorn  in 
the  flesh,  and  the  messenger  of  Satan,  when 
they  drive  us  to  the  strength  of  God. 

This  is  a  precious  word  from  our  Lord's 
own  lip.  It  has  made  the  writer  laugh  for 
joy.  God's  grace  enough  for  me!  I  should 
think  it  is.  Is  not  the  sky  enough  for  the 
bird,  and  the  ocean  enough  for  the  fish?  The 
All-sufficient  is  sufficient  for  my  largest  want. 
He  who  is  sufficient  for  earth  and  heaven  is 
certainly  able  to  meet  the  case  of  one  poor 
worm  like  me. 

Let  us,  then,  fall  back  upon  our  God  and 
his  grace.  If  he  does  not  remove  our  grief 
he  will  enable  us  to  bear  it.  His  strength 
shall  be  poured  into  us  till  the  worm  shall 
thresh  the  mountains;  and  a  nothing  shall  be 
victor  over  all  the  high  and  mighty  ones.  It 
is  better  for  us  to  have  God's  strength  than 
our  own;  for  if  we  were  a  thousand  times  as 
strong  as  we  are,  it  would  all  amount  to  noth 
ing  in  the  face  of  the  enemy;  and  if  we  could 
be  weaker  than  we  are,  which  is  scarcely  pos 
sible,  yet  we  could  do  all  things  through 
Christ. 


314  _  ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3Boofe. 

NOVEMBER  9. 

"Thud  shall  they  know  that  I  the  Lord 
their  God  am  with  them,  and  that  they,  even 
the  house  of  Israel,  are  my  people,  saith  the 
Lord  God."  —  Ez.  xxxiv.  30. 


be  the  Lord's  own  people  is  a  choice 
blessing,  but  to  know  that  we  are  such 
is  a  comfortable  blessing.  It  is  one 
thing  to  hope  that  God  is  with  us,  and  an 
other  thing  to  know  that  he  is  so.  Faith 
saves  us,  but  assurance  satisfies  us.  We  take 
God  to  be  our  God  when  we  believe  in  him; 
but  we  get  the  joy  of  him  when  we  know  that 
he  is  ours,  and  that  we  are  his.  No  believer 
should  be  content  with  hoping  and  trusting, 
he  should  ask  the  Lord  to  lead  him  on  to  full 
assurance,  so  that  matters  of  hope  may  be 
come  matters  of  certainty. 

It  is  when  we  enjoy  covenant  blessings,  and 
see  our  Lord  Jesus  raised  up  for  us  as  a  plant 
of  renown,  that  we  come  to  a  clear  knowledge 
of  the  favour  of  God  towards  us.  Not  by 
law,  but  by  grace,  do  we  learn  that  we  are 
the  Lord's  people.  Let  us  always  turn  our 
eyes  in  the  direction  of  free  grace.  Assur 
ance  of  faith  can  never  come  by  the  works 
of  the  law.  It  is  an  evangelical  virtue,  and 
can  only  reach  us  in  a  gospel  way.  Let  us 
not  look  within.  Let  us  look  to  the  Lord 
alone. 

Lord,  send  us  such  a  flood-tide  of  thy  love 
that  we  shall  be  washed  beyond  the  mire  of 
doubt  and  fear. 


ffaitb's  CbeQue  aBooft.  315 

NOVEMBER  10. 

"He  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to  be  moved." 

Ps.  cxxi.  3. 

# 

«fTF  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  it,  neither  men 
nor    devils    can    do    it.     How     greatly 
would   they   rejoice   if   they   could   give 
us  a  disgraceful  fall,  drive  us  from  our  posi 
tion,    and    bury    us    out    of    memory!     They 
could  do  this  to  their  hearts'   content  were 
it  not  for  one  hindrance,  and  only  one:  the 
Lord  will  not  suffer  it;  and  if  he  does  not 
suffer  it,  we  shall  not  suffer  it. 

The  way  of  life  is  like  travelling  among  the 
Alps.  Along  mountain  paths  one  is  con 
stantly  exposed  to  the  slipping  of  the  foot. 
Where  the  way  is  high  the  head  is  apt  to 
swim,  and  then  the  feet  soon  slide:  there  are 
spots  which  are  smooth  as  glass,  and  others 
that  are  rough  with  loose  stones,  and  in  either 
of  these  a  fall  is  hard  to  avoid.  He  who 
throughout  life  is  enabled  to  keep  himself  up 
right  and  to  walk  without  stumbling  has  the 
best  of  reasons  for  gratitude.  What  with 
pitfalls  and  snares,  weak  knees,  weary  feet, 
and  subtle  enemies,  no  child  of  God  would 
stand  fast  for  an  hour  were  it  not  for  the 
faithful  love  which  will  not  suffer  his  foot  to 
be  moved. 

"Amidst  a  thousand  snares  I  stand 

Upheld  and  guarded  by  thy  hand; 

That  hand  unseen  shall  hold  me  still, 

And  lead  me  to  thy  holy  hilL" 


3i6  _  ffaitb'g  Cbcgue  ffooft, 

NOVEMBER  n. 

"For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over 
you:  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
grace"  —  Rom  vi.  14. 


SIN  will  reign  if  it  can:  it  cannot  be  sat 
isfied  with  any  place  below  the  throne 
of  the  heart.    We  sometimes  fear  that  it 
will  conquer  us,   and  then  we  cry  unto  the 
Lord,  "  Let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion 
over   me."     This    is   his    comforting   answer, 
"  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you."     It 
may  assail  you,  and  even  wound  you;  but  it 
shall  never  establish  sovereignty  over  you. 

If  we  were  under  the  law,  our  sin  would 
gather  strength  and  hold  us  under  its  power; 
for  it  is  the  punishment  of  sin  that  a  man 
comes  under  the  power  of  sin.  As  we  are 
under  the  covenant  of  grace,  we  are  secured 
against  departing  from  the  living  God  by  the 
sure  declaration  of  the  covenant.  Grace  is 
promised  to  us,  by  which  we  are  restored 
from  our  wanderings,  cleansed  from  our  im 
purities,  and  set  free  from  the  chains  of  habit. 
We  might  lie  down  in  despair  and  be  "  con 
tent  to  serve  the  Egyptians  "  if  we  were  still 
as  slaves  working  for  eternal  life;  but  since 
we  are  the  Lord's  free  men,  we  take  cour 
age  to  fight  with  our  corruptions  and  tempta 
tions,  being  assured  that  sin  shall  never  bring 
us  under  its  sway  again.  God  himself  giveth 
us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 


ffattb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  317 

NOVEMBER  12. 

"My  people   shall   be  satisfied   with  my 
goodness,  saith  the  Lord." — Jer.  xxxi.  14. 
Jl 

mOTE  the  "my"  which  comes  twice: 
"  My  people  shall  be  satisfied  with  my 
goodness." 

The  kind  of  people  who  are  satisfied  with 
God  are  marked  out  as  God's  own.  He 
is  pleased  with  them,  for  they  are  pleased 
with  him.  They  call  him  their  God,  and  he 
calls  them  his  people;  he  is  satisfied  to  take 
them  for  a  portion,  and  they  are  satisfied  with 
him  for  their  portion.  There  is  a  mutual  com 
munion  of  delight  between  God's  Israel  and 
Israel's  God. 

These  people  are  satisfied.  This  is  a  grand 
thing.  Very  few  of  the  sons  of  men  are  ever 
satisfied,  let  their  lot  be  what  it  may;  they 
have  swallowed  the  horse-leech,  and  it  con 
tinually  cries,  "  Give !  give !  "  Only  sanctified 
souls  are  satisfied  souls.  God  himself  must 
both  convert  us  and  content  us. 

It  is  no  wonder  that  the  Lord's  people 
should  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  their 
Lord.  Here  is  goodness  without  mixture, 
bounty  without  stint,  mercy  without  chiding, 
love  without  change,  favour  without  reserve. 
If  God's  goodness  does  not  satisfy  us,  what 
will?  What!  are  we  still  groaning?  Surely 
there  is  a  wrong  desire  within  if  it  be  one 
which  God's  goodness  does  not  satisfy. 

Lord,  I  am  satisfied.     Blessed  be  thy  name. 


3i8  ffaitb'6  Gbequc  JBook. 


NOVEMBER  13. 

"Behold,    he    that    keepeth    Israel    shall 
neither  slumber  nor  sleep!' — Ps.  cxxi.  4. 
Jl 

EHOVAH  is  "the  Keeper  of  Israel." 
No  form  of  unconsciousness  ever  steals 
over  him,  neither  the  deeper  slumber 
nor  the  slighter  sleep.  He  never  fails  to 
watch  the  house  and  the  heart  of  his  people. 
This  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  our  resting  in 
perfect  peace.  Alexander  said  that  he  slept 
because  his  friend  Parmenio  watched;  much 
more  may  we  sleep  because  our  God  is  our 
guard. 

"  Behold  "  is  here  set  up  to  call  our  atten 
tion  to  the  cheering  truth.  Israel,  when  he 
had  a  stone  for  his  pillow,  fell  asleep;  but 
his  God  was  awake,  and  came  in  vision  to  his 
servant.  When  we  lie  defenceless,  Jehovah 
himself  will  cover  our  head. 

The  Lord  keeps  his  people  as  a  rich  man 
keeps  his  treasure,  as  a  captain  keeps  a  city 
with  a  garrison,  as  a  sentry  keeps  watch  over 
his  sovereign.  None  can  harm  those  who  are 
in  such  keeping.  Let  me  put  my  soul  into 
his  dear  hands.  He  never  forgets  us,  never 
ceases  actively  to  care  for  us,  never  finds  him 
self  unable  to  preserve  us. 

O  my  Lord,  keep  me,  lest  I  wander  and  fall 
and  perish.  Keep  me,  that  I  may  keep  thy 
commandments.  By  thine  unslumbering  care 
prevent  my  sleeping  like  the  sluggard,  and 
perishing  like  those  who  sleep  the  sleep  of 
death. 


ffaitb'g  Cheque  3Boofr«  _  319 

NOVEMBER  14. 

"//  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  name,  I 
will  do  it"  —  John  xiv.  14. 


HAT  a  wide  promise  !  Anything  ! 
Whether  large  or  small,  all  my  needs 
are  covered  by  that  word  "  any 
thing."  Come,  my  soul,  be  free  at  the  mercy 
seat,  and  hear  thy  Lord  saying  to  thee,  "  Open 
thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it." 

What  a  wise  promise!  We  are  always  to 
ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  While  this  en 
courages  us,  it  also  honours  him.  This  is  a 
constant  plea.  Occasionally  every  other  plea 
is  darkened,  especially  such  as  we  could  draw 
from  our  own  relation  to  God,  or  our  experi 
ence  of  his  grace  ;  but  at  such  times  the  name 
of  Jesus  is  as  mighty  at  the  throne  as  ever, 
and  we  may  plead  it  with  full  assurance. 

What  an  instructive  prayer!  I  may  not 
ask  for  anything  to  which  I  cannot  put 
Christ's  hand  and  seal.  I  dare  not  use  my 
Lord's  name  to  a  selfish  or  wilful  petition.  I 
may  only  use  my  Lord's  name  to  prayers 
which  he  would  himself  pray  if  he  were  in 
my  case.  It  is  a  high  privilege  to  be  au 
thorized  to  ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus  as  if 
Jesus  himself  asked;  but  our  love  to  him  will 
never  allow  us  to  set  that  name  where  he 
would  not  have  set  it. 

Am  I  asking  for  that  which  Jesus  approves? 
Dare  I  put  his  seal  to  my  prayer?  Then  I 
have  that  which  I  seek  of  the  Father. 


320  ffattb's  Cbeaue  ffioofc. 

NOVEMBER  15. 

"My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  ac 
cording  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ 
Jesus."  —  Phil.  iv.  19. 


AUL'S  God  is  our  God,  and  will  supply 
all  our  need.  Paul  felt  sure  of  this  in 
reference  to  the  Philippians,  and  we  feel 
sure  of  it  as  to  ourselves.  God  will  do  it, 
for  it  is  like  him:  he  loves  us,  he  delights  to 
bless  us,  and  it  will  glorify  him  to  do  so. 
His  pity,  his  power,  his  love,  his  faithfulness, 
all  work  together  that  we  be  not  famished. 

What  a  measure  doth  the  Lord  go  by:  "Ac 
cording  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Je 
sus."  The  riches  of  his  grace  are  large,  but 
what  shall  we  say  of  the  riches  of  his  glory? 
His  "  riches  of  glory  by  Christ  Jesus,"  who 
shall  form  an  estimate  of  this?  According  to 
this  immeasurable  measure  will  God  fill  up 
the  immense  abyss  of  our  necessities.  He 
makes  the  Lord  Jesus  the  receptacle  and  the 
channel  of  his  fulness,  and  then  he  imparts 
to  us  his  wealth  of  love  in  its  highest  form. 
Hallelujah! 

The  writer  knows  what  it  is  to  be  tried  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord.  Fidelity  has  been  rec 
ompensed  with  anger,  and  liberal  givers  have 
stopped  their  subscriptions;  but  he  whom 
they  sought  to  oppress  has  not  been  one  penny 
the  poorer,  nay,  rather  he  has  been  the  richer; 
for  this  promise  has  been  true,  "  My  God  shall 
supply  all  your  need."  God's  supplies  are 
surer  than  the  Bank  of  England. 


jfaftb's  Cbeque  3Boofo.  321 

NOVEMBER  16. 

"No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee 
shall  prosper;  and  every  tongue  that  shall 
rise  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt 
condemn"  —  Isa.  liv.  17. 


is  great  clatter  in  the  forges  and 
smithies  of  the  enemy.  They  are  mak 
ing  weapons  wherewith  to  smite  the 
saints.  They  could  not  even  do  as  much  as 
this  if  the  Lord  of  saints  did  not  allow  them; 
for  he  has  created  the  smith  that  bloweth  the 
coals  in  the  fire.  But  see  how  busily  they  la 
bour!  How  many  swords  and  spears  they 
fashion!  It  matters  nothing,  for  on  the  blade 
of  every  weapon  you  may  read  this  inscrip 
tion:  It  shall  not  prosper. 

But  now  listen  to  another  noise:  it  is  the 
strife  of  tongues.  Tongues  are  more  terrible 
instruments  than  can  be  made  with  hammers 
and  anvils,  and  the  evil  which  they  inflict 
cuts  deeper  and  spreads  wider.  What  will  be 
come  of  us  now?  Slander,  falsehood,  insinua 
tion,  ridicule  —  these  are  poisoned  arrows; 
how  can  we  meet  them?  The  Lord  God 
promises  us  that,  if  we  cannot  silence  them, 
we  shall,  at  least,  escape  from  being  ruined 
by  them.  They  condemn  us  for  the  moment, 
but  we  shall  condemn  them  at  last,  and  for 
ever.  The  mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall 
be  stopped,  and  their  falsehoods  shall  bfc 
turned  to  the  honour  of  those  good  men  who 
suffered  by  them. 
21 


322  ffaitb'0  Gbeque  36oofc. 

NOVEMBER  17. 

"For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  his  peo 
ple,  neither  will  he  forsake  his  inheritance." 
Ps.  xciv.  14. 
Jl 

mO,  nor  will  he  cast  off  even  so  much  as 
one  of  them.     Man  has  his  cast-offs,  but 
God  has  none;   for   his  choice  is   un 
changeable,  and  his  love  is  everlasting.     None 
can  find  out  a  single  person  whom  God  has 
forsaken   after   having   revealed   himself   sav 
ingly  to  him. 

This  grand  truth  is  mentioned  in  the 
psalm  to  cheer  the  heart  of  the  afflicted.  The 
Lord  chastens  his  own;  but  he  never  for 
sakes  them.  The  result  of  the  double  work 
of  the  law  and  the  rod  is  our  instruction,  and 
the  fruit  of  that  instruction  is  a  quieting  of 
spirit,  a  sobriety  of  mind,  out  of  which  comes 
rest.  The  ungodly  are  let  alone  till  the  pit 
is  digged  into  which  they  will  fall  and  be 
taken;  but  the  godly  are  sent  to  school  to 
be  prepared  for  their  glorious  destiny  here 
after.  Judgment  will  return  and  finish  its 
work  upon  the  rebels,  but  it  will  equally  re 
turn  to  vindicate  the  sincere  and  godly. 
Hence  we  may  bear  the  rod  of  chastisement 
with  calm  submission;  it  means  not  anger, 
but  love. 

"God  may  chasten  and  correct, 
But  he  never  can  neglect; 
May  in  faithfulness  reprove, 
But  he  ne'er  can  cease  to  love." 


_  3f  attb'g  Cbeque  JBooft.  _  323 

NOVEMBER  18. 

"In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  defend  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem;  and  he  that  is 
feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be  as 
David;  and  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as 
God,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  them." 
Zech.  xii.  8. 


tNE  of  the  best  methods  of  the  Lord's  de 
fending  his  people  is  to  make  them 
strong  in  inward  might.  Men  are  bet 
ter  than  walls,  and  faith  is  stronger  than 
castles. 

The  Lord  can  take  the  feeblest  among  us 
and  make  him  like  David,  the  champion  of 
Israel.  Lord,  do  this  with  me!  Infuse  thy 
power  into  me,  and  fill  me  with  sacred  cour 
age  that  I  may  face  the  giant  with  sling  and 
stone,  confident  in  God. 

The  Lord  can  make  his  greatest  champions 
far  mightier  than  they  are:  David  can  be  as 
God,  as  the  angel  of  Jehovah.  This  would 
be  a  marvellous  development,  but  it  is  pos 
sible,  or  it  would  not  be  spoken  of.  O  Lord, 
work  thus  with  the  best  of  our  leaders  !  Show 
us  what  thou  art  able  to  do  —  namely,  to 
raise  thy  faithful  servants  to  a  height  of  grace 
which  shall  be  clearly  supernatural! 

Lord,  dwell  in  thy  saints,  and  they  shall  be 
as  God;  put  thy  might  into  them,  and  they 
shall  be  as  the  living  creatures  who  dwell  in 
the  presence  of  Jehovah.  Fulfil  this  promise 
to  thine  entire  church  in  this  our  day,  for 
Jesus'  sake.  Amen. 


324  afaitb'a  Cbeque 


NOVEMBER  19. 

"From  this  day  will  I  bless  you." 
Haggai  ii.  19. 


j|%UTURE  things  are  hidden  from  us.  Yet 
here  is  a  glass  in  which  we  may  see 
***  the  unborn  years.  The  Lord  says, 
"  From  this  day  will  I  bless  you." 

It  is  worth  while  to  note  the  day  which  is 
referred  to  in  this  promise.  There  had  been 
failure  of  crops,  blasting,  and  mildew,  and  all 
because  of  the  people's  sin.  Now,  the  Lord 
saw  these  chastened  ones  commencing  to 
obey  his  word,  and  build  his  temple,  and  there 
fore  he  says,  "  From  the  day  that  the  foun 
dation  of  the  Lord's  temple  was  laid,  con 
sider.  From  this  day  will  I  bless  you."  If 
we  have  lived  in  any  sin,  and  the  Spirit  leads 
us  to  purge  ourselves  of  it,  we  may  reckon 
upon  the  blessing  of  the  Lord.  His  smile,  his 
Spirit,  his  grace,  his  fuller  revelation  of  his 
truth  will  all  prove  to  us  an  enlarged  blessing. 
We  may  fall  into  greater  opposition  from 
man  because  of  our  faithfulness,  but  we  shall 
rise  to  closer  dealings  with  the  Lord  our 
God,  and  a  clearer  sight  of  our  acceptance  in 
him. 

Lord,  I  am  resolved  to  be  more  true  to  thee, 
and  more  exact  in  my  following  of  thy  doc 
trine  and  thy  precept;  and  I  pray  thee,  there 
fore,  by  Christ  Jesus,  to  increase  the  blessed 
ness  of  my  daily  life  henceforth  and  for  ever. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JBoofc.  325 

NOVEMBER  20. 

"For  he  satisneth  the  longing  soul,  and 
filleth  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness" 
Ps.  cvii.  9. 


is  well  to  have  longings,  and  the  more 
intense  they  are  the  better.  The  Lord 
will  satisfy  soul-longings,  however  great 
and  all-absorbing  they  may  be.  Let  us 
greatly  long,  for  God  will  greatly  give.  We 
are  never  in  a  right  state  of  mind  when  we 
are  contented  with  ourselves,  and  are  free 
from  longings.  Desires  for  more  grace,  and 
groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,  are  grow 
ing  pains,  and  we  should  wish  to  feel  them 
more  and  more.  Blessed  Spirit,  make  us  sigh 
and  cry  after  better  things,  and  for  more  of 
the  best  things! 

Hunger  is  by  no  means  a  pleasant  sensa 
tion.  Yet  blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness.  Such  persons  shall 
not  only  have  their  hunger  relieved  with  a 
little  food,  but  they  shall  be  filled.  They 
shall  not  be  filled  with  any  sort  of  rough 
stuff,  but  their  diet  shall  be  worthy  of  their 
good  Lord,  for  they  shall  be  filled  with  good 
ness  by  Jehovah  himself. 

Come,  let  us  not  fret  because  we  long  and 
hunger,  but  let  us  hear  the  voice  of  the 
Psalmist  as  he  also  longs  and  hungers  to  see 
God  magnified.  "  Oh,  that  men  would  praise 
the  Lord  for  his  goodness,  and  for  his  won 
derful  works  to  the  children  of  men." 


326  _  ffattb'g  Cbegue  JBoofe*  _ 

NOVEMBER  21. 

"Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth:  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is 
none  else/'  —  Isa.  xlv.  22. 
Jl 


is  a  promise  of  promises.  It  lies  at 
the  foundation  of  our  spiritual  life.  Sal 
vation  comes  through  a  look  at  him  who 
is  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour."  How  simple 
is  the  direction  !  "  Look  unto  me."  How 
reasonable  is  the  requirement!  Surely  the 
creature  should  look  to  the  Creator.  We 
have  looked  elsewhere  long  enough,  it  is  time 
that  we  look  alone  to  him  who  invites  our 
expectation,  and  promises  to  give  us  his  salva 
tion. 

Only  a  look!  Will  we  not  look  at  once? 
We  are  to  bring  nothing  in  ourselves,  but  to 
look  outward  and  upward  to  our  Lord  on  his 
throne,  whither  he  has  gone  up  from  the  cross. 
A  look  requires  no  preparation,  no  violent  ef 
fort:  it  needs  neither  wit  nor  wisdom,  wealth 
nor  strength.  All  that  we  need  is  in  the  Lord 
our  God,  and  if  we  look  to  him  for  every 
thing,  that  everything  shall  be  ours,  and  we 
shall  be  saved. 

Come,  far-off  ones,  look  hither!  Ye  ends 
of  the  earth,  turn  your  eyes  this  way!  As 
from  the  furthest  regions  men  may  see  the  sun 
and  enjoy  his  light,  so  you  who  lie  in  death's 
borders  at  the  very  gates  of  hell  may  by  a 
look  receive  the  light  of  God,  the  life  of 
heaven,  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
is  God,  and  therefore  able  to  save. 


Jfaitb's  Cbeaue  aBoofc.  327 

NOVEMBER  22. 

"In  those  days,  and  in  that  time,  saith  the 
Lord,  the  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought 
for,  and  there  shall  be  none;  and  the  sins 
of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be  found:  for  I 
will  pardon  them  whom  I  reserve!' 
Jer.  1.  20. 


H  GLORIOUS  word  indeed!  What  a 
perfect  pardon  is  here  promised  to  the 
sinful  nations  of  Israel  and  Judah  !  Sin 
is  to  be  so  removed  that  it  shall  not  be  found, 
so  blotted  out  that  there  shall  be  none.  Glory 
be  unto  the  God  of  pardons! 

Satan  seeks  out  sins  wherewith  to  accuse 
us,  our  enemies  seek  them  that  they  may  lay 
them  to  our  charge,  and  our  own  conscience 
seeks  them  even  with  a  morbid  eagerness. 
But  when  the  Lord  applies  the  precious  blood 
of  Jesus,  we  fear  no  form  of  search,  for 
"there  shall  be  none,"  "they  shall  not  be 
found."  The  Lord  hath  caused  the  sins  of 
his  people  to  cease  to  be:  he  hath  finished 
transgression,  and  made  an  end  of  sin.  The 
sacrifice  of  Jesus  has  cast  our  sins  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea. 

The  reason  for  the  obliteration  of  sin  lies 
in  the  fact  that  Jehovah  himself  pardons  his 
chosen  ones.  His  word  of  grace  is  not  only 
royal,  but  divine.  He  speaks  absolution,  and 
we  are  absolved.  He  applies  the  atonement, 
and  from  that  hour  his  people  are  beyond  all 
fear  of  condemnation.  Blessed  be  the  name 
of  the  sin-annihilating  God! 


328  ffaftb'a  Gbeque  JBoofc. 

NOVEMBER  23. 

"The  Lord  thy  God  will  put  out  those 
nations  before  thee  by  little  and  little." 
Deut.  vii.  22, 

Jl 

ME  are  not  to  expect  to  win  victories 
for  the  Lord  Jesus  by  a  single  blow. 
Evil  principles  and  practices  die 
hard.  In  some  places  it  takes  years  of  la 
bour  to  drive  out  even  one  of  the  many  vices 
which  defile  the  inhabitants.  We  must  carry 
on  the  war  with  all  our  might,  even  when  fa 
voured  with  little  manifest  success. 

Our  business  in  this  world  is  to  conquer  it 
for  Jesus.  We  are  not  to  make  compromises, 
but  to  exterminate  evils.  We  are  not  to  seek 
popularity,  but  to  wage  unceasing  war  with 
iniquity.  Infidelity,  Popery,  drink,  impurity, 
oppression,  worldliness,  error  —  these  are  all 
to  be  "put  out." 

The  Lord  our  God  can  alone  accomplish 
this.  He  works  by  his  faithful  servants;  and, 
blessed  be  his  name,  he  promises  that  he  will 
so  work.  "Jehovah  thy  God  will  put  out 
those  nations  before  thee."  This  he  will  do 
by  degrees,  that  we  may  learn  perseverance, 
may  increase  in  faith,  may  earnestly  watch, 
and  may  avoid  carnal  security.  Let  us  thank 
God  for  a  little  success,  and  pray  for  more. 
Let  us  never  sheathe  the  sword  till  the  whole 
land  is  won  for  Jesus. 

Courage,  my  heart!  Go  on  little  by  little, 
for  many  littles  will  make  a  great  whole. 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBooft, 329 

NOVEMBER  24. 

"He  will  not  always  chide:  neither  will 
he  keep  his  anger  for  ever." — Ps.  ciii.  9. 

Jl 

ME  will  chide  sometimes,  or  he  would  not 
be  a  wise  father  for  such  poor  erring 
children    as    we    are.     His    chiding    is 
very  painful  to  those  who  are  true,  because 
they  feel  how  sadly  they  deserve  it,  and  how 
wrong  it  is  on  their  part  to  grieve  him.     We 
know  what  this  chiding  means,  and  we  bow 
before   the    Lord,   mourning   that  we   should 
cause  him  to  be  angry  with  us. 

But  what  a  comfort  we  find  in  these  lines! 
"  Not  always "  will  he  chide.  If  we  repent 
and  turn  to  him  with  hearts  broken  for  sin 
and  broken  from  sin,  he  will  smile  upon  us 
at  once.  It  is  no  pleasure  to  him  to  turn  a 
frowning  face  towards  those  whom  he  loves 
with  all  his  heart:  it  is  his  joy  that  our  joy 
should  be  full. 

Come,  let  us  seek  his  face.  There  is  no 
reason  for  despair,  nor  even  for  despondency. 
Let  us  love  a  chiding  God,  and  before  long 
we  shall  sing :  "  Thine  anger  is  turned 
away,  and  thou  comfortest  me."  Begone,  ye 
dark  forebodings,  ye  ravens  of  the  soul! 
Come  in,  ye  humble  hopes  and  grateful  mem 
ories,  ye  doves  of  the  heart!  He  who  par 
doned  us  long  ago  as  a  judge,  will  again 
forgive  us  as  a  father,  and  we  shall  rejoice 
in  his  sweet,  unchanging  love. 


330  3faftb'0  Cbeque  IBooft* 

NOVEMBER  25. 

"Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain?  before 

Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain:  and 

he  shall  bring  forth  the  headstone  thereof 

with  shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace  unto  it." 

Zech.  iv.  7. 

Jl 

HT  this  hour  a  mountain  of  difficulty,  dis 
tress,  or  necessity  may  be  in  our  way, 
and  natural  reason  sees  no  path  over  it, 
or  through  it,  or  round  it.  Let  faith  come  in, 
and  straightway  the  mountain  disappears  and 
becomes  a  plain.  But  faith  must  first  hear 
the  word  of  the  Lord  — "  Not  by  might,  nor 
by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  This  grand  truth  is  a  prime  neces 
sity  for  meeting  the  insurmountable  trials  of 
life. 

I  see  that  I  can  do  nothing,  and  that  all 
reliance  on  man  is  vanity.  "  Not  by  might." 
I  see  that  no  visible  means  can  be  relied  on, 
but  the  force  is  in  the  invisible  Spirit.  God 
alone  must  work,  and  men  and  means  must 
be  nothing  accounted  of.  If  it  be  so,  that 
the  Almighty  God  takes  up  the  concerns  of 
his  people,  then  great  mountains  are  noth 
ing.  He  can  remove  worlds  as  boys  toss 
balls  about,  or  drive  them  with  their  foot. 
This  power  he  can  lend  to  me.  If  the  Lord 
bids  me  move  an  Alp  I  can  do  it  through 
his  name.  It  may  be  a  great  mountain,  but 
even  before  my  feebleness  it  shall  become  a 
plain;  for  the  Lord  hath  said  it.  What  can  I 
be  afraid  of  with  God  on  my  side? 


Cbeque  3Boofe»  331 


NOVEMBER  26. 

"Your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy." 
John  xvi.  20. 


particular  sorrow  was  the  death 
and  absence  of  their  Lord,  and  it  was 
turned  into  joy  when  he  rose  from  the 
dead  and  showed  himself  in  their  midst.  All 
the  sorrows  of  saints  shall  be  thus  transmuted  ; 
even  the  worst  of  them,  which  look  as  if  they 
must  for  ever  remain  fountains  of  bitterness. 

Then  the  more  sorrow  the  more  joy.  If  we 
have  loads  of  sorrow,  then  the  Lord's  power 
will  turn  them  into  tons  of  joy.  Then  the 
bitterer  the  trouble  the  sweeter  the  pleasure: 
the  swinging  of  the  pendulum  far  to  the  left 
will  cause  it  to  go  all  the  farther  to  the  right. 
The  remembrance  of  the  grief  shall  heighten 
the  flavour  of  the  delight:  we  shall  set  the 
one  in  contrast  with  the  other,  and  the  bril 
liance  of  the  diamond  shall  be  the  more 
clearly  seen  because  of  the  black  foil  behind 
it. 

Come,  my  heart,  cheer  up  !  In  a  little  while 
I  shall  be  as  glad  as  I  am  now  gloomy.  Jesus 
tells  me  that  by  a  heavenly  alchemy  my  sor 
row  shall  be  turned  into  joy.  I  do  not  see  how 
it  is  to  be,  but  I  believe  it,  and  I  begin  to  sing 
by  way  of  anticipation.  This  depression  of 
spirit  is  not  for  long  ;  I  shall  soon  be  up  among 
the  happy  ones  who  praise  the  Lord  day  and 
night,  and  there  I  shall  sing  of  the  mercy 
which  delivered  me  out  of  great  afflictions. 


332  _  ffaltb'g  Cbeque  3Booft. 

NOVEMBER  27. 

"And  he  said,  My  presence  shall  go  with 
thee,  and  I  will  give  thee  rest." 
Ex.  xxxiii.  14. 


•||^RECIOUS  promise!     Lord,  enable  me  to 
11^  appropriate  it  as  all  my  own. 

We  must  go  at  certain  times  from  our 
abode,  for  here  we  have  no  continuing  city. 
It  often  happens  that  when  we  feel  most  at 
home  in  a  place,  we  are  suddenly  called  away 
from  it.  Here  is  the  antidote  for  this  ill. 
The  Lord  himself  will  keep  us  company.  His 
presence,  which  includes  his  favour,  his  fel 
lowship,  his  care,  and  his  power,  shall  be  ever 
with  us  in  every  one  of  our  marchings.  This 
means  far  more  than  it  says;  for,  in  fact,  it 
means  all  things.  If  we  have  God  present 
with  us,  we  have  possession  of  heaven  and 
earth.  Go  with  me,  Lord,  and  then  command 
me  where  thou  wilt! 

But  we  hope  to  find  a  place  of  rest.  The 
text  promises  it.  We  are  to  have  rest  of 
God's  own  giving,  making,  and  preserving. 
His  presence  will  cause  us  to  rest  even  when 
we  are  on  the  march,  yea,  even  in  the  midst 
of  battle.  Rest!  Thrice  blessed  word.  Can 
it  ever  be  enjoyed  by  mortals?  Yes,  there 
is  the  promise,  and  by  faith  we  plead  it.  Rest 
comes  from  the  Comforter,  from  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  and  from  the  glorious  Father  who 
rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works. 
To  be  with  God  is  to  rest  in  the  most  em 
phatic  sense. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  JSooft.  333 

NOVEMBER  28. 

"The  Lord  shall  command  the   blessing 
upon  thee  in  thy  storehouses,  and  in  all  that 
thou  settest  thine  hand  unto!' 
Deut.  xxviii.  8. 
Jl 

+fFF  we  obey  the  Lord  our  God  he  will  bless 
that  which  he  gives  us.  Riches  are  no 
curse  when  blessed  of  the  Lord.  When 
men  have  more  than  they  require  for  their 
immediate  need,  and  begin  to  lay  up  in  store 
houses,  the  dry  rot  of  covetousness,  or  the 
blight  of  hard-heartedness  is  apt  to  follow  the 
accumulation;  but  with  God's  blessing  it  is 
not  so.  Prudence  arranges  the  saving,  lib 
erality  directs  the  spending,  gratitude  main 
tains  consecration,  and  praise  sweetens  en 
joyment.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  have  God's 
blessing  in  one's  iron  safe,  and  on  one's  bank 
ing  account. 

What  a  favour  is  made  ours  by  the  last 
clause!  "The  Lord  shall  bless  thee  in  all 
that  thou  settest  thine  hand  unto."  We 
would  not  put  our  hand  to  anything  upon 
which  we  dare  not  ask  God's  blessing,  neither 
would  we  go  about  it  without  prayer  and  faith. 
But  what  a  privilege  to  be  able  to  look  for 
the  Lord's  help  in  every  enterprise!  Some 
talk  of  a  lucky  man :  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 
is  better  than  luck.  The  patronage  of  the 
great  is  nothing  to  the  favour  of  God.  Self- 
reliance  is  all  very  well ;  but  the  Lord's  bless 
ing  is  infinitely  more  than  all  the  fruit  of 
talent,  genius,  or  tact. 


334 ffaitb'g  Cheque  JBooft, 

NOVEMBER  29. 

"He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste." 
Isa.  xxviii.  16. 


ME  shall  make  haste  to  keep  the  Lord's 
commandments;  but  he  shall  not  make 
haste  in  any  improper  sense. 

He  shall  not  haste  to  run  away,  for  he 
shall  not  be  overcome  with  the  fear  which 
causes  panic.  When  others  are  flying  hither 
and  thither  as  if  their  wits  had  failed  them, 
the  believer  shall  be  quiet,  calm,  and  deliber 
ate,  and  so  shall  be  able  to  act  wisely  in  the 
hour  of  trial. 

He  shall  not  haste  in  his  expectations,  crav* 
ing  his  good  things  at  once  and  on  the  spot; 
but  he  will  wait  God's  time.  Some  are  in  a 
desperate  hurry  to  have  the  bird  in  the  hand; 
for  they  regard  the  Lord's  promise  as  a  bird 
in  the  bush,  not  likely  to  be  theirs.  Believers 
know  how  to  wait. 

He  shall  not  haste  by  plunging  into  wrong 
or  questionable  action.  Unbelief  must  be  do 
ing  something,  and  thus  it  works  its  own  un 
doing;  but  faith  makes  no  more  haste  than 
good  speed,  and  thus  it  is  not  forced  to  go 
back  sorrowfully  by  the  way  which  it  fol 
lowed  heedlessly. 

How  is  it  with  me?  Am  I  believing,  and 
am  I  therefore  keeping  to  the  believer's  pace, 
which  is  walking  with  God?  Peace,  flutter 
ing  spirit!  Oh,  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait 
patiently  for  him!  Heart,  see  that  thou  do 
this  at  once! 


ffaitb'g  Cbeque  JBoofe,  _  335 

NOVEMBER  30. 

"The  Lord,  he  it  is  that  doth  go  before 
thee;  he  will  be  with  thee,  he  will  not  fail 
thee,  neither  forsake  thee:  fear  not,  neither 
be  dismayed."  —  Deut.  xxxi.  8. 


+fFN  the  presence  of  a  great  work  or  a  great 

II    warfare,  here  is  a  text  which  should  help 

us  to  buckle  on  our  harness.     If  Jehovah 

himself   goes  before   us,   it  must  be   safe  to 

follow.     Who    can    obstruct   our   progress   if 

the    Lord    himself    is    in    the    van?     Come, 

brother   soldiers,   let  us  make   a  prompt  ad 

vance!     Why  do  we  hesitate  to  pass  on  to 

victory? 

Nor  is  the  Lord  before  us  only;  he  is  with 
us.  Above,  beneath,  around,  within  is  the 
omnipotent,  omnipresent  One.  In  all  time, 
even  to  eternity,  he  will  be  with  us  even  as  he 
has  been.  How  this  should  nerve  our  arm! 
Dash  at  it  boldly,  ye  soldiers  of  the  cross,  for 
the  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us! 

Being  before  us  and  with  us,  he  will  never 
withdraw  his  help.  He  cannot  fail  in  him 
self,  and  he  will  not  fail  towards  us.  He  will 
continue  to  help  us  according  to  our  need, 
even  to  the  end.  As  he  cannot  fail  us,  so  he 
will  not  forsake  us.  He  will  always  be  both 
able  and  willing  to  grant  us  strength  and  suc 
cour  till  fighting  days  are  gone. 

Let  us  not  fear  nor  be  dismayed;  for  the 
Lord  of  hosts  will  go  down  to  the  battle  with 
us,  will  bear  the  brunt  of  the  fight,  and  give  us 
the  victory.  t 


336 ffaitb'g  Cbegue  3Booft» 

DECEMBER  i. 

"He  that  walketh  uprightly  walketh  surely!' 
Prov.  x.  9. 


MIS  walk  may  be  slow,  but  it  is  sure. 
He  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  shall  not 
be  innocent  nor  sure ;  but  steady  perse 
verance  in  integrity,  if  it  do  not  bring  riches, 
will  certainly  bring  peace.  In  doing  that 
which  is  just  and  right  we  are  like  one  walk 
ing  upon  a  rock,  for  we  have  confidence  that 
every  step  we  take  is  upon  solid  and  safe 
ground.  On  the  other  hand,  the  utmost  suc 
cess  through  questionable  transactions  must  al 
ways  be  hollow  and  treacherous,  and  the  man 
who  has  gained  it  must  always  be  afraid  that 
a  day  of  reckoning  will  come,  and  then  his 
gains  will  condemn  him. 

Let  us  stick  to  truth  and  righteousness. 
By  God's  grace  let  us  imitate  our  Lord  and 
Master,  in  whose  mouth  no  deceit  was  ever 
found.  Let  us  not  be  afraid  of  being  poor, 
nor  of  being  treated  with  contempt.  Never, 
on  any  account  whatever,  let  us  do  that  which 
our  conscience  cannot  justify.  If  we  lose  in 
ward  peace,  we  lose  more  than  a  fortune  can 
buy.  If  we  keep  in  the  Lord's  own  way,  and 
never  sin  against  our  conscience,  our  way  is 
sure  against  all  comers.  Who  is  he  that  can 
harm  us  if  we  be  followers  of  that  which 
is  good?  We  may  be  thought  fools  by  fools 
if  we  are  firm  in  our  integrity;  but  in  the 
place  where  judgment  is  infallible  we  shall 
be  approved. 


jfaitb'g  dbeque  JBooFu  _  337 

DECEMBER  2. 

"/  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me: 
because  he  is  at  my  right  hand,  I  shall  not 
be  moved."  —  Ps.  xvi.  8. 


is  the  way  to  live.  With  God  al- 
ways  before  us,  we  shall  have  the 
noblest  companionship,  the  holiest  ex 
ample,  the  sweetest  consolation,  and  the 
mightiest  influence.  This  must  be  a  resolute 
act  of  the  mind,  "  I  have  set,"  and  it  must 
be  maintained  as  a  set  and  settled  thing. 
Always  to  have  an  eye  to  the  Lord's  eye, 
and  an  ear  for  the  Lord's  voice  —  this  is  the 
right  state  for  the  godly  man.  His  God  is 
near  him,  filling  the  horizon  of  his  vision,  lead 
ing  the  way  of  his  life,  and  furnishing  the 
theme  of  his  meditation.  What  vanities  we 
should  avoid,  what  sins  we  should  overcome, 
what  virtues  we  should  exhibit,  what  joys  we 
should  experience,  if  we  did  indeed  set  the 
Lord  always  before  us!  Why  not? 

This  is  the  way  to  be  safe.  The  Lord  be 
ing  ever  in  our  minds,  we  come  to  feel  safety 
and  certainty  because  of  his  being  so  near. 
He  is  at  our  right  hand  to  guide  and  aid  us; 
and  hence  we  are  not  moved  by  fear,  nor 
force,  nor  fraud,  nor  fickleness.  When  God 
stands  at  a  man's  right  hand,  that  man  is  him 
self  sure  to  stand.  Come  on,  then,  ye  foemen 
of  the  truth!  Rush  against  me  like  a  furious 
tempest,  if  ye  will.  God  upholds  me.  God 
abides  with  me.  Whom  shall  I  fear? 
22 


338 ffaftb'g  dbegue  JBooft. 

DECEMBER  3. 

"I  will  make  with  them  a  covenant  of 

peace,  and  wiU  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease 

out  of  the  land:  and  they  shall  dwell  safely 

in  the  wilderness,  and  sleep  in  the  woods" 

Ez.  xxxiv.  25. 

<£ 

is  the  height  of  grace  that  Jehovah 
should  be  in  covenant  with  man,  a  fee 
ble,  sinful  and  dying  creature.  Yet  the 
Lord  has  solemnly  entered  into  a  faithful  com 
pact  with  us,  and  from  that  covenant  he  will 
never  turn  aside.  In  virtue  of  this  covenant 
we  are  safe.  As  lions  and  wolves  are  driven 
off  by  shepherds,  so  shall  all  noxious  influences 
be  chased  away.  The  Lord  will  give  us  rest 
from  disturbers  and  destroyers ;  the  evil  beasts 
shall  cease  out  of  the  land.  O  Lord,  make  this 
thy  promise  good  even  now ! 

The  Lord's  people  are  to  enjoy  security  in 
places  of  the  greatest  exposure:  wildernesses 
and  woods  are  to  be  as  pastures  and  folds 
to  the  flock  of  Christ.  If  the  Lord  does  not 
change  the  place  for  the  better,  he  will  make 
us  the  better  in  the  place.  The  wilderness  is 
not  a  place  to  dwell  in,  but  the  Lord  can  make 
it  so;  in  the  woods  one  feels  bound  to  watch 
rather  than  to  sleep,  and  yet  the  Lord  giveth 
his  beloved  sleep  even  there.  Nothing  with 
out  or  within  should  cause  any  fear  to  the 
child  of  God.  By  faith  the  wilderness  can 
become  the  suburbs  of  heaven,  and  the  woods 
the  vestibule  of  glory. 


Jfaftb's  Cbeque  JBooft.  339 

DECEMBER  4. 

"He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers,  and 
under  his  wings  shalt  thou  trust:  his  truth 
shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler." 
Ps.  xci.  4. 


H  CONDESCENDING  simile  indeed! 
Just  as  a  hen  protects  her  brood  and 
allows  them  to  nestle  under  her  wings, 
so  will  the  Lord  defend  his  people,  and  per 
mit  them  to  hide  away  in  him.  Have  we  not 
seen  the  little  chicks  peeping  out  from  under 
the  mother's  feathers?  Have  we  not  heard 
their  little  cry  of  contented  joy?  In  this  way 
let  us  shelter  ourselves  in  our  God,  and  feel 
overflowing  peace  in  knowing  that  he  is 
guarding  us. 

While  the  Lord  covers  us  we  trust.  It 
would  be  strange  if  we  did  not.  How  can 
we  distrust  when  Jehovah  himself  becomes 
house  and  home,  refuge  and  rest  to  us? 

This  done,  we  go  out  to  war  in  his  name 
and  enjoy  the  same  guardian  care.  We  need 
shield  and  buckler,  and  when  we  implicitly 
trust  God,  even  as  the  chick  trusts  the  hen, 
we  find  his  truth  arming  us  from  head  to  foot. 
The  Lord  cannot  lie;  he  must  be  faithful  to 
his  people  ;  his  promise  must  stand.  This  sure 
truth  is  all  the  shield  we  need.  Behind  it  we 
defy  the  fiery  darts  of  the  enemy. 

Come,  my  soul,  hide  under  those  great 
wings,  lose  thyself  among  those  soft  feathers! 
How  happy  thou  art! 


340  tfaitb's  Gbeque  3Boofe* 

DECEMBER  5. 

"He  shall  dwell  on  high:  his  place  of  de 
fense  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks:  bread 
shall  be  given  him;  his  waters  shall  be  sure." 
Isa.  xxxiii.  16. 


HE  man  to  whom  God  has  given  grace 
to  be  of  blameless  life  dwells  in  perfect 
security. 

He  dwells  on  high,  above  the  world,  out  of 
gunshot  of  the  enemy,  and  near  to  heaven. 
He  has  high  aims  and  motives,  and  he  finds 
high  comforts  and  company.  He  rejoices  in 
the  mountains  of  eternal  love,  wherein  he  has 
his  abode. 

He  is  defended  by  munitions  of  stupendous 
rock.  The  firmest  things  in  the  universe  are 
the  promises  and  purposes  of  the  unchanging 
God,  and  these  are  the  safeguard  of  the  obe 
dient  believer. 

He  is  provided  for  by  this  great  promise, 
"  Bread  shall  be  given  him."  As  the  enemy 
cannot  climb  the  fort,  nor  break  down  the 
rampart,  so  the  fortress  cannot  be  captured 
by  siege  and  famine.  The  Lord,  who  rained 
manna  in  the  wilderness,  will  keep  his  people 
in  good  store  even  when  they  are  surrounded 
by  those  who  would  starve  them. 

But  what  if  water  should  fail?  That  can 
not  be,  "  his  waters  shall  be  sure."  There  is 
a  never-failing  well  within  the  impregnable 
fortress.  The  Lord  sees  that  nothing  is  want 
ing. 


3Fa!tb'0  GbeQue  jsoofc.  341 

DECEMBER  6. 

"When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I 
will  be  with  thee;  and  through  the  ri/vers 
they  shall  not  overflow  thee:  when  thou 
walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be 
burned;  neither  shall  the  name  kindle  upon 
thee."  —  Isa.  xliii.  2. 


Wjjj^RIDGE  there  is  none:  we  must  go 
JlD  through  the  waters,  and  feel  the  rush  of 
the  rivers.  The  presence  of  God  in  the 
flood  is  better  than  a  ferry-boat.  Tried  we 
must  be,  but  triumphant  we  shall  be;  for  Je 
hovah  himself,  who  is  mightier  than  many 
waters,  shall  be  with  us.  Whenever  else  he 
may  be  away  from  his  people,  the  Lord  will 
surely  be  with  them  in  difficulties  and  dan 
gers.  The  sorrows  of  life  may  rise  to  an 
extraordinary  height,  but  the  Lord  is  equal 
to  every  occasion. 

The  enemies  of  God  can  put  in  our  way 
dangers  of  their  own  making,  namely,  perse 
cutions  and  cruel  mockings,  which  are  like 
a  burning  fiery  furnace.  What  then?  We 
shall  walk  through  the  fires.  God  being  with 
us,  we  shall  not  be  burned;  nay,  not  even  the 
smell  of  fire  shall  remain  upon  us. 

Oh,  the  wonderful  security  of  the  heaven- 
born  and  heaven-bound  pilgrim!  Floods  can 
not  drown  him,  nor  fires  burn  him.  Thy  pres 
ence,  O  Lord,  is  the  protection  of  thy  saints 
from  the  varied  perils  of  the  road.  Behold,  in 
faith  I  commit  myself  unto  thee,  and  my  spirit 
enters  into  rest, 


342  _  jfaitb'g  Cbeque  33ooft, 

DECEMBER  7. 

"The  Lord  will  give  strength  unto  his 
people;  the  Lord  will  bless  his  people  with 
peace."  —  Ps.  xxix.  n. 


had  just  heard  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  in  a  thunderstorm,  and  had  seen  his 
power  in  the  hurricane  whose  path  he 
had  described  ;  and  now,  in  the  cool  calm  after 
the  storm,  that  overwhelming  power  by  which 
heaven  and  earth  are  shaken  is  promised  to 
be  the  strength  of  the  chosen.  He  who  wings 
the  unerring  bolt  will  give  to  his  redeemed  the 
wings  of  eagles;  he  who  shakes  the  earth 
with  his  voice  will  terrify  the  enemies  of  his 
saints,  and  give  his  children  peace.  Why  are 
we  weak  when  we  have  divine  strength  to 
flee  to?  Why  are  we  troubled  when  the 
Lord's  own  peace  is  ours?  Jesus,  the  mighty 
God,  is  our  strength;  let  us  put  him  on  and 
go  forth  to  our  service.  Jesus,  our  blessed 
Lord,  is  also  our  peace;  let  us  repose  in  him 
this  day,  and  end  our  fears.  What  a  blessing 
to  have  him  for  our  strength  and  peace  both 
now  and  for  ever! 

That  same  God  who  rides  upon  the  storm 
in  days  of  tempest  will  also  rule  the  hurri 
cane  of  our  tribulation,  and  send  us,  before 
long,  days  of  peace.  We  shall  have  strength 
for  storms,  and  songs  for  fair  weather.  Let 
us  begin  to  sing  at  once  unto  God  our  strength 
and  our  peace.  Away,  dark  thoughts!  Up, 
faith  and  hope! 


ffaltb's  Cbeque  ffioofe*  _  343 

DECEMBER  8. 

"If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me; 
and  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  servant 
be:   if   any   man   serve    me,    him   will   my 
Father  honour"  —  John  xii.  26. 
J* 


highest  service  is  imitation.  If  I 
would  be  Christ's  servant  I  must  be  his 
follower.  To  do  as  Jesus  did  is  the 
surest  way  of  bringing  honour  to  his  name. 
Let  me  mind  this  every  day. 

If  I  imitate  Jesus  I  shall  have  his  company: 
if  I  am  like  him  I  shall  be  with  him.  In  due 
time  he  will  take  me  up  to  dwell  with  him 
above,  if,  meanwhile,  I  have  striven  to  follow 
him  here  below.  After  his  suffering  our  Lord 
came  to  his  throne,  and  even  so,  after  we 
have  suffered  a  while  with  him  here  below, 
we  also  shall  arrive  in  glory.  The  issue  of 
our  Lord's  life  shall  be  the  issue  of  ours:  if 
we  are  with  him  in  his  humiliation  we  shall 
be  with  him  in  his  glory.  Come,  my  soul, 
pluck  up  courage,  and  put  down  thy  feet  in 
the  blood-marked  footprints  which  thy  Lord 
has  left  thee. 

Let  me  not  fail  to  note  that  the  Father  will 
honour  those  who  follow  his  Son.  If  he  sees 
me  true  to  Jesus  he  will  put  marks  of  favour 
and  honour  upon  me  for  his  Son's  sake.  No 
honour  can  be  like  this.  Princes  and  em 
perors  bestow  the  mere  shadows  of  honour; 
the  substance  of  glory  comes  from  the  Father. 
Wherefore,  my  soul,  cling  thou  to  thy  Lord 
Jesus  more  closely  than  ever. 


344  _  ffaitb'e  Cbegue  JBooft. 

DECEMBER  9. 

"Jesus  said  unto  him,  If  thou  canst  believe, 
all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  belicveth." 
Mark  ix.  23. 


unbelief  is  the  greatest  hindrance  in 
our  way;  in  fact,  there  is  no  other  real 
difficulty  as  to  our  spiritual  progress  and 
prosperity.  The  Lord  can  do  everything;  but 
when  he  makes  a  rule  that  according  to  our 
faith  so  shall  it  be  unto  us,  our  unbelief  ties 
the  hands  of  his  omnipotence. 

Yes,  the  confederacies  of  evil  shall  be  scat 
tered  if  we  can  but  believe.  Despised  truth 
shall  lift  its  head  if  we  will  but  have  confi 
dence  in  the  God  of  truth.  We  can  bear  our 
load  of  trouble,  or  pass  uninjured  through  the 
waves  of  distress,  if  we  can  gird  our  loins 
with  the  girdle  of  peace,  that  girdle  which  is 
buckled  on  by  the  hands  of  trust. 

What  can  we  not  believe?  Is  everything 
possible  except  believing  in  God?  Yet  he  is 
always  true  ;  why  do  we  not  believe  him?  He 
is  always  faithful  to  his  word;  why  can  we 
not  trust  him?  When  we  are  in  a  right  state 
of  heart  faith  costs  no  effort:  it  is  then  as 
natural  for  us  to  rely  upon  God  as  for  a 
child  to  trust  its  father. 

The  worst  of  it  is,  that  we  can  believe  God 
about  everything  except  the  present  pressing 
trial.  This  is  folly.  Come,  my  soul,  shake 
off  such  sinfulness,  and  trust  thy  God  with  the 
load,  the  labour,  the  longing  of  this  present. 
This  done,  all  is  done. 


Cbeque  3Booft»  345 


DECEMBER  10. 

"But  if  thou  shalt  indeed  obey  his  voice, 
and  do  all  that  I  speak;  then  I  will  be  an 
enemy  unto  thine  enemies,  and  an  adversary 
unto  thine  adversaries."  —  Ex.  xxiii.  22. 


Lord  Christ  in  the  midst  of  his  peo- 
pie  is  to  be  acknowledged  and  obeyed. 
He  is  the  vicegerent  of  God,  and  speaks 
in  the  Father's  name,  and  it  is  ours  implicitly 
and  immediately  to  do  as  he  commands.  We 
shall  lose  the  promise  if  we  disregard  the 
precept. 

To  full  obedience  how  large  the  blessing! 
The  Lord  enters  into  a  league  with  his  peo 
ple,  offensive  and  defensive.  He  will  bless 
those  who  bless  us,  and  curse  those  who  curse 
us.  God  will  go  heart  and  soul  With  his 
people,  and  enter  in  deepest  sympathy  into 
their  position.  What  a  protection  this  af 
fords  us!  We  need  not  concern  ourselves 
about  our  adversaries,  when  we  are  assured 
that  they  have  become  the  adversaries  of  God. 
If  Jehovah  has  taken  up  our  quarrel  we  may 
leave  the  foemen  in  his  hands. 

So  far  as  our  own  interest  is  concerned  we 
have  no  enemies;  but  for  the  cause  of  truth 
and  righteousness  we  take  up  arms  and  go 
forth  to  conflict.  In  this  sacred  war  we  are 
allied  with  the  eternal  God,  and  if  we  care 
fully  obey  the  law  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  he  is 
engaged  to  put  forth  all  his  power  on  our 
behalf.  Wherefor^  we  fear  no  man. 


346  _  ffattb'g  Cbeque  JBooft. 

DECEMBER  n. 

"Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good;  so  shalt 
thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  thou  shalt 
be  fed."  —  Ps.  xxxvii.  3. 


and  do  are  words  which  go  well 
together,  in  the  order  in  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  placed  them.  We  should 
have  faith,  and  that  faith  should  work.  Trust 
in  God  sets  us  upon  holy  doing:  we  trust 
God  for  good  and  then  we  do  good.  We  do 
not  sit  still  because  we  trust,  but  we  arouse 
ourselves,  and  expect  the  Lord  to  work 
through  us  and  by  us.  It  is  not  ours  to 
worry  and  do  evil,  but  to  trust  and  do  good. 
We  neither  trust  without  doing,  nor  do  with 
out  trusting. 

Adversaries  would  root  us  out,  if  they 
could;  but  by  trusting  and  doing  we  dwell  in 
the  land.  We  will  not  go  into  Egypt,  but  we 
will  remain  in  Immanuel's  land  —  the  provi 
dence  of  God,  the  Canaan  of  covenant  love. 
We  are  not  so  easily  to  be  got  rid  of  as  the 
Lord's  enemies  suppose.  They  cannot  thrust 
us  out,  nor  stamp  us  out:  where  God  has 
given  us  a  name  and  a  place,  there  we  abide. 

But  what  about  the  supply  of  our  necessi 
ties?  The  Lord  has  put  a  "verily"  into  this 
promise.  As  sure  as  God  is  true,  his  people 
shall  be  fed.  It  is  theirs  to  trust  and  to  do, 
and  it  is  the  Lord's  to  do  according  to  their 
trust.  If  not  fed  by  ravens,  or  fed  by  an 
Obadiah,  or  fed  by  a  widow,  yet  they  shall 
be  fed  somehow.  Away,  ye  fears! 


ffaitb's  Cbeque  3Boofc,  347 

DECEMBER  12. 

"In  quietness  and  in  confidence  shall  be 
your  strength." — Isa.  xxx.  15. 


«fTT  *s  always  weakness  to  be  fretting  and 
II  worrying,  questioning  and  mistrusting. 
What  can  we  do  if  we  wear  ourselves  to 
skin  and  bone?  Can  we  gain  anything  by 
fearing  and  fuming?  Do  we  not  unfit  our 
selves  for  action,  and  unhinge  our  minds  for 
wise  decision?  We  are  sinking  by  our  strug 
gles  when  we  might  float  by  faith. 

Oh  for  grace  to  be  quiet!  Why  run  from 
house  to  house  to  repeat  the  weary  story 
which  makes  us  more  and  more  heart-sick  as 
we  tell  it?  Why  even  stay  at  home  to  cry 
out  in  agony  because  of  wretched  forebodings 
which  may  never  be  fulfilled?  It  would  be 
well  to  keep  a  quiet  tongue,  but  it  would 
be  far  better  if  we  had  a  quiet  heart.  Oh  to 
be  still  and  know  that  Jehovah  is  God! 

Oh  for  grace  to  be  confident  in  God!  The 
Holy  One  of  Israel  must  defend  and  deliver 
his  own.  He  cannot  run  back  from  his  sol 
emn  declarations.  We  may  make  sure  that 
every  word  of  his  will  stand  though  the 
mountains  should  depart.  He  deserves  to  be 
confided  in;  and  if  we  would  display  confi 
dence  and  consequent  quietness,  we  might  be 
as  happy  as  the  spirits  before  the  throne. 

Come,  my  soul,  return  unto  thy  rest,  and 
lean  thy  head  upon  the  bosom  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. 


348  ffaftb's  GbeQue 


DECEMBER  13. 

"It  shall  come  to  pass,  that  at  evening  time 
it  shall  be  light."  —  Zech.  xiv.  7. 


+€FT  is  a  surprise  that  it  should  be  so;  for  all 
II  things  threaten  that  at  evening  time  it 
shall  be  dark.  God  is  wont  to  work  in 
a  way  so  much  above  our  fears  and  beyond 
our  hopes,  that  we  are  greatly  amazed,  and 
are  led  to  praise  his  sovereign  grace.  No,  it 
shall  not  be  with  us  as  our  hearts  are  prophe 
sying:  the  dark  will  not  deepen  into  mid 
night,  but  it  will  on  a  sudden  brighten  into 
day.  Never  let  us  despair.  In  the  worst 
times  let  us  trust  in  the  Lord  who  turneth 
the  darkness  of  the  shadow  of  death  into  the 
morning.  When  the  tale  of  bricks  is  doubled 
Moses  appears,  and  when  tribulation  abounds 
it  is  nearest  its  end. 

This  promise  should  assist  our  patience. 
The  light  may  not  fully  come  till  our  hopes 
are  quite  spent  by  waiting  all  day  to  no  pur 
pose.  To  the  wicked  the  sun  goes  down 
while  it  is  yet  day:  to  the  righteous  the  sun 
rises  when  it  is  almost  night.  May  we  not 
with  patience  wait  for  that  heavenly  light, 
which  may  be  long  in  coming,  but  is  sure  to 
prove  itself  well  worth  waiting  for? 

Come,  my  soul,  take  up  thy  parable  and 
sing  unto  him  who  will  bless  thee  in  life 
and  in  death,  in  a  manner  surpassing  all  that 
nature  has  ever  seen  when  at  its  best. 


ffaitb'0  Cbeque  JBoofc.  349 

DECEMBER  14. 

"And  he  that  sat  upon  the  throne  said, 
Behold,  I  make  all  things  new." 
Rev.  xxi.  5. 


XORY  be  to  his  name!  All  things  need 
making  new,  for  they  are  sadly  battered 
and  worn  by  sin.  It  is  time  that  the  old 
vesture  was  rolled  up  and  laid  aside,  and  that 
creation  put  on  her  Sabbath  suit.  But  no 
one  else  can  make  all  things  new  except  the 
Lord  who  made  them  at  the  first ;  for  it  needs 
as  much  power  to  make  out  of  evil  as  to 
make  out  of  nothing.  Our  Lord  Jesus  has 
undertaken  the  task,  and  he  is  fully  competent 
for  the  performance  of  it.  Already  he  has 
commenced  his  labour,  and  for  centuries  he 
has  persevered  in  making  new  the  hearts  of 
men,  and  the  order  of  society.  By-and-by  he 
will  make  new  the  whole  constitution  of  hu 
man  government,  and  human  nature  shall  be 
changed  by  his  grace;  and  there  shall  come 
a  day  when  even  the  body  shall  be  made  new, 
and  raised  like  unto  his  glorious  body. 

What  a  joy  to  belong  to  a  kingdom  in 
which  everything  is  being  made  new  by  the 
power  of  its  King!  We  are  not  dying  out: 
we  are  hastening  on  to  a  more  glorious  life. 
Despite  the  opposition  of  the  powers  of  evil, 
our  glorious  Lord  Jesus  is  accomplishing  his 
purpose,  and  making  us,  and  all  things  about 
us,  "  new,"  and  as  full  of  beauty  as  when  they 
first  came  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord. 


350  jfaitb'3  Gbeque  JBooft. 

DECEMBER  15. 

"And  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into 
plowshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruning- 
hooks:  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against 
nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any 
more." — Isa.  ii.  4. 

£ 

,  that  these  happy  times  were  come! 
At  present  the  nations  are  heavily  armed, 
and  are  inventing  weapons  more  and 
more  terrible,  as  if  the  chief  end  of  man  could 
only  be  answered  by  destroying  myriads  of 
his  fellows.  Yet  peace  will  prevail  one  day; 
yes,  and  so  prevail  that  the  instruments  of 
destruction  shall  be  beaten  into  other  shapes 
and  used  for  better  purposes. 

How  will  this  come  about?  By  trade?  By 
civilization?  By  arbitration?  We  do  not  be 
lieve  it.  Past  experience  forbids  our  trusting 
to  means  so  feeble.  Peace  will  be  established 
only  by  the  reign  of  the  Prince  of  Peace. 
He  must  teach  the  people  by  his  Spirit,  renew 
their  hearts  by  his  grace,  and  reign  over  them 
by  his  supreme  power,  and  then  will  they 
cease  to  wound  and  kill.  Man  is  a  monster 
when  once  his  blood  is  up,  and  only  the  Lord 
Jesus  can  turn  this  lion  into  a  lamb.  By 
changing  man's  heart,  his  blood-thirsty  pas 
sions  are  removed.  Let  every  reader  of  this 
book  of  promises  offer  special  prayer  to-day 
to  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  Peace,  that  he  would 
speedily  put  an  end  to  war,  and  establish  con 
cord  over  the  whole  world. 


Cheque  JiSooft.  351 


DECEMBER  16. 

"Thou  shalt  drive  out  the  Canaanites, 
though  they  have  iron  chariots,  and  though 
they  be  strong."  —  Josh.  xvii.  18. 


is  a  great  encouragement  to  valour  to 
be  assured  of  victory,  for  then  a  man  goes 
forth  to  war  in  confidence,  and  ventures 
where  else  he  had  been  afraid  to  go.  Our 
warfare  is  with  evil  within  us  and  around  us, 
and  we  ought  to  be  persuaded  that  we  are 
able  to  get  the  victory,  and  that  we  shall  do 
so  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  are 
not  riding  for  a  fall,  but  to  win;  and  win 
we  shall.  The  grace  of  God  in  its  omnipo 
tence  is  put  forth  for  the  overthrow  of  evil 
in  every  form  :  hence  the  certainty  of  triumph. 
Certain  of  our  sins  find  chariots  of  iron  in 
our  constitution,  our  former  habits,  our  asso 
ciations  and  our  occupations.  Nevertheless 
we  must  overcome  them.  They  are  very 
strong,  and  in  reference  to  them  we  are  very 
weak  ;  yet  in  the  name  of  God  we  must  master 
them,  and  we  will.  If  one  sin  has  dominion 
of  us  we  are  not  the  Lord's  free  men.  A  man 
who  is  held  by  only  one  chain  is  still  a  captive. 
There  is  no  going  to  heaven  with  one  sin  ruling 
within  us,  for  of  the  saints  it  is  said,  "  Sin  shall 
not  have  dominion  over  you."  Up,  then,  and 
slay  every  Canaanite,  and  break  to  shivers 
every  chariot  of  iron!  The  Lord  of  hosts  is 
with  us,  and  who  shall  resist  his  sin-destroying 
power? 


352  ffaUb's  Cbeaue  3Boofc. 

DECEMBER  17. 

"So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord." 
I  Thess.  iv.  17. 


MHILE  we  are  here  the  Lord  is  with  us, 
and  when  we  are  called  away  we  are 
with  him.  There  is  no  dividing  the 
saint  from  his  Saviour.  They  are  one,  and 
they  always  must  be  one:  Jesus  cannot  be 
without  his  own  people,  for  he  would  be  a 
head  without  a  body.  Whether  caught  up  into 
the  air,  or  resting  in  Paradise,  or  sojourning 
here,  we  are  with  Jesus;  and  who  shall  sep 
arate  us  from  him? 

What  a  joy  is  this!  Our  supreme  honour, 
rest,  comfort,  delight,  is  to  be  with  the  Lord. 
We  cannot  conceive  of  anything  which  can 
surpass  or  even  equal  this  divine  society.  By 
holy  fellowship  we  must  be  with  him  in  his 
humiliation,  rejection,  and  travail,  and  then  we 
shall  be  with  him  in  his  glory.  Before  long 
we  shall  be  with  him  in  his  rest  and  in  his 
royalty,  in  his  expectation  and  in  his  manifes 
tation.  We  shall  fare  as  he  fares,  and  triumph 
as  he  triumphs. 

O  my  Lord,  if  I  am  to  be  for  ever  with  thee, 
I  have  a  destiny  incomparable.  I  will  not 
envy  an  archangel.  To  be  for  ever  with  the 
Lord  is  my  idea  of  heaven  at  its  best.  Not 
the  harps  of  gold,  nor  the  crowns  unfading, 
nor  the  light  unclouded,  is  glory  to  me;  but 
Jesus,  Jesus  himself,  and  myself  for  ever  with 
him  in  nearest  and  dearest  fellowship. 


3faftb'0  Cbequc  JBoofc.  353 

DECEMBER  18. 

"As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts 
defend  Jerusalem." — Isa.  xxxi.  5. 


MITH  hurrying  wing  the  mother  bird 
hastens  up  to  the  protection  of  her 
young.     She  wastes  no  time  upon  the 
road  when  coming  to  supply  them  with  food, 
or   guard    them    from    danger.     Thus    as    on 
eagle's  wings  will  the  Lord  come  for  the  de 
fence  of  his  chosen ;  yea,  he  will  ride  upon  the 
wings  of  the  wind. 

With  outspread  wing  the  mother  covers  her 
little  ones  in  the  nest.  She  hides  them  away 
by  interposing  her  own  body.  The  hen  yields 
her  own  warmth  to  her  chicks,  and  makes  her 
wings  a  house,  in  which  they  dwell  at  home. 
Thus  doth  Jehovah  himself  become  the  protec 
tion  of  his  elect.  He  himself  is  their  refuge, 
their  abode,  their  all. 

As  birds  flying,  and  birds  covering  (for  the 
word  means  both),  so  will  the  Lord  be  unto 
us :  and  this  he  will  be  repeatedly  and  success 
fully.  We  shall  be  defended  and  preserved 
from  all  evil:  the  Lord  who  likens  himself  to 
birds  will  not  be  like  them  in  their  feebleness, 
for  he  is  Jehovah  of  hosts.  Let  this  be  our 
comfort,  that  almighty  love  will  be  swift  to 
succour,  and  sure  to  cover.  The  wing  of  God 
is  more  quick  and  more  tender  than  the  wing 
of  a  bird,  and  we  will  put  our  trust  under  its 
shadow  henceforth  and  for  ever. 
23 


354  ffaitb's  Gbeque  Boofc. 

DECEMBER  19. 

"He  keepeth  all  his  bones:  not  one  of  them 
is  broken." — Ps.  xxxiv.  20. 


promise  by  the  context  is  referred 
to  the  much  afflicted  righteous  man: 
"  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  right 
eous,  but  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them 
all."  He  may  suffer  skin-wounds  and  flesh- 
wounds,  but  no  great  harm  shall  be  done, 
"  not  a  bone  of  him  shall  be  broken." 

This  is  great  comfort  to  a  tried  child  of 
God,  and  comfort  which  I  dare  accept;  for  up 
to  this  hour  I  have  suffered  no  real  damage 
from  my  many  afflictions.  I  have  neither  lost 
faith,  nor  hope,  nor  love.  Nay,  so  far  from 
losing  these  bones  of  character,  they  have 
gained  in  strength  and  energy.  I  have  more 
knowledge,  more  experience,  more  patience, 
more  stability  than  I  had  before  the  trials 
came.  Not  even  my  joy  has  been  destroyed. 
Many  a  bruise  have  I  had  by  sickness,  bereave 
ment,  depression,  slander,  and  opposition;  but 
the  bruise  has  healed,  and  there  has  been  no 
compound  fracture  of  a  bone,  nor  even  a  sim 
ple  one.  The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.  If 
we  trust  in  the  Lord,  he  keeps  all  our  bones; 
and  if  he  keeps  them,  we  may  be  sure  that 
not  one  of  them  is  broken. 

Come,  my  heart,  do  not  sorrow.  Thou  art 
smarting,  but  there  are  no  bones  broken.  En 
dure  hardness,  and  bid  defiance  to  fear. 


3f  aitb'g  Cbeque  JSooft.  _  355 

DECEMBER  20. 

%  even  I,  am  he  that  comforteth  you: 
who  art  thou,  that  thou  shonldest  be  afraid 
of  a  man  that  shall  die,  and  of  the  son  of 
man  which  shall  be  made  as  grass;  and  for- 
gettest  the  Lord  thy  maker,  that  hath 
stretched  forth  the  heavens,  and  laid  the 
foundations  of  the  earth;  and  hast  feared 
continually  every  day  because  of  the  fury 
of  the  oppressor,  as  if  he  were  ready  to 
destroy?  and  zvhere  is  the  fury  of  the  op 
pressor?"  —  Isa.  li.  12,  13. 
Jl 


%ET  the  text  itself  be  taken  as  the  portion 
for  to-day.     There  is  no  need  to  enlarge 
upon  it.     Trembling  one,  read  it,  believe 
it,  feed  on  it,  and  plead  it  before  the  Lord. 
He  whom  you  fear  is  only  a  man  after  all; 
while  he  who  promises  to  comfort  you  is  God, 
your  Maker,  and  the  Creator  of  heaven  and 
earth.     Infinite   comfort  more   than  covers   a 
very  limited  danger. 

"Where  is  the  fury  of  the  oppressor?"  It 
is  in  the  Lord's  hand.  It  is  only  the  fury  of 
a  dying  creature;  fury  which  will  end  as  soon 
as  the  breath  is  gone  from  the  nostril.  Why, 
then,  should  we  stand  in  awe  of  one  who  is 
as  frail  as  ourselves?  Let  us  not  dishonour 
our  God  by  making  a  god  of  puny  man.  We 
can  make  an  idol  of  a  man  by  rendering  to 
him  excessive  fear  as  well  as  by  paying  him 
inordinate  love.  Let  us  treat  men  as  men,  and 
God  as  God;  and  then  we  shall  go  calmly  on, 
fearing  the  Lord,  and  fearing  nobody  else. 


356 ffaitb'g  Cbeque  3Boofe, 

DECEMBER  21. 

"He  will  turn  again,  he  will  have  compas 
sion  upon  us;  he  will  subdue  our  iniquities; 
and   thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea"—Micah  vii.  19. 
Jl 

OD  never  turns  from  his  love,  but  he 
soon  turns  from  his  wrath.  His  love  to 
his  chosen  is  according  to  his  nature,  his 
anger  is  only  according  to  his  office:  he  loves 
because  he  is  love,  he  frowns  because  it  is 
necessary  for  our  good.  He  will  come  back 
to  the  place  in  which  his  heart  rests,  namely, 
his  love  to  his  own,  and  then  he  will  take  pity 
upon  our  griefs  and  end  them. 

What  a  choice  promise  is  this  — "  He  will 
subdue  our  iniquities ! "  He  will  conquer 
them.  They  try  to  enslave  us,  but  the  Lord 
will  give  us  victory  over  them  by  his  own 
right  hand.  Like  the  Canaanites,  they  shall 
be  beaten,  put  under  the  y$ke,  and  ultimately 
slain. 

As  for  the  guilt  of  our  sins,  how  gloriously 
is  that  removed !  "  All  their  sins," —  yes,  the 
whole  host  of  them ;  "  thou  wilt  cast  " —  only 
an  almighty  arm  could  perform  such  a  won 
der  ;  "  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  " —  where 
Pharaoh  and  his  chariots  went  down.  Not  in 
to  the  shallows  out  of  which  they  might  be 
washed  up  by  the  tide,  but  into  the  "  depths  " 
shall  our  sins  be  hurled.  They  are  all  gone. 
They  sank  into  the  bottom  like  a  stone.  Hal 
lelujah!  Hallelujah! 


Jfaitb'9  Cbeque  J3ooft.  357 

DECEMBER  22. 

"God  is  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very 
present  help  in  trouble" — Ps.  xlvi.  i. 


HHELP  that  is  not  present  when  we  need 
it  is  of  small  value.  The  anchor  which 
is  left  at  home  is  of  no  use  to  the  sea 
man  in  the  hour  of  storm;  the  money  which 
he  used  to  have  is  of  no  worth  to  the  debtor 
when  a  writ  is  out  against  him.  Very  few 
earthly  helps  could  be  called  "  very  present " : 
they  are  usually  far  in  the  seeking,  far  in  the 
using,  and  farther  still  when  once  used.  But 
as  for  the  Lord  our  God,  he  is  present  when 
we  seek  him,  present  when  we  need  him,  and 
present  when  we  have  already  enjoyed  his  aid. 
He  is  more  than  "  present,"  he  is  very  pres 
ent.  More  present  than  the  nearest  friend 
can  be,  for  he  is  in  us  in  our  trouble;  more 
present  than  we  are  to  ourselves,  for  some 
times  we  lack  presence  of  mind.  He  is  al 
ways  present,  effectually  present,  sympathetic 
ally  present,  altogether  present.  He  is  present 
now  if  this  is  a  gloomy  season.  Let  us  rest 
ourselves  upon  him.  He  is  our  refuge,  let  us 
hide  in  him;  he  is  our  strength,  let  us  array 
ourselves  with  him ;  he  is  our  help,  let  us  lean 
upon  him;  he  is  our  very  present  help,  let  us 
repose  in  him  now.  We  need  not  have  a  mo 
ment's  care,  or  an  instant's  fear.  "  The  Lord 
of  hosts  is  with  us:  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our 
refuge." 


358  3faitb'0  Cbeque 


DECEMBER  23. 

"And  of  Joseph  he  said,  Blessed  of  the 
Lord  be  his  land,  for  the  precious  things  of 
heaven,  for  the  dew,  and  for  the  deep  that 
coucheth  beneath."  —  Deut.  xxxiii.  13. 
Jl 

may  be  rich  in  such  things  as  Joseph 
obtained,  and  we  may  have  them  in  a 
higher  sense.  Oh  for  "  the  precious 
things  of  heaven  "  !  Power  with  God,  and  the 
manifestation  of  power  from  God,  are  most 
precious.  We  would  enjoy  the  peace  of  God, 
the  joy  of  the  Lord,  the  glory  of  our  God. 
The  benediction  of  the  three  divine  Persons  in 
love,  and  grace,  and  fellowship  we  prize  be 
yond  the  most  fine  gold.  The  things  of  earth 
are  as  nothing  in  preciousness  compared  with 
the  things  of  heaven. 

"The  dew."  How  precious  is  this!  How 
we  pray  and  praise,  when  we  have  the  dew! 
What  refreshing,  what  growth,  what  perfume, 
what  life  there  is  in  us  when  the  dew  is  about  ! 
Above  all  things  else,  as  plants  of  the  Lord's 
own  right  hand  planting,  we  need  the  dew  of 
his  Holy  Spirit. 

"  The  deep  that  coucheth  beneath."  Surely 
this  refers  to  that  unseen  ocean  underground 
which  supplies  all  the  fresh  springs  which 
make  glad  the  earth.  Oh  to  tap  the  eternal 
fountains!  This  is  an  unspeakable  boon;  let 
no  believer  rest  till  he  possesses  it.  The  all- 
sufficiency  of  Jehovah  is  ours  for  ever.  Let 
us  resort  to  it  now. 


ffaftb's  Cbeque  ffioofc*  359 

DECEMBER  24. 

"Thine   enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto 
thee"  —  Deut.  xxxiii.  29. 


arch-enemy,  the  devil,  is  a  liar  from 
the  beginning;  but  he  is  so  very  plausi 
ble  that,  like  mother  Eve,  we  are  led  to 
believe  him.  Yet  in  our  experience  we  shall 
prove  him  a  liar. 

He  says  that  we  shall  fall  from  grace,  dis 
honour  our  profession,  and  perish  with  the 
doom  of  apostates;  but,  trusting  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  we  shall  hold  on  our  way  and  prove 
that  Jesus  loses  none  whom  his  Father  gave 
him.  He  tells  us  that  our  bread  will  fail,  and 
we  shall  starve  with  our  children;  yet  the 
Feeder  of  the  ravens  has  not  forgotten  us  yet, 
and  he  will  never  do  so,  but  will  prepare  us  a 
table  in  the  presence  of  our  enemies. 

He  whispers  that  the  Lord  will  not  deliver 
us  out  of  the  trial  which  is  looming  in  the  dis 
tance,  and  he  threatens  that  the  last  ounce 
will  break  the  camel's  back.  What  a  liar  he 
is  !  For  the  Lord  will  never  leave  us  nor  for 
sake  us.  "  Let  him  deliver  him  now  !  "  cries 
the  false  fiend:  but  the  Lord  will  silence  him 
by  coming  to  our  rescue. 

He  takes  great  delight  in  telling  us  that 
death  will  prove  too  much  for  us.  "  How  wilt 
thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan?"  But 
there  also  he  shall  prove  a  liar  unto  us,  and 
we  shall  pass  through  the  river  singing  psalms 
of  glory. 


360  ffattb's  Gbeque  JBoofc* 

DECEMBER  25. 

"This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from 
you  into  heqven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner 
as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven" 
Acts  i.  ii. 


are  celebrating  our  Lord's  first 
coming  this  day;  let  us  turn  our 
thoughts  to  the  promise  of  his  second 
coming.  This  is  as  sure  as  the  first  advent, 
and  derives  a  great  measure  of  its  certainty 
from  it.  He  who  came  as  a  lowly  man  to 
serve  will  assuredly  come  to  take  the  reward 
of  his  service.  He  who  came  to  suffer  will 
not  be  slow  in  coming  to  reign. 

This  is  our  glorious  hope,  for  we  shall  share 
his  joy.  To-day  we  are  in  our  concealment 
and  humiliation,  even  as  he  was  while  here  be 
low;  but  when  he  cometh  it  will  be  our  mani 
festation,  even  as  it  will  be  his  revelation. 
Dead  saints  shall  live  at  his  appearing.  The 
slandered  and  despised  shall  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  Then 
shall  the  saints  appear  as  kings  and  priests, 
and  the  days  of  their  mourning  shall  be  ended. 
The  long  rest  and  inconceivable  splendour  of 
the  Millennial  reign  will  be  an  abundant 
recompense  for  the  ages  of  witnessing  and 
warring. 

Oh  that  the  Lord  would  come  !  He  is  com 
ing  !  He  is  on  the  road  and  travelling  quickly. 
The  sound  of  his  approach  should  be  as  music 
to  our  hearts!  Ring  out,  ye  bells  of  hope! 


Jfattb'e  Cbeque  Book.  361 

DECEMBER  26. 

"Peter  answered  and  said  unto  him, 
Though  all  men  shall  be  offended  because 
of  thee,  yet  will  I  never  be  offended." 

Matt.  xxvi.  33. 


,"  cries  one,  "this  is  no  promise 
of  God."  Just  so,  but  it  was  a 
promise  of  man,  and  therefore  it 
came  to  nothing.  Peter  thought  that  he  was 
saying  what  he  should  assuredly  carry  out  ;  but 
a  promise  which  has  no  better  foundation  than 
a  human  resolve  will  fall  to  the  ground.  No 
sooner  did  temptations  arise  than  Peter  de 
nied  his  Master,  and  used  oaths  to  confirm 
his  denial. 

What  is  man's  word?  An  earthen  pot 
broken  with  a  stroke.  What  is  your  own 
resolve?  A  blossom,  which,  with  God's  care, 
may  come  to  fruit,  but  which,  left  to  itself,  will 
fall  to  the  ground  with  the  first  wind  that 
moves  the  bough. 

On  man's  word  hang  only  what  it  will  bear. 

On  thine  own  resolve  depend  not  at  all. 

On  the  promise  of  thy  God  hang  time  and 
eternity,  this  world  and  the  next,  thine  all  and 
the  all  of  all  thy  beloved  ones. 

This  volume  is  a  cheque  book  for  believers, 
and  this  page  is  meant  as  a  warning  as  to 
what  bank  they  draw  upon,  and  whose  signa 
ture  they  accept.  Rely  upon  Jesus  without 
limit.  Trust  not  thyself,  nor  any  born  of 
woman,  beyond  due  bounds;  but  trust  thou 
only  and  wholly  in  the  Lord. 


362  Jfaitb's  Gbcque  JBoofc* 

DECEMBER  27. 

"For  the  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the 
hills  be  removed;  but  my  kindness  shall  not 
depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant 
of  my  'peace  be  removed,  saith  the  Lord  that 
hath  mercy  on  thee." — Isa.  liv.  10.  • 


of  the  most  delightful  qualities  of 
divine  love  is  its  abiding  character. 
The  pillars  of  the  earth  may  be  moved 
out  of  their  places,  but  the  kindness  and  the 
covenant  of  our  merciful  Jehovah  never  depart 
from  his  people.  How  happy  my  soul  feels  in 
a  firm  belief  of  this  inspired  declaration !  The 
year  is  almost  over,  and  the  years  of  my  life 
are  grbwing  few,  but  time  does  not  change 
my  Lord.  New  lamps  are  taking  the  place  of 
the  old,  perpetual  change  is  on  all  things; 
but  our  Lord  is  the  same.  Force  overturns 
the  hills,  but  no  conceivable  power  can  affect 
the  eternal  God.  Nothing  in  the  past,  the 
present,  or  the  future  can  cause  Jehovah  to 
be  unkind  to  me. 

My  soul,  rest  in  the  eternal  kindness  of  the 
Lord,  who  treats  thee  as  one  near  of  kin. 
Remember  also  the  everlasting  covenant. 
God  is  ever  mindful  of  it  —  see  that  thou  art 
mindful  of  it  too.  In  Christ  Jesus  the  glori 
ous  God  has  pledged  himself  to  thee  to  be  thy 
God,  and  to  hold  thee  as  one  of  his  people. 
Kindness  and  covenant — dwell  on  these  words 
as  sure  and  lasting  things  which  eternity  itself 
shall  not  take  from  thee, 


3Faftb'0  Cbcque  JBooft.  363 


DECEMBER  28. 

"He  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee."  —  Heb.  xiii.  5. 


SEVERAL  times  in  the  Scriptures  the 
Lord  hath  said  this.  He  has  often  re 
peated  it,  to  make  our  assurance  doubly 
sure.  Let  us  never  harbour  a  doubt  of  it.  In 
itself  the  promise  is  specially  emphatic.  In 
the  Greek  it  has  five  negatives,  each  one  defi 
nitely  shutting  out  the  possibility  of  the 
Lord's  ever  leaving  one  of  his  people  so  that 
he  can  justly  feel  forsaken  of  his  God.  This 
priceless  Scripture  does  not  promise  us  ex 
emption  from  trouble,  but  it  does  secure  us 
against  desertion.  We  may  be  called  to  trav 
erse  strange  ways,  but  we  shall  always  have 
our  Lord's  company,  assistance,  and  provi 
sion.  We  need  not  covet  money,  for  we  shall 
always  have  our  God,  and  God  is  better  than 
gold,  his  favour  is  better  than  fortune. 

We  ought  surely  to  be  content  with  such 
things  as  we  have,  for  he  who  has  God  has 
more  than  all  the  world  besides.  What  can 
we  have  beyond  the  Infinite?  What  more 
can  we  desire  than  Almighty  Goodness? 

Come,  my  heart;  if  God  says  he  will  never 
leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee,  be  thou  much  in 
prayer  for  grace,  that  thou  mayest  never  leave 
thy  Lord,  nor  even  for  a  moment  forsake  his 
ways. 


364  _  ffaitb'g  Cbegue  3S3ooft. 

DECEMBER  29. 

"And  even  to  your  old  age  I  am  he;  and 
even  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  you:  I  have 
made,  and  I  will  bear  ;  even  1  will  carry,  and 
will  deliver  you."  —  Isa.  xlvi.  4. 


year  is  very  old,  and  here  is  a  promise 
for  our  aged  friends;  yes,  and  for  us  all, 
as  age  creeps  over  us.  Let  us  live  long 
enough,  and  we  shall  all  have  hoar  hairs; 
therefore  we  may  as  well  enjoy  this  promise 
by  the  foresight  of  faith. 

When  we  grow  old  our  God  will  still  be 
the  I  AM,  abiding  evermore  the  same.  Hoar 
hairs  tell  of  our  decay,  but  he  decayeth  not. 
When  we  cannot  carry  a  burden,  and  can 
hardly  carry  ourselves,  the  Lord  will  carry 
us.  Even  as  in  our  young  days  he  carried  us 
like  lambs  in  his  bosom,  so  will  he  in  our  years 
of  infirmity. 

He  made  us,  and  he  will  care  for  us.  When 
we  become  a  burden  to  our  friends,  and  a 
burden  to  ourselves,  the  Lord  will  not  shake 
us  off,  but  the  rather  he  will  take  us  up  and 
carry  and  deliver  us  more  fully  than  ever. 
In  many  cases  the  Lord  gives  his  servants  a 
long  and  calm  evening.  They  worked  hard 
all  day  and  wore  themselves  out  in  their  Mas 
ter's  service,  and  so  he  said  to  them,  "  Now 
rest  in  anticipation  of  that  eternal  Sabbath 
which  I  have  prepared  for  you."  Let  us  not 
dread  old  age.  Let  us  grow  old  graciously, 
since  the  Lord  himself  is  with  us  in  fulness 
of  grace. 


ffaitb'0  Cbeque  36oofc.  365 

DECEMBER  30. 

"Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in 
the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end." 
John  xiii.  I. 

Jl 


fact  is  essentially  a  promise;  for 
what  our  Lord  was  he  is,  and  what  he 
was  to  those  with  whom  he  lived  on 
earth,  he  will  be  to  all  his  beloved  so  long  as 
the  moon  endureth. 

"  Having  loved  :"  here  was  the  wonder  ! 
That  he  should  ever  have  loved  men  at  all  is 
the  marvel.  What  was  there  in  his  poor  dis 
ciples  that  he  should  love  them?  What  is 
there  in  me? 

But  when  he  has  once  begun  to  love,  it  is 
his  nature  to  continue  to  do  so.  Love  made 
the  saints  "  his  own  "  —  what  a  choice  title  ! 
He  purchased  them  with  blood  and  they  be 
came  his  treasure.  Being  his  own,  he  will 
not  lose  them.  Being  his  beloved,  he  will  not 
cease  to  love  them. 

The  text  is  well  as  it  stands  :  "  to  the  end," 
even  till  his  death,  the  ruling  passion  of  love 
to  his  own  reigned  in  his  sacred  bosom.  It 
means  also  to  the  uttermost.  He  could  not 
love  them  more:  he  gave  himself  for  them. 
Some  read  it,  to  perfection.  Truly  he  lav 
ished  upon  them  a  perfect  love,  in  which  there 
was  no  flaw  nor  failure,  no  unwisdom,  no  un 
faithfulness,  and  no  reserve. 

Such  is  the  love  of  Jesus  to  each  one  of  his 
people.  Let  us  sing  to  our  Well-beloved  a 
song. 


366 ffattb'g  Cbeque  JSSooft. 

DECEMBER  31. 

"Thou  shall  guide  me  with  thy  counsel, 
and  afterward  receive  me  to  glory." 
Ps.  Ixxiii.  24. 


day  to  day  and  from  year  to  year 
my  faith  believes  in  the  wisdom  and  love 
of  God,  and  I  know  that  I  shall  not  be 
lieve  in  vain.  No  good  word  of  his  has  ever 
failed,  and  I  am  sure  that  none  shall  ever  fall 
to  the  ground. 

I  put  myself  into  his  hand  for  guidance.  I 
know  not  the  way  that  I  should  choose:  the 
Lord  shall  choose  mine  inheritance  for  me. 
I  need  counsel  and  advice;  for  my  duties  are 
intricate,  and  my  condition  is  involved.  I 
seek  to  the  Lord,  as  the  High  Priest  of  old 
looked  to  his  Urim  and  Thummim.  The 
counsel  of  the  infallible  God  I  seek  in  prefer 
ence  to  my  own  judgment  or  the  advice  of 
friends.  Glorious  Jehovah,  thou  shalt  guide 
me! 

Soon  the  end  will  come:  a  few  more  years, 
and  I  must  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the 
Father.  My  Lord  will  be  near  my  bed.  He 
will  meet  me  at  heaven's  gate:  he  will  wel 
come  me  to  the  glory-land.  I  shall  not  be  a 
stranger  in  heaven:  my  own  God  and  Father 
will  receive  me  to  its  endless  bliss. 


be  to  Him  wbo  will  ouifce  me  bete, 
anfc  receive  me  bereatter,    Emeu, 


ifn&ex  of  Scripture 


GENESIS. 
Chap.  &  Verse    I 

'age 

DEUT.  —  continued. 

Chap.  &  Verse    Page 
xxviii.  3    44 

i  KINGS. 

Chap.  &  Verse    Page 
xi.     39  227 

xxviii.   5    68 

2  KINGS. 

xvii.    7    

214 

xxviii.   8   333 

xxvin.   13   
xxviii.   15    

3 

30 

xxviii.   10   98 
xxviii.    12   146 

vi.   16   230 
xix.  32   175 

xlviii.    21    

149 
183 

xxx.  3   126 
xxx.  6   286 

xxu.    19  94 

1     24    

276 

xxxi.   8    335 

i  CHRONICLES. 

xxxiii.   12   262 

EXODUS. 

xxxiii.   18    72 

iii.   12   

17 

2  CHRONICLES. 

215 

vii.     14  287 

3O3 

xv.     7  48 

157 

VII        T  1 

16 

345 

JOSHUA. 

xxiii.   25    

147 

JOB. 

xxiii.   28   

95 

1.     7     220 

xxxni.  14  

332 

xvii.     18  351 
xxiii.      10  145 

xxii.    23  38 

LEVITICUS. 
i    4 

JUDGES. 

xxxiii.  27,  28.  .     25 

iv.   7    

Ji 

XXll.     II      

«i 

iv.    9  173 

NUMBERS. 

xiii.     23  269 

xvi.    8  337 

i   SAMUEL. 

xxi.  8    

IOI 

ii      7  223 

xxiii.  4   I7« 

xxiii.  23   

26 

ii-     9  24 
11.     30  64 

xxix.    ii  342 

DEUTERONOMY 

r. 

xvii.     37  53 
xvii.     47  71 

xxx.     5  234 
xxxii.     10  45 

i    21            .        . 

219 

xxxiii    21  130 

o28 

xii    28  

29 

2  SAMUEL. 

xiii,    17    

T-8 

v.     24  1  24 

xxxvii.    3  346 

xv.  1  8  .... 

vii      29                     296 

XX     4    . 

xxvin.  2,  3   ... 

37 

XXlll.     5  .  .           .    243 

xli.     I  .  .                     22 

367 


368 


of  Scripture  (Text*. 


PSALMS.  —  contit 
Chap.  &  Verse 

lued. 

Page 
86 
357 
105 
185 
213 
241 
196 
232 
224 
144 
366 
235 
274 
307 
79 
339 
136 
261 
322 
297 
191 
192 
329 
325 
264 
275 
58 
46 
52 

305 
171 

100 

315 
318 

PROVERBS.  —  cont'd. 

Chap.  &  Verse    Page 
xi.    25  9 

ISAIAH.  —  continued. 

Chap.  &  Verse    Page 
Ixi      6                        56 

xlvi.  i   

Xli.       IQ  

xin.      13  
xv.     8  

.   291 
.      78 

Ixvi     5                      6  1 

i.  15  ..:  

lv.   16  

xvi.     7.  ... 

108 

JEREMIAH. 
i.    6     7                     n-> 

xx.     7  

116 

Ixii.   i        .    . 

xxiii.    17,    18.  . 

.    127 

1       8                                         77 

Ixxiii.    24  

xv.     19  ....            140 

Ixxvi     10 

T  iR 

xv      20                   298 

Ixxxi.    10  

xxix.   7  69 

Ixxxiv.    1  1 

xxx.     ii                   293 

Ixxxiv.    ii  
xci.     4  

ECCLESIASTES. 
xj.    i  153 

XXXI.       12  242 

xxxi.    14.  ...          317 

xci.    14  

xxxi.  34                  1  02 

xxxi.    34  103 

xciv.    14  

xi.    3  

ISAIAH. 
ii     4.. 

.  142 

•    350 

xxxiii.     3  181 
xxxix.    17  ....        187 

ci.    6  

xxxix.   18  195 

1.     20  .  .  .                           -J27 

en.    13     14 

cm.     9  

.  165 

LAMENTATIONS. 
»!•   27  255 

cvn      9  .  . 

xxviii.     1  6  .  .  .  . 

•    334 

ex.     3  
cxi.    5  

xxx.     15  
xxxi.     5  

•    347 
.    353 

CXV.        12  

•    259 
.    170 

1".     31  12 
EZEKIEL. 

xi..  if  75 
xvi.    60  182 

cxv.     13  .... 

xxxiii.     1  6  .  .  .  . 

•    34O 

cxvm.    17  
cxix.    80  

xxxiii.     21  .... 

.    266 

xxxv.    8  

.      92 

cxxi.     3  
cxxi.    4  

xli.     10  
xli.     10  

6 

•      39 

xx.     43  27 
xxxiv.    ii  no 

cxxvi.    5  
cxxvii.    2  

292 
184 
167 

143 
118 
179 
49 
67 
U3 

81 
85 
91 

6| 
236 

336 
106 
174 

xlii.   3  
xlii.    16  

.    252 
•      83 

xxxiv.    15  238 

cxxxvin.     7.  .  .  . 
cxxxviii.     8.  .  .  . 
cxl     13 

xliv.    3  

.      42 
96 
'41 
.    326 
•    364 
240 
189 

xxxiv.   30  314 
xxxvi.   25  304 

xlv.       2 

xxxvu.    13  247 

cxlv.   1  9 

xlv.     22  

xlvii.     9  268 
DANIEL. 
xi.   32  199 

cxlvi      7 

xlvi.    4.  .  . 

cxlvi.    8  ... 

xlviii.    10  

PROVERBS. 

iii        ?i 

xlix.    13  

\\    7  
Ii.    12,    13  

355 

xii.     3  203 
Xli.     13  207 

111.      24  

liv.    4.  . 

18 
163 
362 
321 

HOSEA. 

iii.    25,    26  
iii.     33  

liv.     17  

lv.    12.  . 

x.     9  

Ivii.     1  6  

310 

Si 

Iviii.    ii.. 

fnfcer  of  Scripture 


369 


HOSEA  —  continued. 

Chap.  &  Verse    Page 
ii.   19,  20  204 

MALACHI.  —  cont'd. 

Chap.  &  Verse    Page 
iii.    17  156 

IV.     2  -        ^2 

[OHN.  —  continued. 

rhap.  &  Verse    Page 
xvi.    14  273 
xvi.    20  331 

IV.     2  

MATTHEW 

j      2i          

.      33 

XVJ.     22  212 

ACTS. 
j      ii   36o 

JOEL. 
ii      25                      139 

.    186 

.    197 

xiii.     34  209 

137 

AMOS. 

v*  s::::::::: 

xviii.    io  89 
xxii.     15  41 

vi.    3,    4  

.     62 

ROMANS. 

i-    17  i" 
v.    3  265 
vi.    14  3i6 

MlCAH. 

v.     7  279 
vii.     7  31 
vii.    8  125 

'    288 

x      42  

.   260 

xi.    28  
xx.     7  

.      14 
1  68 
.    129 

vii.     19  356 
NAHUM. 
i     12                          So 

xxvi.   33  

MARK. 
i     17          .... 

.   300 
.   361 

.    150 

vui.    32  34 
x.     9  19 

i  CORINTHIANS. 
i.    19  237 

2  CORINTHIANS. 
vi     16                      119 

i     13           154 

HABAKKUK. 
ii      i                        308 

344 

.    281 

LUKE. 

312 

in.    19  155 

ZEPHANIAH. 
iii     12   161 

xii     9  313 

GALATIANS. 
vi.   8  123 

JOHN. 

iii.    13  162 

1.     50  

i     5i 

7 

.    177 

PHILIPPIANS. 
iii.   21  104 

188 

HAGGAI. 
ii      ig     324 

vi.    37  

'        o3 

vi.    57  
x.     28  

.   289 
-.159 

iv.    6,    7  90 
iv.    9  76 

ZECHARIAH. 

xi.    26  

.  .    193 
343 

iv.    19  320 
i  THESSALONIANS. 
iv.    17  352 

.    278 

xii.    46  

.  .      70 

x.  12  285 

Xlll.     I  

..    365 

xii.    8  323 

xiv.    13  
xiv.    14  

..    319 
.  .      35 

v.     24  306 

2   THESSALONIANS. 

iii      1                               Sd 

xiv     7                         -*<i8 

.  .   290 

XV.       2  

.  .     222 

MALACHI. 
Hi.   io..,           .   115 

xv      7  

54 

i  TIMOTHY. 
iv.    IS-.     93 

55 

245 

xvi.   13.. 

..    280 

370        ITn&e*  of  Scripture  Gerts. 


HEBREWS. 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 
iv.  9  272 

JAMES.  —  continued. 

Chap.  &  Verse  Page 
iv  8          87 

REVELATION. 
Chap.  &  Verse  Page 

ix.  28  202 

v.  8  178 

ii.  it  114 

x.  17  205 
X..34  59 
xui.  5  363 

i  PETER. 

»•   17  121 

11...  28  134 

xui.  6  131 

i-  25  244 

V.   6  2IO 

iii-  8  284 

xxi  4           28 

JAMES. 

XXI   5  ^4g 

1   e              160 

2  PETER. 

xxn.  3,  4  301 

1.   12  2cg 

i  8           TAR 

iv.  6  :  II 

«.   9  IQ4. 

