Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/evilsofinfantoap0000robe 


ON ae tt 


HRAde gee Tt z ; ta - Sg 


..% 4 * yee 
a” : : e as © 


=. 5 e “te 


EVILS OF INFANT BAPTISM. 


. 


s 


) a if. 
+3 . ‘ 

a ass. sae = 

e+ Shy tes “8 


** ‘ROBERT BOYTE ( . HOWELL, D. ‘ike 


Pastor of the Second Bae urch Richmond, Va. * a e 
™ ’ vie 


. ™ a ; " es ‘s 
, > : : <. fede = 
- . es 
/ _ ¥ j oe 
“AUTEOR OF ee OF COMMUNION,” “THE Desccaa “Tue WA OF 


thee RALVATION,” ETO. 


THE MASTER hi E LIBRARY 
13248 ROSCOF BLVD. te 
SUN VALLEY, CA 91352. 


» Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, i Fs 
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things 
are lovely, whatsoever things are of good réport, if there be any virtue, and — ie 
if there be any praise, sain on these things.”—-P aut, z 
- : 


of e hs _ THE MASTER'S COLLEG 
(fern. POWELL LIBRARY 
a SEVENTH EDITION. SANTA CLARITA, CA: , 


> 


—. CHARLESTON, SOs 


SOUTHERN BAPTIST PUBLICATION SOOIETY fe 


Bg ; i -- ” 


16 year tiie _" 


OYTE 0. HOWELL DD, 


PREFACE T0 THE SECOND EDITION. 


bi J 
F Sp! 


. My feraditude is due to God, and to his pale for 
the: Kindness with which this little work has been re- 
~ ceived.” A. second ‘edition. is demanded at a much 
earlier period than T had ar ticipated. I have pre- 


pared. it with as much attention as my cireuiances 

would permit. Some portions of the book, as will be 

seen, -haye been ‘recast, and a new Chapter has been — 
added, on Infant Salvation. More perspicuity and con- bet 
celusiveness have, as I think, been thus given to some fe 
of the arguments, and the whole work made much 
more complete. Again I send it forth, with the earn- | 
est. prayer that it may pao a pie to the cause of dl 


ha] 


rue religion. 


ty i a Row’ Bord C. Howeit.” iy 
N ; aE e ee pg 

_ Rioawonn, Vi4., Dec. 17th, 1851. : 
eae: . 

* e * J - 
in? eg 
J v ~ So 

MO wt 


4B is ro rms eS: 
io 8 Spt ‘on, oe 


abe: 
a 

Sx os * é 4 
are 


IN *. 


: 
st 
- 
4 


2 


gi oF RICHMOND, tainge 
pt 
; ° 3 P nits VOLUME ‘ me 


= a Bevpectturty Devtesten * 


a ; as : de aki ontren 


a> 
ys hy on 
- 
‘ * # 
od + 
+ 
ed * A 4 
pee * +f 
age 
> S, ' e? ' 
ts . pe 
meer ; 
. 
% : 


es 
“ite 
x “i a i | 
3 
ee 
‘ fai 


. ; . ° oer as ir aaah i aa 
4 a ae, 
< ¥ s,s 3 pi La *. 4 a. e 
Ej = * Sine * Pe aS re if at 
« \ ‘ b Z £ 
. PREEACKE.. co. 
yt Sern ee 
~ . . ~ # ites " ‘ e 
’ * * ‘ ce = Pes Dean 
Taiz siekats pages were written “i the specie ac 
‘sani of considering, not the “molleof bap, ; nor : ie 
“the epee of baptism,” bu “© the. avis “of 3 ridge A : 4 


“baptism.” What baptism is, and» who” ‘are. atti a 
to receive it, have been questions of sceiiaellae 


‘fifteen hundred years. .. The ‘last ‘twd centuries have ; 
been ‘especially prolifie: ee essays andi books 0 on. these ’ 
subjects. Great: learning’ and zeal have been a 
“into aniston, on both. sides of ‘the digiscg 1 ep 


, as time. . passes, loses” nothing of its, erst, 
“bu each year, more ahd tore warm. Noi or will ‘ee 
it ever cease until all. christians fully. understand, the  ‘“#@>s: 
‘diyine” teachings in the premises, and submit them- 

Ce wes to the kee of. the Sei oh 6 Gog aS ogie ‘a. 


aS 
| lees ‘saheseiga bp : 0) 
periodic, and sometimes a 


a 


eee 


‘ 


a 


x , PREFACE. 


firming, and sustaining the mischievous results of the 


rite. myself wrote a small.tract on the subject, 


more than twenty-five years ago, entitled “ Plain 


Things for Plain. Men,” suggesting most of the prop- 


ositions contained® in- this work. Beyond ~ these 
almost nothing, so far*as I know, has been pub- 
lished. * Copeeauently the advocates of infant bap- 


tism, driven from. every other quarter, have here felt 


J themselves safe. They affirm, and. expect us to admit, 


that “If it does no good, it does no harm.” ey Abts 
innocent, and therefore may be practised. . 4 a this 
every. apology,» ‘offered in its behalf lately, by a friend 
in my presence, and which I had before so often heard, 
that called forth the book now before you. I thought 
it wrong to permit the public mind longer to remain 


‘involved in this error; and as ‘I ‘knew of no one who 


: was likely soon to expose it, I determiried to undertake 


the task myself. I have attempted, with what success ” 


* Since the first edition ‘of this work went to press, I haye seen 
Dr. Gill’s Tract, ‘Infant Baptism a Part and Pillar of Popery,” 


4 


edited by George B. Ide, D. D., and published in a handsome. 


little volume, by the American, Baptist Publication Society. ss 
volume has” a chapter by Dr. Ide on “The Influence of Infant 


Baptism on Protestant Churehes, Historically considered.” This ; 


san able and conclusive chapter, of which, ‘in this second edition, 


oe have folly pvailed myself. ; * . en 


** 


te 


Ry 


PREFAOE. xi 


my fades’ will judge,” to show ‘that infant baptism is 
far from being harmless. On 'the contrary; that i it is 
one of the most ‘calamitous til with which the churéh 
“has ever been visited.. . ng ae, eae 
Permit, if you pee a word of explanation in the . 
outtiot, regarding some terms; and. phrases, pisagiient 
occurrence. ‘I have spoken of it as_ baptism, “when 
fg sprinkling was used ‘and ina were the. sub- 
jects, not that I suppose any’ such thing really Saptiom, 
or that others’ than believers are’ eapable of the “Ordi- 


“nanee, but Supls as a matter’ of courtesy, and in com- 


< 
“p iance with common usage. In the’ same Sense I have : 
spoken i ~“ the church, A “the clinched? ‘and “ ‘the & 


churches of Christ.” Inthe use of these, and - ‘ike 


expressions, I shall certainly, by all ‘htelligent peépley 


. 


- 8 perfectly understood. ee - 


Pe ae “4 


*- One other: prefatory remark’ will $e pardoned,’ In 


‘thar as in “every, other pook’ T have written, wk have 
carefully sought the utmost simplicity and plainness. 
I write for “ the million,” and I-have determined that 
_ “the million” shall understand *me. I am unwilling 
to sacrifice, force, and ditectneSs,to elegance of, style. 
Ido not enter in the présence. of my. youd into: la-, 
" Bored criticisms, nor. abstruse disquisitions, but’ | 

ae the. results énaphg il nigga ¥ with 


a3 


.. 


9 


+ 


xu. PREFACE. 


the process ; and they have them in the plainest Saxon 
T can command. It has been. my purpose to. present 
the truth fully, fairly, and candidly; but at the same 
time, with all proper respect for the. opinions. of oth- ° 
Fe ers. J have not: introduced an argument which I do » 


not believe to be logical’and conclusive, a single pas- 


sage of scripture which I am not persuaded is: rele- 


vant, nor an authority from any writer, ancient. or mod- 
ern, which I. am not assured is justly adduced, and 
applicable to the* subject. My sole desire is the honor 
of truth, and the salvation of men. 
With thiege ‘observations premised, I send forth this 
little volume, earnestly praying that God our Heavenly : 
Father, may make it a blessing to his. cause and 


people: ab 
- Ros’t Bortz C. Howsut. 
Rrcawonn, VA., March 24th, 1851, : 
4 
e 2 a * 
$ ES b 
+ a e % * - Ps 7 
oy wt a #*® 
58, Aes a? “y ake 
e * is 
P15 Se “ 


CONTENTS ~~ 


* 


r 


CHAPTER I. 


‘Page Bs 


Infant paptiem i is an evil because its practice: 18 a a ; 
: by the werd of Gods...... POE Aare rece i aricle Boor 


CH A PTERII. 
(ofant baptien i is an evil because its defence leads to ees asks 


injurious brie of scripture........ SAR mpc’ oa 40 


CHAPTER Tit. 


Infant baptism is an evil because it engrafts Sodatien upon 
fho’gospel of Christ. 2... 0. cde euadeaeaes sss te lelbie siya’ ouhias 


' CHAPTER 4 
Infant ifuptioni is an evil because it falsifies the doctrine of 
universal DODIAVILY. citeois s siewhas.s faints Heptas Mules we sdeees 


CHAPTER-Y 


Infant baptism is an evil because the doctrines upon which 
_ itis predicated contradict the great fundamental princi- 


_ © ple of justification by faith..........c00sesecenenseess 1¢ 


“Gag CHAPTER VI. 


eae: baptism is an evil because it is in direct conflict with 
the doctrine of the work of the Holy Spirit in fegen- 


17 


; eration, ee cee LF 


2 


%, 


iv CONTENTS. . . 


a 


ae HAPTER Viel. 
Page. 


iad byt is an ‘evil acta it despoils the church of. 
_ those»peculiar qualities which are ish Bee ‘the ohurch » 


of Christ. 3 Bape sat aces ba eee ec se eees Shi Wes Sabo: 180 
, \ | CHAPTER VIII. ~~ & 
fatant Beco is ore because its practice perpetuates. 
_ the’ eS aed that originally produced Siccock rege LOGY 


CHAPTER ee See 
Infant ‘baptism-is an» evil because it eubyanks the seripture? 


doctrine of infant salvation eaininy sais ice ett tater piciseesiete= 115 
_e 
oars CHAPTE RB x. 
: Tofant baptism is. an evil because it leads its advocates: into 
rebellion against the authority of Christ: oA pe OS 


- CHAPTER Xl, 


Tofant’ pepe is an evil because of the connection it as- 
umes with the, moral and religious training -of chil- 


arent... sels « o ++ geet AS Bor sgn i ian wes 218 
oe > CHAPTER Sr , 
‘Infant baptisut is an évil because it is the grand found ‘ion 
~apon which rests the union of church and state....... 5. 225 
a sp apogee CHAPTER XIII. 
ofant "paptiam i is an evil because it leads to religious per-* 
" secutions ...... cjeceas ved Na Wie! ose’ ow sieleleieeniece wee str otlen 234 
4 “CHAPTER XIV. “f 


Infant ‘eptiom is an evil because, it is contrary to the prin- 
ciples of civil and religious freedom ...eeceevere sada - 258 


PRL spa en Hee ees : . 


- x 


CONTENTS. 


xv 
1 ~ CHAPTERSMEY. ” 
. : ‘ Page.” 
“infant beptiom is an evil because it enfeebles the | ‘power op) 
the church to combat error......../..+eeee sede eeeeer ee 262 
es: , CHAPTER Xviv --*."* 
Infant baptism is an evil because it injures the credit of re- 
ligion with reflecting men of the world, Rar arapre eve eee ents 279 
OHAPTER XVII. ae 
Infant baptism is an evil because it is the greet | barrier to 
christian union..... Se by ee re 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


Infant baptism is an evil because it prevents the salutary im- 
_ preasion which baptism was designed to make upon the - 
minds both of those who. receive it, and of those who 
witness its administration - 

" ee 
; . CHAPTER XIX.s * tipo 


Infant baptism is an evil because it retards the designs of 
Christ in the-conversion of the world 


BR LA Sh sees 298 
') , CHARTER X&, ee Te 
Becapitulation, with concluding addresses........,....+0+5 .. 808 
Y = 
n i 

. * Oa te 

4 ; - \ - 

: ’ hs ees x whey 


muni & e J * . 
= bad 


THE "¢ OF INFANT BAPTISM. 


A. Saari 
we CHAPTER I. : 


INFANT ‘BAPTISM Is AN EVIL *phicavsit ITS PRAOTION I8 


UNSUPPORTED BY THE ORD OF GOD. 
# : ¢ 
Proposition stated; no authority in the Bible for infant baptisra ; confessions 
of its advocates; the great Protestant rule i in meligion’; their arguments ; it 
“is no ‘baptism ; ‘forms of the evil. a ; 


. ee Pee te Ps 
-Prrreorion on earth, in its absolute form, ‘unhappily 

ho longer .exists. ‘“Man’s first disobedience” brought 
sin into the world. Evil was its attendant. And since 
that fatal hour, evil has been ‘connected with all that, 
pertains. to our race! It is like the air we breathe, an 
evér present influence. It corrupts all that is pure, 
and impairs all that is beautiful. Where are the natu- 
“ral Déings. whose perfections it has not disturbed ? 
“What rule of moral aétion is there, from- compliance » 


with which it has not’ turned men aside? . But these 2 


are not its most lamentable developments. fit is foun ie 
prevailing even in the professed churches of Christ 
Nor is its presence in the sanctuary seldom apparent. 
“Seareely i is there a feature in our holy religion, which it 
has not somewhere, marred or distorted!’ Jn no form, . 
however, has it afflicted the cause of truth and salvation 
‘Q* 


n ) 
* ra 
= = 
aes 


<t 


18  -[NFanT BAPTISM IS * 


more grievously, than in that of infant baptism Ca 
generally / prevalent, but without divine author ity 5 Te 
pulsive in itself, and in its consequences always Osi. 
rious. This declaration I hold myself bound, * in the 
following pages, to sustain by adequate testimony. “At 
' present BE solicit yourattention ‘to t roposition oe 
nounced : ‘Infant baptism is an — t ig un-— 
supported by the word of God.? | * a 

It is assumed that infant. baptism is unsupported 
the word of God. This i is the subject of the proposi- 
tion If, upon examination, it be found true, the predi- 

* cate, that it is an evil; follows as a matter of ‘course. 
The forms and bearing of that evil may then be con® 
sidered. Is infant baptism supported by the word of - 

God? I aver that it: aS It is nowhere command.. 
; ed. It is nowhere, in any form, divinely authorized. 

Examine the holy record, from: first. to last, and * you 
‘will discover not a trace _of infant baptism,” “Tf it as 
anywhere commanded, or authorized, ‘the _ passages in 
which that fact. appear , can be produced, Where are 
they? Let them be | forthcoming. We have a right t to’ 
see, and to examine them, for ourselves, We demand 
the texts, But this demand “has. before. been _often 
made, and always in. vain, They have » neve been , 

‘ _ produced. They have 3 not yet been found. They 1 nev- 

| Gene They do not exist. The word of - 
od, in all its length and readth, contains not a sylla- 

ble of authority for infant baptism; i in the form of.com- 
“mand, of precept, of permission, of example, or in any 
other form whatever. In that sacred book not one 
word in relation to it, is anywhere uttered. He who 
‘claims divine authori ye for infant baptism, must justify 


~ 
r 2 - . — 
% ; Ra, " 


UNSUPPORTED BY THE WORD OF GOD. 19 


_ himself: by adducing it. Until he does so, the least that 

: “ean be said of it, is that “i is oeaees by. the 
word. of God.” 

The authority demanded, Sue? boweves often. been 

: essayéd. Learned, ingenious, and protracted : efforts 

‘have been attempted by every sect into which Pedo- 

tapi i 18 divided. But as if God had de- 


__ termined to defend his own truth by the individual con- 


: flicts of its’ adversaries, it has turned out that no two 
of them have been able to harmonize either as to what 
maybe regarded as testimony in-the premises, or the 
‘class of infants divinely authorized ‘to ‘be baptized ! 
Each is in collision — with every — Other. Wall, Ham- 
mond, and-others of that school, claim that Jewish 


~ sproselyte baptism is its. Broad and ample foundation. — 
Owen, Jennings; and many more » repudiate Jewish 


“ proselyté baptism, and predicate it upon circumcision 
as taught-in the* Abrahamie covenant.  Beza, -Dod- 
dridge, and their. associates, teach that children are 
holy, and. are. therefore to be baptized. Wesley, and 
his disciples, teach that they are unholy, and must be 
baptized to cleanse, them fire: m their defilements. Bur- 
der, Dwight, and their ‘class, ‘permit no other infants to 
be baptized but those of christian parents, all of whom 
“they contend, are ‘born in the church, and are there- 
fore entitled’ to its or¢ 
_those ‘of similar faith, 1 aptize infants to. bring them 
into the covenant and church of the Redeemer. The 
evangelical divines of the Church of England, and of 
the Episcopal Church of America, ‘tell us that “the 
doctrine of infant baptism is deduced by analogical 
reasoning, from statements of _seriphine applying more 


line ances. Baxter, Henry, and 


cee 


j 


a, 


i * 


20 >. INFANT BAPTISM 18 A 


expressly, to the case of: adult baptism.” But those 
of the opposite _ character teach that baptism: : to 
the infant the regeneration of the Holy Giese ‘and 
must. therefore be Faliaitisteued.s ‘Many others receive 
‘and practise. it, because, as. they say, “ It is in *conso- 
nance with the general | spirit of relig ‘< Each of ~ 
these ‘theories shows all the others to wholly desti-. 
tute of scriptural support. . Among the sever al-classes 
of religionists now indicated, are to he found very many gts 
men of the most extensiye learning and research. Why 
are they all thus im. hopeless conflict; on the subject ? 
The “moment one brings forward | is scriptural proofs 
of infant baptism, all the others clearly show them to 
be utterly false. Could this be the’ case *weresthe 
ordinance any where enjoined or authorized ? Every : 
unprejudiced. mind abate” that, taken together, ‘the 
arguments of all classes: of Pedobaptists, dedindy one 
another throughout. Like the builders at Babel, no 
two of them speak’ the same tongue, although every 
one protests that he utters the language. of the Bible! 
Iti Is true consequently, for any thing that yet appears 
to the contrary, that infant baptism as Mian! ted by 
the word of God. Po 

But we have testimony i in proof. of ‘our proposition 
cee if possible, than. any which has yet been 
- submitted. — Very many of the most learned and piorts 
Pe obuptist Biblical er itics, themselves candidly confess. 


that infant baptism is not distinctly enjoined, nor direct- 


taught, in the, word of God. Some of these I will 


wi 
w proceed. to specify. ‘ : 


Martin. Luther, the great father of the Reformation, 
says :-—“ It cannot be proved by the seriptures, that 


‘ y 
ae ae 


UNSUPPORTED BY ‘THE WORD OF GoD. 21 
a 
or begun by 


infa aptism was instituted by Christ, 
John Calvin 


. the rst. christians after the apostles.’ 
testifies thus :—“It is nowhere expressly 
by the e rgelists, that any child was: by | the apostles 

Aaa Bishop: Burnet, avers :—‘ There is no ex- 

press precept, or rule given in thi New Testament, for 
the baptism OF ikfonts. Bik ks says = The con- 

"nection of infant baptism wi circumcision deserves no 

ig consid eration, since there were physical reasons for cir- 
cumeising in infaney.’ ’§ Angusti says : :—‘ The paral- 

lel between circumcisio ‘and. baptism is altogethe er for- 
eign to the New Testament.” -. Bishop Je jeremy Taylor 
thus writes : -e For argument from cipcumeision, it 

. is invalid from. infinite ‘eonsiderations. ” Figures. and 
types prove nothing, unless a 
them, ‘or’ some express to. 

purpose. "@ Dr. Woods of - dover remarks :—= It 
“is a plain case, that there i is no: express precept respect- 
ing infant baptism in our ie ed writings.” The proof 

* then, that it is a divine in stite meee be made out in 
some other way.”** Prof. St 
mands, or plain and cert é baila in the New les- 

- tament, relativé to it [infant baptis I not. find, tt 
aa op Dr. say declares :-— « As baptism v 

ous s entrance on 


*30% » 


* hui, Van. Inf. Bipt., par Ps 

t+ Institutes of Religion, Liber 4, ae 

f Expos. 89 ‘Arts., Art. 18. es: sie 

| Works, vol. 7, ‘pe “829.5 FB? 

1 Liberty of ‘Prbphesying, pp: 908-246. he a “e : “ 
i of 


 ** Leet, on Inf. Bap.,.ps 11. A Sa Mest 
a Biblical Repository, 1888, p. 885. © a oe Yige # Fs 


mentioned _ 


| command go along with oe 
ynify such to be their — 


os 
3 


Le « 
22 . _ INFANT BAPTISM IS 


with one. antOLbek and thus it is in the highest : : ree 
probable, that baptism was performed only in instances . 
where both could meet together, and that the practice 


of infant baptism was kalistoncele to the apostolic age.* 
In another work Neander says:—‘ Baptism was at» _ 


first, administered only to adults, as men were accus~ 7 
tomed to conceive baptism and faith’ as strictly con- | 


nected. We. have all reason for aot deriving infant 


baptism from apostolic institution. ”’}, Multitudes of 
other similar declarations. could, were they necessary, | 
be. a produced, but these are amply sufficient. 
It is acknowledged that the word of God does not 
teach infant. baptism, This acknowledgement is made 
candidly, by those who ought to know, since they. were 
among the most learned men, and best Biblical critics 


the wail has ever produced, made against themsélves, 


voluntarily, freely, and of their own aaeeed: and ought 
therefore to -be considered decisive of the question:” 
Infant baptism is not found in ‘any form in the Bible., 
Every effort to deduce it from the sacred records, no- 
matter how ingeniously conducted, has proved a wretch- 
ed failure. It is confessed by its advocates that ‘it. is~ 
not. found in the inspired pages... Jnfant. baptism is: 
therefore, unsupported by the word of Gods 2. 
May I now, in view of all these ‘facts, and.consider- 
ations, solicit your attention to ‘the « great Protestant 
principle i in religion, so. familiarly noms to all-who are» 
‘in the least conversant with sacred literature 9—“ The © 
word of God is a perfect rule of fut and, practice.” 
To this maxim every: evangelical ‘denbeamnation peepee 
* Planting and Training; p- 10h. ie = 
+ Church History, vol. rie p- 311 , Morey? 8 Tronsiation, = 
es 


sae : , 4 


, 


See rollag BY THE WORD bs GoD. 23 


y with entire submission. Tt av Bic scrip- 
2s to be not the | supreme authority onl but also the 
sole aut hority, in in all that pertains: to religio s It repu- 
diates all tradition. “At looks not to the Fathers of the 
church of whatever period, except in so far as they 
are sustained by.the divine word. It relies exclusively 
upon the scriptures. If any doctrine or practice be 
there clearly taught, it must be received heartily, and 
fully.” If otherwise, you dare HOR admit it.The 
word of God is-a perfect rule of faith and practice.”” 
‘For myself, and for my“brethren—although we are 
- not Protestants—I declare for this christian Riw.3 in re- 
_ligion the sincerest reverence. We receive it fully , and 
conform to¥it. in every respect, We.do this however, 
not simply because’ it is wise in principle, and safe in 
practice, but: because it is really an embodiment i in an- 
other form, of the law of God himself. It comes to us 
with the: sanction not of men only, but of God. The 
language of Jehovah on ‘the: ‘subject is this :—“ ‘What 
thing soever I command you a, observe to do it. Thou 
shalt not add thereto, nor diminish § from it. And’ in 
another place he says. :—“Ye shall not add unto the 
word which a command. “you, neither shall ye diminish 
oug t from it, that ye may keep the commandments of 
the Lord your God which I command you.”+ Is not 
this a -plain declaration, “Gn other terms, that, “Th 
set word of God.is a perfe of faith and practic 
_ Does any one ‘suppose that since these precepts hi i 
-more direct reference to the law of Moses, that they 
are not. equally ‘applicable under the gospel 2» To such 
it may be replied, that the law west much less perfect 


5 97 
te 


% *. 


oe © Dent.xii, ee Er poe. «+ Dont. i 3 


.* K- : 
: * wa © 
: 


94 se RinANt BAPIEAE I 8 


than is iit Bospél: ’ Did our tetaly: Father enforce 
the obligations. of the former with the most | jealous 
particularity, and is hé less careful as. to’ our compliance 
with the demands of ‘the. latter ? Such. an objection 
is unreasonable. It is also i in direct, conflict with apos: 
tolic teaching. To this “yery’ topic Paul refers, when 
“he says :—“ ‘God, who at sundry times, and. in divers 
manners, spake in times: ‘past to the Sathers, by the 
prophets, hath in these last sdays. spoken unto us, by 
his Son.”* “Therefore we ought to give the more 
earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at 
any time we should. let them slip. For-if the word — 
spoken by angels [messengers, in the law| was stead- 
fast, and every transgression, and disobedience received 
a just. recempeénse ne reward, how shall we escape: if 
~ we neglect so great. salvation, which at the first began * 
to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us 
~ by them that heard him, God also bearing them wit- 
: ness, both 1 ith. ‘signs * and wonders, and divers mira- 
j cles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost ?”} See that ye 
refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escapednot - 
rho refused him that spake on earth; much more 
‘hall: not we escape if we refuse-him that speaketh from 
heaven.” { Thus it is séen” “that if the inspired. apostle 
knew whereof he affirmed, ‘and: reasoned not illogically, 
it is unquestionably true ‘that the gospel requirés'to be. 
; obeyed, not with less, but with more carefulness, , par- hi 
“ _ ticularity,and fidelity than did the law. «To. no com-— 
ert: eee of the gospel” mercy may you add any 
thing whatever ; -neither may_ you diminish aught from 
: it. You are oblig ed to obey, andin the manner en- 


# Heb. i, 1. f Wleb. i, kf Heb ay 2, 


4 = 


UNSUPPORTED BY THE’ WORD oF GOD. 25 


joined, all that J eHovah has there ravoclel for your 
‘guidance. ‘It is “the word of God,” and that a 
perfect rule of faith and practice.” 
But we are constantly told that the ‘Bapt unlike 
the law, is in many respects, indefinite in its instruc- 
~ _ tions, giving only the outlines, and great principles of 
_ religion, and leaving the details to be filled up by the 
~ wisdom and pious discretion of the followers of Christ. 
‘He who has arrived at this.conclusion -has wholly mis: 
taken’ the subject. If the-word of God is a’ perfect 
rule of faith and practice, then the. assumption cannot 
possibly be true. It is unreasonable in itself; itis in 
conflict with the inspired teachings just recited ; and it 
‘proceeds on the false assumption — that “the gospel is 
less perfect than the law! On the contrary, in the gos- 
pel every duty required is distinctly enjoined. No one 
need mistake its authority, or its nature. That rule is 
certainly not perfect, to whatever department of life it 
may pertain, which only sketches general principles, ‘ 
, and great outlines, and leaves the détails to be supplied 
by each individual in such manner as may seem to him 
“most proper. The word of God is no such rule. lt is. 
perfect. It is disfigured by neither redundancy nor 
defect.. It must be obeyed in all things, without addi- 
tion, diminution or change. You can never depart 
from it in any particular, saibout incurring imminent 
ee peril. ‘fee % 
It. is, proper to remark in passing, that: our pedobap- 
tist brethren have yet another method of satisfying 
themselves that infant baptism is seripiwral. ‘When, as 
swe have seen, Dr. Woods stated that since “ “It: is a 
se ne case that there i is no ones see concerning 


Bee E-LIB ARY 
BLVDY NM 


eit 


< 


oa 
4 MASTER'S COLLEGE 


wh 


Pe eR, rN 


. 


4 : 


96 af INFANT BAPTISM, 1s 


<e . 
i Wet: ‘ 


or 


infant baptism. in our sacred writings,” and that ise 
quently, “The proof that it is a divine. ‘institution. 
must be made out in some other way,” you were per- 
haps, ata loss to conceive what that “other way” 
could be. By what process can any ordinance be 
proved “a divine institution,” in regard to which not 
a word is said “in our sacréd writings ? 2?" Nos gucn 
thing can be done. Since the Bible is our only” author-_ 
‘ity in_ all cases, the proof proposed is clearly impossi- 
ble. We will however hear Dr. Woods: He obtains 
his pr oof thus: :— It cannot with any g good reason, be 
denied, or doubted, that those christian writers who 
haye, in different ways, given testimony to the preva- 
lence of infant-baptism in the early ages of christiani- 
ty, are credible witnesses. Nor.can it be denied that 
they were under the best advantages to know whether 
the practice commenced in the times of the apostles, 
\On this subject, as they were not liable to mistake, so 
their testimony is entitled to full credit!”* This is the 


method. It is. by tradztion, youched by the Fathers, 


that protestant pedobaptists discover that the word of : 
God teaches ordinances which are confessedly not in 


" the word of God! These protestants will not allow 


vhe papists to prove, in the same way, the- -divine au- 
uhority for the invocation of saints, prayers. for the 
dead, the use of holy water, and=such like < institu- 
tions,” which they can do, readily: and fully. They 
are popish. — But this is protestant. _ If therefore the 


: Fathers say, this was an apostolic tradition, if was an. 


apostolic tradition! .And more; 2. this. matter, these 
same Fathers <« were not. liable 10; mistake He? eir au-, 


£ 
rt 


wigs * ‘Aptia Hodges*on Inf. Bap.; p. 89. | 


“a 


cE = WORD Epes o% 


thority therefore, though entirely “apajpeh lesan when, in: 


favor of the Catholics, is when infant baptism is to be 


proved scriptural, as good at least, as that of the apos-— 


tles, since of them no more can be said than that they Yy were 
not lidble to mistake! Who would have supposed that 
theological | professors could have been ‘cuilty of Tea- 
soning so absurdly ? The argument, it would seem, 


needs not a word of refutation. I would not stop to 


consider it, if Dr. Woods alone, relied upon such testi- 
monies. But it is a common pedobaptist resort. | 
will offer two or three examples. 

Dr. Miller deposes thus regarding tradition : aif The 
history of the ‘christian church from the apostolic age, 
furnishes an argument of aresistible Saree, in favor of 
the divine authority of infant baptism.” » “He proceeds 

—* Can the most incredulous reader who is not fast 


bound i in the fetters of invincible prejudice, hesitate to 
admit, first, that Augustine, and_ Pelagius, verily. be-. 


lieved. that infant baptism. had been the universal -prac- 
tice of the church from the days of the apostles ; and 
secondly, that situated, and informed as they were, it 


was «possible that they should be mistaken ? epee Te 
€ 


‘men flourished four hundred years. after Christ. Th 
word of God says not a word about infant baptism. 
This however does not disconcert Dr. Miller. Augus- 
tine, and Pelagius, say it was an apostolic tradition. 


And this he says, is “an argument. of irrescstible force, | 
in favor of the divine authority of infant baptism,” and 


by which every one “not fast bound in the fetters of 
invincible prejudice,” must be convinced. Bat. these 
Fathers also. declared that pang communion was. an 


Ing. Bap., PP. 21, wy 


28 % INFANT BAPTISM I8 


apostolic tradition. This Dr. Méller does not regard as 
of any importance... Their testimony makes infant bap- _ 
tism scriptural; but it has no such effect upon infant 
communion! Was Dy.-Miller. dreaming when he ut 

tered this logic? Richard Watson says :—“ The anti 

quity of infant baptism,” taken together with the other 

arguments, “ establish this practice of A church upor 
the strongest basis of scripture authority!” In another 
“place he says :—“That a practice which can be traced 
up to the very first. periods of the church, and has 
been till very modern times, its uncontradicted pr actice, 
should haye a lower author ity than apostolic usage, may 
~ be pronounced impossible.”* -'To these I will add the 
declaration of Mr. Hodges. He says :—“ Were there 
no other testimony but that of Irenzeus alone, it seems 
‘to me, every unbiased and conscientious man must hold 
himself bownd to continue infant baptism, were the 
scriptures even. silent on the subject.’’+ By these and 
such like arguments, our pedobaptist brethren essay to 
prove fafa. baptism scriptural, not by thes psorpiures, 
but by the Fathers. “It is a plain case,” say they, 
_ “that there is no. express pce respecting infant 
baptism in our sacred: writings ;” “yet we are assured 
that the traditions of early times, youched by the Fa- 
thers, ‘establish the divine authority of infant bap- 
tism with irresistible force.”- The Fathers say it was 
practised in the time. of the apostles, and “ it*was im- 
possible that. they should be mistaken!” It is not in- 
the scriptures, but it is undeniably scriptural ! And 
“these: men who ‘so contradict theme and abuse 


.? en | 
* 


* Theol. Instst, yol. 8, pp. 382, 397, 899. 
teInf. Baipt:,“p: 195.<*. ** 


er Ret BY THE WORD OF GoD. 29 


s 


_common sensé, are Protestants, who proclaim that “The 
‘word of God is a perfect rule of faith and practice,” 
and who clamorously j jom in the-ery, “The Bible, the 
Bible alone, is the religion of Protestants.” Yet. to-. 
tally aside from the Bible, and by tradition exclusively, 
they hold infant baptism. Thus they r renounce, in this 
case at least, their professed protestant principles, and 
return to the old and exploded dogmatism of popery- 
Their position is utterly Sincousisteh and cannot. be. 
maintained. They are in truth, compelled either to 
reject all the traditions, as they do all the teachings of 
the Fathers, which are not. sustained by the word of 
God, and. thus become Baptists; or, .as in this in- 
stance, they must receive them all irrespective of their — 
biblical character, and thus become. avowed Roman 
‘Catholics. However this may be, by the confession 
that the Bible does not im “tself teach it, they have 
surrendered thé argument to us,-and made the truth 
still more sure, that Infant yee iS naa aDOroe by 
the word of God. : 

How unlike the reasoning of Woods, and Miller, 
Watson, and the rest, on patristic tradition, is that of _ 
their brother pedobaptist, the great Neander! He 
says :—“ Not till so late a period.as—at least certainly » 
-not earlier than—Irenzeus appears a trace of infant 
baptism. That it first became recognized as an apos- 
tolic tradition in the course of. the third century, is evi- 
dence rather against, than for, the’ admission. of its 
apostolic origin, eSpecially since, in the spirit of the 
age when christianity appeared, there were. many ele- 
ments which must have been favorable to the introduc- 
tion of infant baptism.’ These were”: “the same ele- 

3* 


50. <a "INFANT BAPTISM 15 ” 


ments from which [afterwards] proceeded’ the notion 
of the magical effects of outward baptism ; the notion 
of its absolute hecessity for salvation; the notion which 
gave rise to the mythus that the. apostles baptized the 
Old Testament saints m Hades. How very much must 


“infant baptism have corresponded with such a tenden- 


cy, if it had» been favored by tradition! Ite might in- 


deed, be alleged on the other hand, that after infant 


baptism had fone been recognized as an ‘apostolical tradi- 
‘tion, many eile causes hinder ed its universal intro- 
duction, and the: same causes might’ still earlier stand 
in the way of its spread, although ; a practice sanctioned 


. by the. apostles. - But. these causes could not have 


ie 


acted in this manner in the apostolic. age, Tn later 
times we’ see the opposition between theory and _prac- 
tice, in this respect, actually coming forth. Besides, it 
is a different thing that a practice ‘wehien could not al- 
together deny. the marks of its later institution, ‘al- 


though at last recognized as of apostolic founding; 


could not for a length of time, pervade the life of the 
church ; and that a practice really proceeding from 


apostolic institution, and tradition, notwithstanding the 


3 


authority that introduced it, and the circumstances m 
its favor arising from the spir it of the times, should not 
yet [in the third century] have been generally adopted. 
And if we wish to ascertain. tony whom such an insti- 


ie tution was origiriated, we should say certainly ly, not ém- 


mediately from=Christ himself» Was: ‘it from the prim- 
itive church in Palestine, from an “injunction given by 
the earlier apostles? But among the Jewish christians 
circumcision was héld as a seal of the covenant, and 
hence’ they had so much less occasion to make use of 


UNSUPPORTED | ‘BY THE WORD oF GOD. el 


- another eesasion for oe ‘Giijien. Could. it ere 
been “Paul, who. first ‘among heathen christians: intro- 
duced this alteration in the use of baptism? «But this 
would agree least of all with the peculiar christian 
characteristics: of this apostle. He who ‘says of him- 
self that Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach 
the gospel; he who always kept his eye fixed on one 
thing, justification by faith, and so carefully avoided 
every thing which could give & handle or support to 
the notion of a justification by outward things ; how 
could. he have set. up infant baptism ‘against the cireum- 
cision that continued to be pradiied by the Jewish 
christians ?°. In “this case the dispute ‘carried on. with 
- the Judaizing party, on the necessity of. circumcision, 
would easily 1 have given an opportunity of introducing 
this. substitute into: the controversy, fit had really ex 
-isted. The evidence afising from si/ence on this topic: 
has therefore the greater weight.”* Thus this distin- 
guished scholar, and Ecclesiastical Historian, disposes 
of the question about which others are* so confident, 
» whether infant baptism ‘was really an apostolical tradi- 
ition, “He fully proves the whole to be an ‘utter fiction, ‘i 
not less pross than that which insisted that, “ the apos- 
_ tles baptized the Old Testament saints in Hades.” ’ 
-‘There-is still onevother argument however, which is . 
supposed by many, to be sufficient to sustain infant 
Se ia upon a. scriptural. basis, as “a divine institu- 
tion.” Iam told Zé és not forbidden inthe word op. 
God. It may therefore be practised. Not forbidden, 
forsooth!. Infant baptism not. forbidden in the word of 
God?! It may therefore, be practised! And is this 


~ * Church History. On baptism. 


%~ . Pi oF 


32. INFANT PARTIOM Is . 


» eet 4 ¥' Sara? 


the fashion it your ‘argument ? Upon this” principle 
what may you not do? You are obliged to baptize all 
to whom God has commanded the ordinance to be ad- 
ministered ; and you may also baptize all others whose. 
baptism he has not expressly forbidden !/ What ‘shall 
I say of «a proposition so monstrous ? Its folly can be 
concealed from no one, who will think for.a single mo- 
ment on the subject. Need I enter into its for ‘mal- ref. 
utation? This is surely unnecessary. Yet, since the 
argument is so. easy and plain, it- may be as well. to: 
sprove that infant baptism is in truth, elf, pre oni 
ed by the word of God. ; . 

It is prohibited, in the first place, by the fact that it is 
dausbenined in the sacred records; as a divine institu- 
‘tion. The great christian axiom which teaches ‘that 
“The word of’ God is a perfect rule of faith and prac- 

. tice,” is, as we have seen, adopted by every” protestant. 
denomination * ‘upon the face of the earth. We have} 
besides: ‘this, seen that it is fully sustained by the. 
teachings of divine-revelation, and that no other prinei- 
ple in religién, can be true in theory,-or safe in prac- 
tice. Whatever God has revealed, we aré bound’ to 
receive in the love of it, and to obey with reverence, . 
-and fidelity, without addition, diminution, or change. , 
‘Infant baptism, we have clearly seen,-is not taught in 
the Bible. Its friends and, advocates confess that it 
does not there. appear, and nih ate fers they vainly seek 
to sustain it by tradition, and the authority of early 
Christian Fathers. Is all this true? Is the word of 
God not a perfect rule of faith and practice ? © Are 
you, as taught by Moses and. Paul, permitted to add 
any thing to the commandments of God, or to diminish 


ee o . 
UNSUPPORTED BY THE WORD OF GoD. 33 


aught from them? Dare you receive any detec as 
an article of faith, or practise any rite as a christian 
ordinance, not taught, and instituted by Jehovah? To 
these inquiries who will venture an affirmative answer? 
No one, surely. Is infant, baptism directly enjoined in 
the word of God? It confessedly i is not. Then it is 
not by the word of God allowed. It is. unlawful. 
And that which cannot be allowed, because it is not 
lawful, is clearly prohibited.” Thus God ‘has, in his 
word, clearly prohibited infant baptism. 
'* Infant baptism is prohibited, secondly, by the apos- 
tolic commission. This is the “law of baptism” in- 
stituted by Jesus Christ himself, and “the only law,” 
as Baxter justly observes, “he ever ordained on the 
subject.” As recorded by Mark, it has the following 
reading :— “Go ye into all the world, and preach the gos- 
pel to ve ery creature. He that believeth, and is bap- 
tized, shal 1] wed.” ‘This statute is perfectly simple 
Bia te ie eae 
and persp uous. ‘It ordains first, that the gospel shall 
be preached ; secondly, that it shall be preached to every 
creature ; thirdly, that all those who believe the- gospel 
shall be ‘baptized ; and fourthly, it promises that’ those 
“who so believe, and are baptized, shall be saved. These 
are all positive declarations. Every positive necessarily 
has. its negative. ~ And does not every one know that 
the’ requirement of the positive is, as a general rule, the 
prohibition of the negative? When God comrade 
you to do a specified thing, the command embraces 
that particular thing only ; mil all that is not embra- 
ced is, by the very terms of the order, necessarily. ex- 
cluded: Especially is forbidden whatever is inconsist- 
ent with: the faithful performance of the duty enjoined. 


fine lary Kpalie am “LNA RY 


34 _ -JNFANT BAPTISM Ie. . 


All these are self-evident traths. Let them be applied 
to the law of baptism as contained.in the commission. 
Only those are permitted to preach whovare called of 
God to the work ; they are not allowed to- preach, as 
coming from’ Christ, any; thing but the gospel; and 
those, and those alone, who Binns the gospel, they are 
required to baptize. The persons to be baptized are 
minutely -described. They are. believers. Believers 
therefore, and believers only, are to: be baptized. A 
law to baptize believers is necessarily confined in its ad- 
ministration to believers. It-embraces no others. To. - 
baptize any others is a violation of the law. It is un- 
lawful. It is prohibited. Infants are not believers. 
The baptism of infants supersedes and prevents the 
baptism of believers, and is therefore inconsistent with 
a faithful compliance with.the law. Every violation of 
the law is unlawful, and consequently prohibited. B § 
fant baptism is a violation of the law; is therefe 
unlawful ; and’ consequently by. the law itself, volea 
prohibited. . 2 
Infant baptism, thirdly, i is prohibited, fe ae very na’ 

ture and design of baptism. This ordinance was insti- 
tuted and enjoined as the form in which you publicly. 
profess your faith in Christ, and devote yourself to his 
service. Paul so teaches when he says, “ As many. of 
you as have been baptized into. Christ have put’on 
Christ.” Episcopalians and Methodists consent to this 
truth when they concur in the declaration that it “is a 
sign of profession, and a mark of difference, whereby 
christians are distinguished- from atl ers that are not. 
baptized.”* Presbyterians and Congregationalists, of 


* Arts. of Rel., Art. 17. 


bd 
UNSUPPORTED BY THE WORD OF GOD. 35 


all. classes, regard‘it as ‘“ Not only for the solemn ad- 
mission. of the party baptized into the visible church, 
but also,” of “his giving up unto God, through Jesus 
Christ, to walk in newness. of life.”* In this great 
fact, therefore, all parties are in theory agreed. I now 
submit the inquiry whether such a profession of. faith, 
and devotion to Christ,.as baptism expresses, must not 
necessarily be a voluntary and intelligent act, on the 
part of the baptized? To.me no fact appears more 
certain. To those who are incapable of such voluntary 
and intelligent action, baptism can never be administer- 
ed, Infants cannot profess their faith, even if they 
had any faith to profess. They cannot devote them- 
selves to Christ. By the very nature of the ordi- 
nance therefore, since they are incapable of compli- 
ance with its demands, they cannot be baptized. Any 
baptism 1 which is unreasonable and inconsistent, be- 
cause it does ‘not embrace the design, nor express the 
sense. of the ‘ordinance, i is unlawful, and therefore pro- 
hibited. ‘Infant baptism is unreasonable and inconsist- 
‘ent, because it does not.erabrace the design, nor ex- 
press the sense of the ordinance. It is therefore un- 
lawful. It is prohibited. hs 
It must now, I think, be evident to every unpreju- 
diced mind that infant baptism i is by the wort of God 
actually prohibited. It is prohibited by the fact that 


it is unrecognized in the sacred records, as a divine in- 


stitution ; it is prohibited by the terms of the apostolic 
commission ; and it is prohibited by the vem nature 
and design of baptism. 

My proposition is thus fully established. We have 


* West. Conf., chap. 28, sects 1.” 


2 


36 _ INFANT BAPTISM 18 


seen that “Infant baptism is not supported by the 
word of God,” because it is not found to be instituted, 
or in any manner ‘authorized in the inspired records ; 
because the different sects who: imagine that they find 
it there, prove the contrary by their mutual refutation 
of each other; because the most pious and learned 
‘among pedobaptists themselves, confess it is not direct- 
ly taught in the sacred writings; because the great 
christian axiom whieh teaches that the divine word is 
our sole authority in religion, does not permit us to re- 
ceive as scriptural what is not recognized in the scrip- 
tures ; because the attempt to make it a divine institu- 
tion by the testimony of the Fathers, through the 
medium of tradition, is a miserable failure ; and be- 
cause it is really and distinctly forbidden in the word 
of God. Infant baptism: is, in truth, therefore, -no 
baptism at all. God in his word, does not recognize 
it as baptism. It never can be recognized as baptism 
by the people of God. It is exclusively an institution 
of men foisted surreptitiously into the religion of Christ. 
It is therefore a most appalling evil. Some of the 
forms and. bearings of this evil may now not improperly 
be considered. ARS TERE Se alleen ly 
It betrays ministers into most fearful’ presumption. 
When an infant is baptized the minister performs the 
rite professedly, in the name, and by the authority of 
Jesus Christ! But Jesus Christ never authorized any sth | 
thing! On the contrary, he has discountenanced and 
forbidden it! What’ then, shall be ‘said of the act? 
What magistrate in civil society won venture, under 
pretence of law, to do a thing, and especially in his of- 
ficial capacity, for the sanction of which no law could 


il 
UNSUPPORTED BY THE WORD OF Gop. 87 


be’ produced, and which by existing’ laws, according to 
any reasonable interpretation, is plainly prohibited ? 
Such an officer would act most. presumptuously. He 
would violate his trust. In what well-regulated com- 
munity would his administration long ie endured ? 
And ‘shall ministers of religion thus conduct them- 
selves, and that too without compunction, and without 
rebuke 2 ? In ‘this unauthorized and prohibited cere- 
mony of infant baptism, shall they not only meet no 
discountenance, but. on the contrary be ‘sustained, and 
defended ? How can'a conscientious servant of Christ 
occupy a position so revolting, and abhorrent ? 

But. ministers are. not aloue concerned inthis evil. 
Infant baptism must create in the minds of the people 
generally, who are under its influence, a want of proper 
respect for the word of God. The habit of acting 
without law, and in opposition to law, leads to this. re- 
sult inevitably. is This truth is so obvious that no argu- 
ment is needed in its support. May men do, under 
pretence of law, the most important acts for which no 
law can be produced ? May. they indeed, do all these 
things, and be sustained in them, even in opposition to 
law ? 9 How long then, willit be»to them a matter of 
any special concern what the law may dar They 
are not-obliged to conform to its demands ey may do 
what they please with impunity, without regard to law! 
Do they any longer yield a due respect to the law? —Do 
they feel for it any special deference? Assuredly they 
do not. In civil society this is true, and it is pre-emi-" 
nently true ‘in reli igion. “Infant baptism.necessarily de- 
stroys respect for the authority of the word of God. - 

Ther evil is still more striking in the fact, that it is a 

4 


& 


: om 
38 INFANT BAPTISM IS 
bold. attempt to perfect that which-it is vainly concelv- 
ed God has left imperfect. It is greatly»more criminal 
to do in the name of Jesus Christ, what he has - not 
commanded, than it is not to do what he has com- 
manded, since when you fall short you thereby confess 
the difficulty of obedience, but when you go beyond, 
you impugn his wisdom. In the former case you ac- 
knowledge your own deplorable weakness. In ‘the lat- 
ter, atid especially when you claim what. he has not 
authorized or permitted as a part of his religion, you 


madly charge him with defectiveness, and attempt by 


additions of your own, to maké his government more 
complete. Why did’ he not. ordain infant baptism ? 
Evidently because he did hot design that his’ religion 
should embrace any such ordinance. ~You have’ dis- 
covered that it is necessary, and have therefore added 
it! You saw that it was demanded to make God’s ap- 
pointments - complete ! You know better than Jeho- 
vah, what is requisite to give ‘perfection ‘to his _re- 
ligion ! ; x 

Who, i in view" of all these facts, can avid the con- 
clusion that infant baptism ‘is a sin against God? 
What is sin? Is it not any thought, word, action, 
omission, or desire contrary to the law of God?* “Sin 
is the transgression of the law.”+ Infant baptism is 
not according to the law of God. It is a violation of 


the law of God. It is the transgression of the law 


of God. Therefore infant baptism is a sin against 

God. seen TY a 
These are some of the forms in 

nance not instituted, nor sanctioned 


** Crudin on the Word. , ena bJobn: iii 4. 


We ¢ 


UNSUPPORTED BY THE WORD OF GoD. 39 


the evil of infant baptism is developed. Its practice 
betrays ministers into fearful presumption ; it-creates a 
want of respect for the divine law ; it charges imper- 
fection upon the institutions of Messiah ; and it is a sin 
against God: Infant baptism is unsupported by the 
word of God. It is therefore a great and fearful evil. 
In conclusion permit me to entreat for these facts 
vid arguments, your patient, unbiased, and prayerful 
consideration. You fervently desiregto glorify God, 
and in-all things to do his will. You have no wish to 
depart in any respect from the divine law. You would 
-not encumber religion, much less pollute it, with any - 
doctrines, or observances, not sanctioned from on high. 
You must therefore, remove infant baptism from its 
place in your theological system. While it remains 
there, it will continue to produce its natural fruits. Its 
extirpation only, can relieve you from its inherent evil. 
.Humbly receive, and diligently practice the religion of 
Christ, guided in all things, exclusively by his most 
holy word, and infant baptism will be known no more. 
To the ascertained will of our Heavenly Father meekly 
submit yourself. Upon this principle alone is it possi- 
ble for you to “keep the commandments of the Lord 
your God which he commanded you.” “Behold to 
obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the 
fat of rams.” But “rebellion is as the sin of witch- 
emft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.” 


CHAPTER ie 


INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE ITs DEFENCE 
LEADS TO MOST INJURIOUS PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD 
OF GOD. & . 


The general principle; instances in Glinctestion, from the spaces commis- 
sion; from Peter’s sermon; from Paul’s instructions to the Corinthians ; 5 
from Christ’s blessing the children ; forms of the evil 


THE defence of infant bape, unsustained as it 1s by 
divine authority, necessarily leads to most tyurious per- 
versions of the word ef God. The same may be said 
also, of évery other departure from truth, to support 
which a resort is had to the sacred record. The ew 
resulting will of. course, be in proportion to the magni- 
tude, and peculiar bearing, of the error sought to be 
established. Infant baptism is not a mere ceremony, 
which when performed, ceases to be of any further im- 
portance. Considered in itself, it may indeed seem of 
little consequence. It is not however thus isolated. 
Its relations, and influences extend themselves into ev- 
ery department of christianity. It is the process by 
which the churches which practise it, receive their en- 
tire membership, and must therefore enstamp upon 
them all, its own peculiar character. It leads to insid- 
ious and hurtful expositions of scripture _ IMposes upon — 
the people false doctrines ; subverts ‘the true ecclesias- 
tical polity; qcorrupts the spirit of religion ; Vitiates . 


INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO, ETC. 4), 


christian intercourse ; weakens the power of the gos- 
pel; and hinders the conversion, and salvation of men. 
Like an error in the beginning of a mathematical calcu- 
lation, it runs through the whole process, continually 
increasing in re ptude as it advances, until every part 
of it is involved in hopeless confusion. How then, can 
infant baptism be. taught and defended without most 
injurious perversions of the word of God ? 

In proof of the proposition now before. you, I will 
point you to appropriate examples. But these are so 
numerous that I know not where to begin. A proper 
exposition of them all would require a volume. In the 
space allowed to this chapter it is not practicable to do 
more than briefly, to refer to a few instances. These, 
however, of themselves, will be sufficient to establish 
the truth of the proposition now before us. 

The apostolic commission, which I had occasion in 
the preceding chapter to recite, has been confidently 
claimed as a law for the baptism of infants. “Go ye 
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever 
IT have commanded you; and lo I am with you alway, 
even unto the end of the world.” . This is the version 
of Matthew. That of Mark is as follows: ‘And he 
said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach 
the gospel to.every creature: He that believeth, and 
is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not 
shall _be damned. ” How plain! How perspicuous! 
How compre ei sive ! To mistake its sense would 
1 ossible. The solemn obligations thus 
imposed, are to be faithfully and always obeyed by 

ae 


49 INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO 


both the teachers, and the taught. And let it not. be 
forgotten that the several parts of the commission 
are to be observed in the order in which they are en- 
joined, The order is plainly as imperative as the 
commands themselves, A violation of the order is in- 
deed a violation of the commands. This interpreta- 
tion so evidently correct, is not peculiar to bee os 
Pedobaptists also give: it their concurrence. Baxter, 
for example, says :— This is not like some occasional 
historical mention of baptism, but is the very commis- 
sion of Christ to his apostles, and purposely expresseth 
their several works in their several places and order.” 
«To contemn this order, is to renounce all rules of or- 
der ; for where can we.expect to find it if not here ?”’* 
Each duty in the. commission must therefore be ob- 
served in the order in which. it is enjoined. Thus far, 
all is simple and obvious. ‘The «commission is ‘evi- 
dently, as before seen, a law to baptize believers, and 
believers only. . 

By what kind of process, we mow inquire, can it be 
possibly made to appear, that this law to baptize be- 
lievers is @ law to baptize infants? Pedobaptists shall 
themselves answer, and in their own words. “In this 
commission to his apostles,” says Dr. Worcester, “his 
direction was that all nations should be baptized, and 
children constitute a part of all nations ;” therefore 
children are to be baptized.t Dr. John Edwards re- 
marks :—‘ This general commission includes all partic: 
ulars. Go baptize all nations, is as much, and as 
full, as if Christ had said, Go baptize all, men, women, 


* Disp, of Rights to Sacr., + PP. 91-149, 150. 
+ Letters on Bap., p. 116. 


PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD. 43 


and children.”* Matthew ‘Henry observes :—* If it 
‘be the will and command of the Lord Jesus that all 
nations ‘should. be discipled by baptism, and children, 
a part of all nations, are not excepted, then children 
are to be discipled, by baptism.’’+. These are fair ex- 
amples of their teaching, and of the manner in which 
they bring infant baptism into the commission of Christ 
to his apostles. 

Consider these expositions, attentively. How eyi- 
dent the perversions they contain! “Were the apostles 
directed to baptize all nations without respect to moral 
character, or any other religious qualifications? Surely 
te Is the commission a command in other words, 

“baptize all, men, women, and children?” Pre- 
; ao claim! If infants are not in the commission 
“excepted” in express terms from baptism, are they 
therefore to be baptized? How surprising the pre- 
tension! Is any one ever “ discipled by baptism ?” 
To disciple is to teach. To teach is one thing. To 
baptize is another. They are not the same thing. To 
pretend then, that any one is “discipled by baptism” 
is nonsense. Here we have four perversions of this 
portion of the word of God, all palpable, and all made 
evidently for no other reason than to defend infant 
baptism. When great and good men, such as these, 
and the thousands of others who agree with them, 
thus interpret the commission, we cannot but lament 
the blindness of mind into which this spe error 
has betrayed them. 

One striking instance is now before you of the per- 
version of the word of God, made for the sake of de- 


* Theol. Ref, vol. i., p. 568. t Treat. on Bapt., p. 114. 


44 . INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO 


fending infant baptism. Take if-you please, another. 
In a learned and very elaborate work recently, publish- 
ed, by a distinguished clergyman of the Episcopal 
church, we have: the following passage :—“ The chief 
scripture ground upon, which it [infant baptism] _ is 
placed, is the text, ‘The promise is unto you, @ d 
your children.’—Acts ii, 39. And one of its best 
supports is St. Paul’s statement that the children of a 
believing parent: are’ in a certain sense holy.—1 Cor. 
vil., 14.”*. “We have here therefore, as claimed by pe- 
dobaptists themselves, the two passages which are, the 
one their “chief séripture ground” for infant baptism, 
and the other “its best support.” — We will therefore, 
briefly examine them both, and see to what extent 
they have been perverted for the defence of the ule . 
in question. 

“The promise is ‘to you, and to your children.’’} 
This text we are told, is “ the chief scripture ground 
upon which infant baptism is placed.” That you may 
understand it perfectly, I will refresh your memory 
with the circumstances under which this inspired decla- 
ration occurred. -It was uttered by Peter, in Jerusa- 
lem, during the ever memorable pentecost. Multitudes 
had on that day, been called together by “the signs, 
and wonders, and miracles” meaultine from the fulfil- 
ment of the promise, of God in the gift of the Holy 
Ghost. This intrepid apostle seized the occasion to 
preach Christ to the people. His sermon evinced 
great. power, and was attended with singular success, 
Large numbers were convicted of sin, and in the an- 
ae of their heart cried out :-—“ What shall we do 2” 


* Goode on Bapt., p. 81. + Acts ii, 89. 


. PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD OF'GOD. 45 


In the strictest consonance with the apostolic commis- 
sion, and almost in its very words; he answered :— 
“Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the 
“name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye 
1 receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.» For the 
promise is to you, and to your children, and to all 
that are afar off, even as many ds the Lord our, God 

- shall call.” gj ie ; 
~ What, I now inquire, was the promese of which the 
apostle here spoke? It was undoubtedly, the gift of: 
the Holy Ghost. Peter himself so declares. “This is. 
that which was spoken of by the prophet Joel :* And 
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will 
* pour out of my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons 
and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young 
men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream 
dreams ; and.on my servants, and on my handmaidens 
I will pour out in those days of my spirit.” -“ And it 
shall come to pass.that whosoever shall call on the 
name of the Lord shall be saved.”} It. is decided 
therefore that the promise was the Holy Ghost, whose 
influences as predicted by Joel especially, were at that 
moment seen so conspicuously among the people. This 

_ truth is indubitable. +.§ c 
To whom, 1 next ask, was this promise made? 
Peter answers, “To you Jews, and to your children, 
and to all that are afar of.’ .The words of the prom- 
ise’ in Joel, recited by Peter, are; ‘lo you Jews, and to 
“your *sons and your daughters.” By “children” 
therefore, the apostle means “sons and daughters,” ox 
in general terms, posterity.{ The gentile nations are in 
* Joel ii, 28-82. + Acts li., 16-21. _ t rexva. ° 


46 ‘ INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO 


other places of | the ‘scriptures spoken of as “ them that 
are afar off. ”* They are, therefore, the persons al- 
luded to in that form of language. But was it the - 
promise of God that ald or any of these classes of per- 
sons, who in reality included “all flesh,” should, re- 
ceive the Holy Ghost in the times of Messiah—* the 
last_ days’? unconditionally ? _ No one -will surely 

maintain® that it was, and especially since these very 

conditions were explicitly stated. They were according 
‘to Joel, that the persons in question should ‘call on. 
the name of the Lord.” Peter instructs us that by 
calling on the name of the Lord is implied, that they 
should “ repent, and be baptized in the name of the 
Lord Jesus.” The promzse was to be fulfilled to all 
those who should: comply with thése conditions, and to 
none others. Jf you Jews repent of your sins, and by 
baptism profess your faith m our. Lord Jesus Christ, 
you shall. receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the 
promise is to you. Jf your “children,” or as Joel 
calls them, ‘your sons and your daughters,” repent of 
their sins, and by baptism profess their faith in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, they shall receive the gift .of. the 
Holy Ghost, for the promise is to your children. Nor 
are these privileges and blessings to be confined to your 
nation. ia are to be petended to “them that are 
afar off,” to “all flesh,” to “every creature,” to “all” 
nations,” i as many as the Lord our God shall call by 
his gospel, and who shall repent and be baptized, no 
matter, to what people they belong. They also shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, Sor the promise ts 
to. them. « To that anxious multitude how full of en- 
couragement was this precious gospel message! It fell 


PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD. 47 


upon their hearts like gentle. showers upon the parched 
earth. Hope sprang up in the bosoms: of about three 
thousand, who “ gladly received the word.” They be- 
lieved it ; they acted upon it; they became the sub- 
jects of renewing grace, and received the Holy Ghost, 
according to the promise of God. 

Thus, briefly, I, have submitted the sense of the 
passage, and that itis the true sense it seems to me 
impossible to doubt. In what part of it is infant bap- 
tism taught’? Not the remotest reference is found to 
any such thing. ‘Yet ‘say our friends, “ It is the chief 
scripture ground for infant. baptism! How is it pos- 
sible for them to make good this assertion? It can- 
not be done. But. you shall hear their arguments. 
They shall speak for themselves. | Mr. Henry gives the 
meaning of this passage as, follows. Peter, he as- 
serts, intends to. say, in other words, to the people :— 
“Your children shall have, as they have had, an in- 
terest. in the covenant, and a title to the external seal 
of it. Come over to Christ to receive those inestima- 
ble benefits ; for the promise of the remission of sins, 
and the gift of the Holy Ghost, is to you, and to your 
children.” “When God took Abraham into covenant 
he said, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed ;— 
Gen. xvii, 7--and accordingly every Israelite had 
“his son circumcised at eight days old. Now it is 
proper for ‘an Israelite, when he is by baptism to 
come into a new dispensation of this covenant, to 
ask, What shall I do with my children? Must they 
be thrown out, or taken in with me? Takew in, 
says. Peter, by all means; for the promise, the 
great. promise of God’s ‘beng to you a God, is 


® 


48 INFANT BAPTISM rs, 


as much to you and your gdh now, as ever. it 
was.””* | 

Who that possesses any tolerable ensibibage of the 
scriptures could readily imagine that learned and good 
men would venture this as the sense of the passage in 
question ? 9 It is.crowded in nearly ever 4 ‘line, with ab-. 
surdities and perversions. Let-them be separately, and 
more particularly designated. 

In the first place, the representation that the word. 
“children” in the passage means the babes of ‘those 
then present is absurd for three reasons ; first, because 
Joel says they were their sons and their daughters, who 
should then prophesy; and Peter did not imtend to 
contradict Joel: secondly, because their babes could 
not fulfil the conditions upon which the promise Was 
made: and thirdly, because of the nature of the prom- 
ise itself, which was that they should receive the gift 
of Ae Holy Ghost, and prophesy. The word “chal- 
dren” is unquestionably used by Peter, in the sense of 
posterity simply. This fact is so obvious that it is’ 
frankly conceded by some of the best biblical critics 
among the pedobaptists themselves. Dr. Whitby says: 

=e These words will not prove a right of infants to 
receive baptism, the promise here being’ that of the | 
Holy Ghost mentioned in verses 16, 17, 18, and so re- 
lating only to the times of the miraculous effusions of 
the Holy Ghost, and to those persons who by age were 
capable of these extraordinary gifts.”+ Limborch of 
Amsterdam, says :—“ By children the apostle under- 
stands not infants, ‘but posterity.” “Whence it ap- 
pears that the argument which is commonly taken 


* Comm. in loco. + Annot. in loco. * 


PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD. 49 


from this passage for the baptism of infants is of no 
force, ‘and: good for, nothing.”* With these distin- 
guished. interpreters agree Doddfidere; Hammond, and 
many others. ..To:represent, Peter therefore, as refer- 
ring to infant children, and inculcating their baptism, is 
a most injurious perversion of the noid of God. 

. A second perversion, is found.in the implication that 
im faith and: baptism of their parents, were the con- 


ditions upon which their’ infant children were to re- , 


ceive the Holy Ghost, and the remission of sins. This 
passage teaches no such thing. Our pedobaptist breth- 
ren however represent Peter. as’ saying in other words, 


to the Jews there under conviction,of sin, and whom ~ 


they, singularly. enough, suppose to be- inquiring, 
“What must I do with my children ;” “ Come over to 
Christ to receive these inestimable ‘benefits ; for the 
promise of the remission of sins, and the gift of the 
Holy Ghost, is to you and to your children.” Do you 
joi the church of Christ, and your children, by virtue 
of their relation ‘to you, shall be entitled to the same 
blessings you receive. They shall share with you ev- 
ery gospel blessing, and especially “the remission of — 
sins, and the gift = the Holy Ghost.” Do not hesi- 
tate therefore ; “come over to Chxist.” What a mon- 
strous ‘perversion ! 

“A third perversion of this passage is committed. 


Ga pedobaptist brethren insist that the promise in _ 
question, relates to the blessings pledged in the cove-_ 


nant with Abraham. The promise as stated by Peter, 
was the gift of the Holy. Ghost to believers. But 
their version is wholly different. They satin the 


aS + Comm, in loco. 
, § 


4 


50 - INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO ~ 


apostle as saying to the. Jews: :-—* Your ohidnai [in- 
fants} shall [still] have, as they have had, an interest 
in the covenant [vata Asbaetigral and a title to the ex- 
ternal seal of it,” all which the Surely. gives to You, 
and consequently to them! ‘ 

This short passage is subjected;to a foot perver- 
sion. They maintain that the gospel covenant is a con- 
tinuance of the- covenant of circumcision! Their. Jan- 
guage is, ‘“ When God took»Abraham into covenant, 
he said, I will. be a God to thee, and to thy ‘seed ;— 
Gen. xvii., 7—and-accordingly every Israelite had his. 
son circumcised at. eight days old. Now it is proper 
for an Israelite when L is to enter into a new dispensa: 
tion of this covenant, to ask, What must be done with 
my children?” And*is the gospel. a new dispensation 
of this covenant that God made. with Abraham, ac- 
* cording to which -“‘ every Israelite had his-son circum: . 
cised at eight days old?” The gospel a new dispensa- 
tion of ‘aie. covenant of circumcision! And ‘does Peter 
so teach? No such thing appears, ¢ elther in this text, 

or elsewhere. 

The fifth perversion ms this passage, and the last I - 
shall EBERUOD: is the claim that Peter means by ¢ the 
promise,” that infants .are to be baptized, receive the 
Holy Ghost, and be taken into the church. “An Is- 
raélite” is represented as inguiring, If I “come over 
to Christ,” and unite with this gospel church of yours, 
“What must be’ done with my children? Must they 
be thrown ‘out, or taken in with me?” To. this. they 
represent the passage as answering :—* Taken in, says 
Peter, by all means ; for the promise, that great prom- 
bs ‘of God’s being to youa. God, is as much ‘to you 


oe eee ee 
’ 


ee a? : : 
PERVERSIONS' OF THE WORD OF GOD. 51 


and your. children ow, as ever it was.”-. How mani~ 
fest a. perversion is here! Bere are good men 
blinded, “so blinded by infant baptism, that they it 
seems, really. believe that Peter teaches what they. rep- 
resent. in the passage ! 
Having thus disposed of “the shies scripture ground, 
upon which it: is placed,” and found that no. allusion 
whateveris made in it to infant baptism, we now turn 
to the other passage, which is, “one of its best sup- 
ports.” This.“ is Sti Paul’s statement that the chil 
_ dren of a believing parent are in.a certain sense holy.” 

In ‘what sense are they holy? To comprehend the 

- whole matter perfectly, let us turn to the sacred rec- » 
ord, and together with its_ context, read carefully the 
entire’ passage. y Now concerning the things whereof 
ye wrote unto me,” says Paul, pal proceeding, he gave 
various instructions to the Corinthians oe oe mar- 
riage, and domestic duties. Among other things he 
says’: “ Let not the wife depart feo her husbanee but 
if she depart let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled 
to. her. husband; and let not the husband put away his 
‘ wife.” sf If “any: brother hath a wife that believeth not, 

and she be pleased to. dwell with him, let him not put — 
her away. And the woman which hath a husband that 
believeth not, and if ‘he be pleased to dwell with her, let 

; her. not leave him. For the unbelieving husband is sanc- 
tified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified 
by ‘the husband ; else were your children unclean, but now 
are they holy. But if the unbelieving depart let him de- 

‘ part. A brother, or a sister, is not in bondage i in such. 
cases ; but-God hath called us. to peace. For what 
knowest thou, Oo em whether thou shalt save thy ae 


* 


52 |S INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO. 


band ?. Or what ‘knowest thou, O man, whether thou 
shalt save thy wife? - But as God hath distributed to- 
every man, as the Lord hath*called every one, so let him 
walk, And so ordain I in all the churches. aad 

We will here pause if you please, until we have as- 
certained. definitely, the. true sense of this interesting 
portion of divine truth, Paul is without doubt, in- 
structing the Corinthians regarding their conjugal, do- 
mestic, and social relations. . This fact no one ean ration- 
ally question. On these topics they needed to be en- 
lightened, since they were, evidently disposed to go 
astray. By some. means, probably the’ instructions. 4 
Judaizing teachers among them, he church had, 
seems, become agitated ith the question whether. Es 
old Jewish law which required Israel to regard all gen- 
tiles as unclean, and. their touch polluting, which in a 
word prohibited all familiar intercourse with them, 
ought not to govern christians in their relations with 
unbelievers. Should not the church regard all who are. 
not members as unclean to them in the same sense that 
gentiles were formerly looked upon as unclean to Jews ? 
To this opinion the brethren of Corinth appear to have 
strongly inclined. They soon saw; however, that such a 
rule of intercourse if adopted among ‘them, must be at- 
tended with the gravest consequences, ‘It would not 
only sever their social and domestic relations, but would 
actually break up and destioy their families, since some 
of them were marriéd to unbelievers, from whom of. 
course, they must instantly separate. That this was 
the true state of the case, and the actual question sub- © 
mitted Py them to the apostle, is so plain, from his’ 


-*'1- Cor, Vii. 1-17." 


& 


ef OF THE WORD OF GoD. 53 


answer alone, that it is confessed by some of the pe- 
dobaptist commentators. and ‘divines themselves, Even 
Henry, for instance, could not avoid seeing it. He 
says :——“ They thought that (the unconverted members 
of their families) would be common, or unclean, in the 
same sense as heathens in general were styled in the 
apostle’s vision. 2% >Dr. -Muallery notwithstanding his 
_ prejudices, is still more full.. He says :— It appears 
that among the Corinthians to whom the apostle wrote, 
there were many cases of professing christians being 
united by the marriage tie with pagans ; the former 
being perhaps converted after marriage, or being so un- 


wise as after conversion deliberately to, form this “une- 
qual: and. unhappy connection. What wastobedeemed 
of such marriages seems to have been the grave ques-- 


tion submitted to this inspired teacher.”+ Upon this 
point therefore, we are certainly right. 
' These were the perplexing cikcitenttincs under which 
they wrote to Paul for advice.. He answered them in 
-substance, that the old Jewish law regulating inter- 
course with gentiles, was not -applicable to them, not 
‘only because. the ceremonial dispensation to which it 
exclusively belonged had passed away, but also because 
in their case, (and the same was true of all other church- 
es,) its observance was impracticable. Any attempts 
_ to enforce it, must have been attended with the most 
disastrous consequences., The christians, unlike the 
Jews, lived, and must live, in the midst of unbelievers, 
: Many of ‘them were connected with je. es and 
were a part of them. With such person they could 
not. avoid contact, and associatiogg: If such separation 


* Comm. in loco. OSES RY Miller, Bapt., PP. 17-20, 


a- 


54 INFANT BAPTISM LEADS 10 


was, necessary to preserve their iinet? purity, then 
to retain it they “must needs go out of the world.” 
But especially some of them: were married. to unbe- 
lievers, and if this abrogated Jewish law. was. to be en- 
forced all such husbands and ‘wives must part from 
each other. But this was not demanded by the gospel, 
and ought not to take place, unless. the temper of the 
tabelientig party should render it necessar y. > “Tf-dny , ~ 
brother hath a wife that believeth: not, and she be 
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her. away. 
And the woman which hath a husband that believeth 
- not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not 
leave him.” -‘ But-if the unbelieving depart, let him. 
depart. A brother or, a sister is not under bondage in 
such cases; but God hath called us to. peace.”  Be- 
lievers and unbelievers who are husband and wife, may 
lawfully, and ought to continue to dwell together. No 
such rule of ceremonial holiness, and inches ‘ob- 
tains under the. gospel as that which characterized the 
Mosaic economy. The marriage tie makes the parties, 
though it unite a believer with an unbeliever; holy to, 
each other. The unbelieving. husband is not unclean $0 
that the believing wife may not lawfully dwell with’ 
him. ‘The unbelieving wife i8 not» wnclean so. that the 
believing husband may not lawfully dwell. with her.. 
Why then separate? “Let theni remain together. And . 
for their’ continued 0 union there is yet another most im- 
portant reason. God may perhaps, bless the efforts of 
the believing, to the conversion and ‘salvation of the , 
unbelieving } party. ° : 
- And yet more. ist the believing husband or, wife 
separate from the unbelieving, for the reasons alleged ? 


« 
— ® 


: 


Sad ail 


*taessions OF THE WORD OF GOD. 5D 


Then it -will'follow that, for the very same reasons, the 
believing ‘parent must also separate from his own chil- 
dren, since they also are not believers! Indeed, not a 
member of the church, if separ ation from all unbeliev- 
‘ers is necéssary to preserve his. christian purity, must 
touch his own children, eat with them, or associate 


-with them. The believing parent occupies, in this re- 


spect, precisely the same relation to his child that he 
does’ to his unbelieving wife. “Must he separate from 
his wife? He must die separdie ama his child. But 


‘you do.not, said Paul, consider your children unclean 


to you, but holy. You do not, you must not, human- 
ity forbids that you should, consider their touch pol- 
luting. They are sanctified, holy, clean, to you. So 
also the unbelieving wife is “sanctified, holy, clean to 
you. You must not.separate fromyour child. There- 
‘fore you must” not separate from your wife. “The 


unbelieving husband is sanctified to* the. wife, and the 
‘unbelieving wife is sanctified fo the husband, else were 


your children unclean [to you], but now they are holy” 
‘to you. Therefore the unbelieving wife is holy to you. 
In the same way that the-child is holy to the believ- 
ing parent, the unbelieving husband is: holy to the be- 


: Tieving wife, and the ‘unbelieving wife is holy to the be- 


lieving husband. You may tebeitull remain with your 
children. You may therefore lawfully remain with 


veach other. Throw aside these absurd notions about 
‘the old Jewish law. of «ceremonial purity» Dwell to- 
‘gether in the conjugal relation. “ As God hath dis- 


tributed to every man, as the Lord hath called every one, 


a) let him walk. And so ordain) in all the churches.” 


* ey, - Macknight i in loco. : 


. 


+ 


56 INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO _ 


Is not this a true exposition of the «sense of. the 
apostle? It is self-evident. Some few of the more 
learned pedobaptist divines have seen and confessed it. 
Dressler, for example, says : =‘ According to: Paul a 
holy pedigree is nothing in religion. Neither cireum- 
cision nor uncircumcision Soe any thing, but keep- 
ing the commandment of God. The passage 1 Cor. 
vii., 13, 14, [that now before us| does not support any 
such view. He says, if the christians would fiee from 
every mila ee him: as unclean, they must” 
flee, from their own children, and hold them as unelean, 
for they were among the. unbeliévers. “ Otherwise 
your children would ba unclean,’ for they are not 
christians by birth merely. _‘ But now are they holy,’ 
1, é, you are not to consider yourselves polluted by 
them.”’* 

Such is.the lesson, in resporise to ae inquiry, ait 
by Paul to his brethren the Corinthians. How beauti- 
ful! How important! How simple! .How easy to . 
be understood! Not the remotest reference is made 
in it in any way, to infant baptism. Yet it is declared 
to be “one of its best supports!” Accordingly our 
brethren have chiefly. predicated upon it this declara- 
tion in the Westminster Confession of Faith :-—*« Not: 
only those that do actually profess faith in and’ obe- 
dience unto. Christ, but also the infants of one or both. 
believing parents are to be baptized.’’} ‘Commenting # 
upon the passage, “ Else were your children unclean. 
but now are they holy,” Mr. Henry says : :—“ That is, 
they would be heathen, out of the-pale of the church, 
and covenant of Cody They would not be of the holy 


* Doct. Sacra. Bapt., p. 187. + West. Conf, pp- 21, 22. 


- 


PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD OF.GOD. BT 


seed.” “The children born to christians, though mar- 

; ried to unbelievers, are not part of the world, but of 

the church.”* On the same passage Dr, Clarke re- 

marks :—“ If this. kind of relative sanctification were 

not allowed, the children of these persons could not be 

received into the christian church, nor enjoy any rights 

or privileges as christians; .but the church’ of God | 
never scrupled to admit such children as members.” | 
Dr. Miller, after admitting all that we have just. seen, 

still says that Paul “ pronounces under. the direction of 

the Holy Spirit, that in all such cases, when the unbe- 

liever is willing to.live with the béliever, they ought to 

continue to live together, that their connection is so - 
“sanctified by the character of the believing companion 
that their children are ‘ holy,’ that is, in covenant with 
God; members of that church with which the believ- 
ing parent.is in vistue of his profession united ; in.one 
word, that the infidel party is so far,-and in such a 
sense, consecrated by the believing party, that their 
children shall be reckoned to haloots to the sacred fam- 
ily with which the latter. is connected, and shall be 
regarded and treated as members of the church of — 
God. hs 

' These are specimens of the havoc ‘made of the sense 
of the word of God for the sake of infant baptism. 
Look at the perversions here committed. 

Paul teaches, as they contend, that the offspring. of 
parents one, of” whom is a believer, are born members 
of the church with which the believing parent is con- 
‘nected ; that they are born in covenant with God ; 
that as such they are entitled to “ enjoy the rights 


s.: Comm: in loco. + ge on Bap., PP ws 17-20, 


58 “INFANT BAPTISM er a 


a 


and privileges of christians ;” and that were it not so 
their children “would be heathens!” -Here are four 


palpable perversions. None of these propositions are 


‘true in themselves; they are not ‘sustained at all in 


the word of God; and especially they are not found 
in the instructions of Paul to the Corinthians. But 
a still greater perversion of this passage, if possible, 
remains to. be mentioned. Paul told the. Corinth- 
ians_ that as they did not consider their children cere- 
monially unclean or unholy to them, but holy, and they _ 
therefore took care of them ; so the unbelieving~ ‘party 
in marriage, since shé bore the same relation ‘to ‘the be- 
heving. party with the child, was not to be considered 


by ‘the other cer emonially unclean, or unholy, but holy, 
and they should therefore remain together. No, no, 


Paul! respond our pedobaptist brethren, this is not , 


what you mean! You méan that the holiness of the 


children is spiritual, that it is ‘ ecclesiastical,” and 
more, you mean that this holiness is produced by hered- 


3 itary transmission, so that the children are born.in the 


covenant and church of God, and, since as such they 
are entitled to “enjoy the privileges and rights of chris- 


tians,” they are to be baptized! ~ Thus*boldly do they 
contradict: the apostle himself, and greatly also to his 


injury ; since if their interpretation is true they. make. 
Paul speak nonsense, and bring him into collision with 
himself, and other portions of “aan truth. Are the 


terms unclean, sanctified, and holy to be understood in 


a spiritual, or in ecclesiastical: sense ? They so main, 


tain. It is certain that these words are used in the 

same sense in their application to both parent and 

child. Is follows thus, that if the child is to be bap- 
; : 


a 


- 
* 


ee 


San ons OF THE WORD OF GOD. 59 


tized because that. relationship makes it holy, as. cer- 


. tainly i is the unbelieving husband, or wife, to be ‘bap- 


° 


tized because by the same relationship he, or she, is 
sanctified. He who is sanctified is.holy, and the sane- 
tified have the same right to baptism with the holy.* 

If then you baptize the child upon the faith of its 
mother, you must, to. be consistent, baptize the unbe- 


‘lieving husband upon the faith of, his-wife, since if. the 
- child is holy, so also is the unbelieving | father sanctified. 


But it is certain Paul teaches no such doctrine. Paul 
was wise.~ We have reason to lament that so much 
cannot be said of very many of his professed inter: 
preters. * 


One other passage ought to be epteld cea and its =. 


false glosses briefly exposed: since much confidence has 
of late, been expressed that it contains evident author- 
‘ity for infant baptism. “Jesus said, Suffer little chil- 
dren, and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of such 
is the kingdom of heaven.”+ Let us, in the first place, - 
carefully examine this text, and ascertain ise exact 
sense. : * 

“The Saviour was in the midst of a Hhscntee of sur- 
passing interest. His disciples wére absorbed in their 
attention to his. instructions. wigs there “ were 
brought unto him little children.” The object’ of those 
who brought them—probably their parents—the evan- 
gelist fully states. It was, “That he should put his 
hands on them, and pray.’”{, This was a very familiar 


_ observance among the Jews. Great importance was 


* In the” original both words aré the same, one the verb, the 
other the corresponding adjective, 
+ Matt, xix., 14. : . ; satak idle. 


60 INFANT BAPTISM LEADS 0 

attached by them, and justly; to the benedictions ‘of 
holy men. To obtain them therefore, when practica- 
ble, had been common from the earliest times.* These 


parents fully believed that Jesus was a prophet of God, , 


‘and they desired for their children his prayers and 
blessing. This was what they sought, and all that 
' they sought. They however, encountered in their ap- 
proach, a rebuke from the disciples! This occurred, 
not certainly, from any. want of respect on the part of 
the disciples for their motives, and wishes, byt. evi- 
dently because they were impatient ot the interruption. 
Their feelings were deeply enlisted in the topic before 
them, -and sHey were. not willing that their Master 
should, on any account, be diverted from it. But he, 
observing what they did, “was much displeased,’’t 
and immediately suspending his discourse, ‘Called the 
little children to him.”{ Thus he manifested his great 
love, patience, and condescension. What the Saviour 
_did for these children is now distinctly and fully stated: 
—‘ He took them up in his arms, put his hands upon 
them, and blessed them.” Meantime he compensated 
his disciples for the interruption, by imparting one of 
the richest lessons to be found in all his teachings. It is 
contained in the very passage now in question :—“ Of 
such is the kingdom of heaven.” And he adds :— 
“ Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive 
the kingdom 4 God as a little child, shall in no wise 
enter ther ein.’ 
By “the kingdom of enue and “ the hited 
of God,” here employed as convertible terms, our Sa- 


* Gen. xlviii., 14. Matt: ix..18. Mark xvi., 18. 
+ Mark x., 14-16. '. $ Luke xviii., 16. 


a 


PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD OF Gop. 61 


viour refers to the Gospel, the true principles of 
which i in the heart, alone can qualify any one for the . 
holy brotherhood of the church upon earth. This fact 
' needs only to be stated. But what are we to under- 
stand by the phrase, “ Of such. is the kingdom of 
heaven?” Is it not sufficiently explained by the other 

phrase, “Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of 
God [the grace offered by Christ] as a little child, [in 
the spirit, and with the disposition of a little child]: 
shall in no wise enter therein?” This appears to me 
most evident. He does not say that the kingdom of 
heayen—the church—belongs to little children, or is 
composed of these, and other such little children. Cer- 
tainly not. This is plain from our present version, but 
in the original it is still more obvious. The word ren- 
dered “of such,”* conveys the idea, as every scholar 
must see, of comparzson, and. does not therefore, signify 
identity, but likeness. The church therefore, is made 
up, not, as pedobaptists tell us, of litile children, but of 
those who by divine grace are made /¢ke little children. 

Only “such” can have a place there, as are spiritually, 
what little children are literally, Little children love their 
parents supremely : To fit you’for a place in his visible 
church, you must love God supremely. Little children 
receive as true, and implicitly believe, whatever is de- 
clared by their parents: You must receive as true, and 
implicitly believe whatever is. declared in his word, by 
God. Little children submit themselves to such po 
‘visions as are made for them by their parents: You’ 
must submit yourselves to. such arrangements as are 
. made for you by God. Little children obey the com- 

* rorourwy, NOt avrwr, 


6 


62 INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO 


mandments of their parents: You must obey the com- 
mandments of God. In these and other respects, to 
qualify you for a place in the kingdom, or church of 
God, you must be dike little children. You « receive the 
kingdom of God as a little child? when you . cherish the 
same love, faith, submission, * and obedience towards 
God, that little children do towards their parents. a : 
‘Such is undoubtedly, the true, and full sense. of the 
passage. How evangelical! How nich! Never, as has 
been said, did the Redeemer himself, teach a more im- 
portant lesson. Let it be observed, however, that neither 
in the passage, nor in the context, nor.anywhere else im . 
this connection, is there an allusion of any kind even 
remotely to baptism, With these facts.and ‘expositions 
before us, we turn to the interpretations of our pedo- 
baptist brethren, What are they? Mr. Henry shall 
again serve as an example of them all.* “He speaks 
thus :-—“ Observe the faith of those who brought [these 
children to Christ. They were believing parents. | _ The 
children of believing parents belong to the kingdom “of: 
heaven, and are members of the visible church. Of such— » 
not only of such in disposition, and affection, (that might 
have served for a reason why doyes, or lambs should 
be brought to him,) but of such én age—is the king- ‘ 
dom of heaven; to them pertain the. privileges of  visi- 
ble. church- -memibership as among the Jews-of old.” 
« Parents are trustees of their children’ s wills, are em-_ 
powered by nature to transact for their benefit, and 
therefore Christ accepts their dedication of them as - 
their [the children’s] act and deed, and will own these 
“aticoted things in the day . when he. ee up his ' 


* Comm. in loco. 


PEEVEESIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD. 63. 


jewels. Therefore he takes it ill of those who forbid. 
_them, and [who] exclude those [children] whom he has 
received ;” “and who forbid water that they. [infants | 
should be baptizéd, who if’ that promise be fulfilled 
(Isa. xliv., 8) [I will pour out my Spirit upon thy seed, 
and my blessing upon thine offspring] havé received: 
the Holy Ghost as well as we, for aught we know.” 
Look at this’gloss! Ponder it! How: preposterous ! 
Dr. Clarke’s commentary is as ‘follows hee every. 
parent that fears God, bring up his ‘children in that 
fear-; and by baptism let caoh, be dedicated to’ the 
Holy Trinity. ‘Whatever is solemnly» consecrated to, 
God, abides under his protection.and blessing. These, 
and such like, are the pedobaptist inter pretations of the 
passage in question! They are published to the world, 
and received, and defended, as expressing its true sense / 
Is it surprising therefore, that a vail is thus thrown 
over the gospel, and its great pars withtheld from: 
the faith of the simple ? 
_ And now mark if you please,’ the glaring perver- 
sions with which this whole pedobaptist: “ exposition”: 
is crowded. sh shall notice siz only. It is here denied 
that Christ designs to illustrate the true ‘christian. char- 
acter by the disposition of children, and it. is asserted 
that this might have been done by the dispositions and 
affections of doves, or lambs, as well as by those of 
children ; thus the obvious ‘truth is repudiated : it is 
idjutained that Christ here teaches the church-mem-_ 
betship of literal infants, by natural birth; that parents 
have’a natural right to “ transact in religion ‘for their 
St se upon them the vows, and ordinance 


* Comm. in loco, 


* 


64 INFANT BAPTISM LEADS TO, ETO. 
Cie 


of baptism—and that God will accept it, as_ binding 
upon the children; that. in the last day, when God. 
shall. make up» his “jewels, persons will be “owned” 
by. him, because they were in sie infancy “dedicated 
to the Holy Trinity'in baptism ;” that Christ takes it 
tll of those who refuse to receive infants into the 
church, and to baptize them; and that “for aught 
we know, infants have received: the Holy Ghost as 
well as we,” and ought therefore to be ° baptized ! 
What perversions! What falsifications of truth! 

We have thus seen how the word of God is per- 
verted in order fo sustain this unauthorized rité, in the 
instances of the apostolic commission, the address of 
Peter on the day of pentecost, the instructions of Paul 
to the Corinthians, regarding social and domestic inter- 
course, and the blessing of children by our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Many, very many other examples equally strik- 
ing, might be produced, but enough has been said to 
establish fully the proposition with which we set out. . 
It is unquestionably true that the defence of infant bap- 
tism necessarily leads to most injurious perversions of 
the word. of God. This is an evil, a most melancholy 
evil. It destroys all just. principles of biblical inter- 
pretation ; it covers the sacred oracles with impenetra- 
ble obscurity ; it inculeates error, and withholds the 
truth from the,.cause and people of God; by it knowl- 
edge is abridged ; faith. is made “weak ; religion be- 
comes less pepaeeiey +: and practical godliness is over- 
whelmed ! 


““@ sii tee ie” 


CHAPTER ill. 


INFANT BAPTISM I8. AN “EVIL BECAUSE IT: ENGRAFTS 
JUDAISM UPON THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST. 


Form of church organization $ pedobsntist theory; eaves { too much ; 1s 
in conflict with christianity ; violates true analogy ; 3 is at war with fanda- 
~ mental eg is antiscriptural. 


THERE are two theorzes, and two only consistent with . 
themselves, of church organization. One of them mod- 
_ els the church upon the spiritual plan developed in the 
New Testament; the other gives it the form of the old 
Jewish Theoeraey y. The former is Baptist. The latter 
is Roman Catholic. Between these two, and partaking 
more or less of both, stand all the various: protestant 
denominations. Their evangelical spirituality is Baptist. 
Their other characteristics, and especially their infant 
baptism, is Roman Catholic; or* rather Judaism, of 
which popery is confessedly, a continuation, To ob- 
tain.a basis for this ordinance, they have been obliged, 
-with the papists, to assume the unity of the Jewish 
church and the Christian church. Thus they engraft. 
Judaism upon the gospel of Christ.”' I shall state thee 
argument in their own language, as elaborately set 
forth, in terms Pulnomiedacd fy all, to be correct, and 
perspicuous. “ Abraham and. his seed, were divinely 
constituted a‘true visible church of God.” “The Jew- 
ish society before Chtist, and the Christian society after 
6* 


66. INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTIS - 
Christ, are one and ‘the samé church in different’ dispen- 
sations.” ‘“Jcwish circumcision before Christ, and 
Christian baptism after Christ, are one and the same 
seal, though in different forms.’ ‘The administration 
of this seal to infants was once enjoined by divine> au- 
thority.” ‘The administration of this seal to infants. 
was never prohibited. by divine authority.” . You will . 
then perceive that we have “a divine command for 
baptizing infants.”* To this statement may be added 
that of Rev. Dr. Peters. He says :—‘“ When [cireum- 
cision] the ancient sign of the covenant which God 
made with his. people “for an everlasting covenant, was 
abolished, another [baptism] was instituted in the same 
church, under the same covenant, Pe precisely the same 
import, and for the same purpose.” Such is the plat- 
form erected” for “the support of imfant baptism. Lt. 
abandons the New Testament wholly, and assumes the 
old Jewish Theocracy y as the true form ms the a 
church ! 

1. In the consideration of this argument, so specious 
to many minds, generally so successful, and therefore 
advanced with so much confidence, I shall, in the first 
place, show that zi proves immeasurably too much. - 

Let us, for the sake of the discussion, admit fae 
ment that it is true, and what’ are,the results? By all 
Protestants at least, as soon as its bearings and results 
are understood, it must be instantly renounced. — It,is 
really available for Papists, aid for Papists only. But, 
to the demonstration. “ Abraham and his: seed were 
divinely. constituted)a true visible church. of» God. - 
“The Jewish society before Christ, and the Christian. 


* Dr. Maccalla in Debate with Rev. A. Ggepeale pp: 55; 56.. 


‘JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 67 


society after Christ, are one and the same church in dif- 
ferent dispensations.” « Jewish circumcision before 
Christ, and Christian baptism after Christ, are one and. 


the same seal, though in different forms.” « They were 


instituted in the same church, and under the same cov- 
enant.” <The administration of this seal to infants 
was onee enjoined by divine authority.” ‘‘The admin- 
istration of this seal to infants was never prohibited by 
divine authority.” “ You will therefore perceive that 
we have a divine command for baptizing infants.”” 

Very well. Now you have infant baptism, and you 
have it by “divine command !” Presbyterians, Metho- 
dists, Congregationalists, and others are delighted. The 
argument is satisfactory. ‘They embrace it with eager- 
ness. It is true, every word true. The thought has 
“not occurred that it is dangerous. But we shall see, 

‘An Episcopalian perceives that it will serve ‘his 


design. The other sects may protest against his use of” 
it, but they cannot hinder it. All have an equal right: 


to its benefits. ‘He assumes as true, and admitted, all 


the propositions now before you, and then proceeds 
thus :—In the Jewish church there were three ordérs 
in the ministry, each a‘grade above the other in dignity 
and authority ; the chief priests, the. common priests, . 
and the levites.: There are therefore, three orders in 


the ministry in the Christian church. It is the same 
church, and under the same covenant. These orders 


fn the ministry of the church were once enjoined by .di-. 


vine authority:~ They were never prohibited by divine 
authority. You will therefore perééive that we havea 


divine command for three orders in the ministry of the’ 


Christian church. , They are ‘bishops, priests, and:dea- 


68 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS — 


cons, and we have them by divine right and by regular 
succession from the-apostles. Episcopalians are now 
fully gratified. Their episcopacy can be questioned no 
longer by any class of pedobaptists, since the argument 
for infant baptism and for episcopacy is the same, and 
you cannot overthrow one without at the same time de- 
stroying the other. . Here, however, Episcopalians insist 
that the “analogy” shall cease. But no. . The bali has 
been set in motion, and you must be content to see it 
rollon. The propositions are admitted, and they peat 
you resistlessly forward to other results. 

A Roman Catholic reminds you that in the Jewish, 
church there was one great high priest, who was the 
pastor or bishop of the whole “sib lae church of God 
upon earth. In the Christian church therefore, there 
is one great high priest, who is pastor or bishop of ~ 
the whole visible church of God upon earth. . Although 
in different dispensations, it isthe same church, and un- 
der the same covenant. The appointment of this uni- 
versal pastor or bishop was once enjoined by divine. au- 
thority. It was never prohibited by divine authority. 
You will therefore perceive that we have a divine com- 
mand for one great high priest, who is’ the pastor or 
bishop.of the whole visible church of God upon earth, 
This universal pastor ‘or benop we have, by ‘regular 
succession from St. Peter.” He is the Pope. _, His resi- 
dence is Rome, the See of the Fisherman of Galilee, and 
the capital of the world, whence “by divine right” he 
' rules the whole visible church of God upon earth. oti 
name at present is Pro Nono. . 

You have obtained, from the argument barons oon, 
infant baptism,; but the process By, which this has’been 


JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 69 


secured has also for ced upon you, first episcopacy, and. 
then popery ! If you take the first you, must also take 
the other two. And what else will you have? You 
must go still further. You must unite your chureh with 
the state, and have a national religion! ‘This would be 
very convenient. It would give you dignity, and wealth, 
and power. The Jewish shure was a nadional:church, 
and the Christian church is-the same church. Therefore 
the Christian church must be a national church. The 
* union of church and state was once enjoined by divine 
authority. It was never prohibited by divine authority. 
You will therefore perceive that we have a divine com- 
mand for the union of church and state! The sacrifice of 
the mass would probably be agreeable, if it only possess- 
ed divine authority, Itisa very imposing rite. You have 
the wished-for sanction in the Jewish sacrifices. You 
. want seventy cardinals ?. The seventy elders who com- 
posed the Jewish council will supply you. You are 
perchance fond of pageantry, and would willingly or- 
nament the persons. of your ministry with pontificals. 
The splendid robes and mitres of the Jewish’ priests, 
and especially the jewelled breast-plate of the high 
priest, will satisfy your vanity to the utmost. The 
Jewish church and the Christian church are the same 
church. All these were once enjoined by divine au- 
thority. ‘None of them were ever prohibited. by. divine 
authority. You will therefore perceive that we have 
a divine command for the union of. church and state, 
for the sacrifice of the mass, for the college of cardi- 
nals, and for priestly robes and ornaments. 

The argument for the whole paraphernalia of popery 
is precisely the same with that for infant baptism, It 


~ 


70 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


has aher same force and conclusiveness. bina m4 
the mass, car ana ‘hes: ait rest upon the same foun. 
dation and must stand or fall together. They are pred- 
icated not upon the gospel, but upon what our brethren 
call the analogy of the church, and really upon Judaism. 
Indeed such is, and has been the influence of. Moses 
upon christianity, that pedobaptist chur ches of all classes, 
receive their members, and most of them are modelled, 
and governed, by his law rather than according to the 
gospel of Christ. Are youa Pedobaptist ? To be con- 
sistent you must also-be a Papist. ‘The same law that 
requires infant baptism requires a pope, an established 
religion, and their adjuncts. Do you repudiate these? 
For the same reason you must also repudiate infant bap- 
_tism. But renouncing them all, you are forced back 
upon Baptist ground. You adopt the New Testament 
as giving the true form of the church of Christ. 

2. I, in the second place, remark.that this Judaistic 
argument for infant baptism cannot be maintained, be- 
eause it is directly in conflict with christianity as taught 
by Christ and his apostles. : 

Essays to commingle Judaism with the gospel com- 
bo ig immediately after the ascension of our Redeem- 

~ The Judaism then preached was precisely such as 
our it-pedobaptist brethren now claim as legitimate in re- 
ligion. It did not indeed, include infant baptism, but 
advocated instead literal circumcision. The discovery 
that “ Jewish circumcision before’ Christ, and Christian 
. baptism after Christ, is one and the same seal, though 
in different forms,” was: not yet made, nor did_it come 
to light until some centuries after. The principle how- 


r 


USS hei * 


’ 
Mite te 


‘ JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 7 1 
ever v was texans same, Glance through the ination: of 
‘the first period of -the church, as edhtaitied: in the Acts 
of the Apostles, and you will find that, as soon as the 

- gentiles began to embrace the religion of Christ, there 
were instantly among*them christianized Jewish priests, 
urging upon the converts the absolute necessity of add: 
ing to the gospel the doctrines and rites of Moses. They 
said, in substance, to these disciples, The religion of Christ 
‘is true, and necessary, but it is not enough ; «« Except. 
ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot 
be saved.”* The agitations and proceedings consequent 
upon this teaching inthe church at. Antioch in Syria, 
and subsequently in the council at Jerusalem, with the 

humerous admonitions regarding them contained in all 
the epistles, will fully instruct you as to the rise of Ju- 
daism in the Christian church, its nature as then taught, 
and the manner in which it was met and resisted by 

“he poasties, “Certain men that came down from 
Judea,” says Luke, thus “taught the brethren.” “When 
therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension 

“and disputation with them, they determined that Paul 
and Barnabas, and certain others of them, should go 
up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about 
this question.”+ We saw in the last chapter.an in- 
stance of the influence of Judaism among the Corinth- 
ians, and the painful perplexity it occasioned regard- 
ing ‘domestic and social intercourse. “Among the Ga- 
latians were those who desired to be under the law, 
and they constrained their brethren to be circumcised.§ 

' Indeed, the epistles evince donclusivély, that the 

.* 


3 * Acts xv, Fis a ne t Gal. iv., 91. - 
. ¢ Acts xv.,'1.2. § Gal. vi.,.12, 18, 


T2 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS © 
. . ai > ” 


‘churches of the Romans, the Corinthians, the Galatians, 
the Ephesians, the Colossians, and the’ others, were 


constantly excited, and agitated with J udaism. This fact. 


cannot have ‘escaped the attention of any intelligent 


christian. Perpetually repeated efforts were made ‘by * 


converted priests, and others, to engraft its forms, eo 
ordinances, upon the gospel of Christ 

How was this subject regarded by the Ter apos- 
tles? Did they iook upon the matter as of little im- 
portance? They taught the churches that it was in 
conflict with. christianity, and could result only in con~ 


fusion and disaster. Corresponding with these senti-. 


ments were the measures they adopted’ respecting: it. 
Let us turn to their “inspired instructions, and be en-. 


lightened. Protesting against the: introduction of the ° 


doctrines and rites af Judaism, Paul, for example, thus 


admonishes his brethren. “O foolish Galatians, who_ 
hath bewitched you that ye should not obey the - 
truth 2” «Received ye the Spirit by the works of the. 


law, or by the hearing of faith? Are ye so foolish ? 


Having begun in fie Spirit, are ye now made perfect ’ 


by the flesh ? Have ye suffered so many things in 
vain, if it be yet in vain? He that ministereth to you 


the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it. 


by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith 2” 
You wish to’ conform, to the law of Moses that you 
may be accounted the children of Abraham. Remem- 
ber that “ Abraham believed God, and it was accounted 
to him for righteousness. Know-ye therefore that they 
which are of faith, the same are the children of ‘Abra- 
ham.” And further. “After that ye have known God, 


or rather are known of God, ‘how"turn } ye again Ee the. 


JUDAISM UPON THR, CHURCH. 73 


weak aed beggarly elements whereunto ye desire to be 
again in bondage 7 ? Ye observe days, and months, and 
times, and years. I am afraid of you lest I have be- 
stowed upon you labor in vain.” ‘And still further, 
hey [the Judaizing teachers] zealously affect you, but — 
not well; yea they would exclude you that ye might 
affect them.” “ My little children, of whom I travail 
in birth again until Christ.be formed in you, ‘I desire to 
be present with you now, and to change my voice, for I 
stand in doubt of you. . Tell me, ye that desire to be 
under the law, do ye not hear the law?” ©“ It is.writ- . 
ten, Abraham had. two sons, the one [Ishmael] y a 
bond maid, the other [Isaac] by a free woman. But he 
who was of the bond woman was born after the flesh ; 
but he of the free woman was by promise. Which 
things are an-allegory ; [the two sons were typical] 
for these are [figures of] the two covenants; the one 
[that shadowed forth by Ishmael is the covenant] from 
Mount: Sinai [the law] which gendereth to bondage, 
which is [the son of] Agar.” The other, that. prefig- 
ured by Isaac,.is the covenant of grace in our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Isaac was by promise ; ; Isaac was free ; 
and << re brethren, as Isaac was, are the children. of 
promise,” and like him we ‘are free; “ For the law of 
the spirit of life in Christ J esus hath sna us free from 
the law of sin and death.”* ‘“ What. saith the scrip- 
tures? Cast out the bond woman and her son [ this 
-law of ceremonies and external observances from Sinai], 
for the son of the bond ges shall not be heir with 
the son of the free woman.” ‘“ Brethren, we are not 
children. of - Hee bond woman, but of sf free. Stand 


- ~ re ne 
».* 3 * Rom. vili., 2. 


vi 4 * or 


Piet Mine Zh is) a eae} Sait 
14 INFANT ‘BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


fast therefore in the liberty wherewith’ Christ hath 
made us free, and be not entangled again in the yoke 
of bondage ;” “the yoke which Sone our fathers nor 
we were able to bear.”* “Behold I Paul, say 
you that if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you 
nothing.” <‘‘ Christ has become of no effect unto you, 
whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen 
from grace. For we through the Spirit do wait for the 
hope of righteousness by faith. “For in Jesus Christ 
neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncireum- 
cision, but faith which worketh by love.. Ye did run 
_well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the 
“truth ?” «A little leaven leaveneth the whole” lump.” 
“He that troubleth you shall bear his judgment whoso- 
ever he be.” “I-would that they were even cut off 
which trouble you. For, brethren, ye have been called 
unto liberty.”+ Once more. In Christ. “dwelleth all 
the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are com- 
plete in him which is the head ‘of all principality and 
power ; ; in whom also ye are’ circumcised with the: cir- 
cumcision made without hands, [purified i in heart by the 
Spirit] in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh 
by the circumcision of Christ ; buried with him in bap- 


tism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the _ 
faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him. 


from the dead. And you being dead in your sins, and 
the uncireumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened to- 
gether with him, having forgiven you all trespasses ; 
blotting out the hand writing of ordinances that was 


against us, which was contrary to. us, nailing it to his 


" oross ; and having spoiled principalities and powers, he 
* Acts xv., 10. , “4 Gal, chs. iii, iv., v. 


... re 


JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 5 


made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in 
it. Let no man therefore’ judge you in meat, or in 
drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new moon, 
or. of the sabbath days ; which are a shadow of things 
to come ; but the body is of Christ. ”* Tn this manrier 
did the apustles meet, and resist Judaism in the church 
of Christ. If any conclusion can be drawn from their 
language which is beyond question correct, it certainly 
is that they regarded its introduction as.in conflict with 
christianity, and portending destructive consequences. 
Judaism was thus suppressed for the time, but it was 
not cast out. As some of the Canaanites were left in 
Israel, so Judaism remained in the church, to try the 
faith of the people of God. Nor did it lie inactive, but 
as time passed, and piety waned, it gained strength ; 
and at the present hour, though slightly changed in 
form from what it was oily it has, as we have 
already seen, with all the sects, more influence in their 
ecclesiastical polity, and their administration of ordi- 
nances, than has even the gospel itself of the grace of 
God. ae . 

We have thus seen how Judaism is embodied in 
the argument before us, by which infant baptism is sus- 
tained and defended. We have seen how it arose in 
the church, how deleterious was its influence; and how 
it was met and resisted by the apostles. And are we 
after all, to be told that it is legitimate and scriptural ? 
Are we now to hear it defended by grave and learned 
divines? hat very. corruption once so warmly depre- 
cated by Paul, and James, and Peter, and John, and 
thé others, as so. insufferable that they spoke of ne ; 

* Col. it., 9-17. 


"heed & 


%6 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


off those who troubled the churches with it, is it now to 
be assumed as granted, and. made the foundation for in- 
fant baptism? No, we cannot. We will not. We re- 
pudiate it. We protest against it. We denounce it as 
condemned by the word of God, in conflict-with chris- 
tianity, and an offence to our adorable Redeemer. 

3. This argument for infant baptism, in the. third 
place, fails conte ley because it. perverts, and renders. 
wholly unintelligible, the true scriptural apology of the 
church, 

Pedobaptists call the argument for infant baptism, 
which ‘we are now. combating, analogy ; but it is in 
truth identity, and not analogy, since they claim. that 
the Jewish church and the Christian church are the 
same church, and that, although in different dispensa- 
tions, they subsist under the same covenant. ‘This is 
unquestionably sameness, as distinguished from simili- 
tude and diversity. This is identity.. And what is 
analogy? If Webster be authority for words, it is 
“an agreement or likeness between things in some cir- 
cumstances and epents, when the things are otherwise 
entirely different.” A correspondence between the 
churches, .of this character undoubtedly exists. But 
the identity claimed and advocated, and which is neces- 
sary to include and defend infant baptism, while, as we: 
have fully seen, it also includes and defends popery in 
all its absurd extremes, is condemned and denounced 
by the apostles. There is a beautiful analogy ; but the 
identity assumed is nothing more nor less than naked 
Judaism. Trace with me = you please, briefly, the trae 
analogy between the Jewish chureh and the Christian’ 
church. 


* , 


ee io oe ate eee “e 
- JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 1 


~The relations between them are, [ remark, precisely 
“ded ‘subsisting between-a figure and the thing signi- 
fied, ora shadow end its Substance. “The Jewish church 
was a figure, a shadow, a type of the Christian church. 
No one. with this proposition distinctly in mind, ¢an 
read carefully the* epistle to the Hebrews, and then 
seriously doubt its truth. To state this important fact, 


«to establish it, and to illustrate its various bearings, 


much space; and carefulness, are employed in this admi- 
rable epistle. Indeed it seems to have been one of its 


> main designs. The Hebrews were naturally more prone 


than others to Judaism, and “to fall consequently into 
the error which supposes that “the Jewish society be- 
‘fore Christ, and ‘the Christian society after. Christ, are 
one and the same chufch in different dispensations.” 


. Paul therefore instructs them that the people, the sac- 


rifices, the priesthood, the temple, and all the or dinan- 
ces and forms of the she ve worship, were figures 
for the time then present,” and were ordained and 1 in- 
stituted as “ es of better things,” “until the times 
of reformation,” : in other words, until the coming , of 
Christ. “The holy places made with hands were the 
fi ures of the true” holy places.* All the parts of the 


_ Jewish church and worship were figures of the Chris- 


tian church and» worship. What is true of all the 


_ parts, is true of the whole. The whole Jewish church 


therefore was a fign ure or type of the Christian church. 
This, as set forth in the word of God itself, isthe true, 
and exact analogy between the Jewish chutt oli and the. 


’ Christian church.” : 2% 


“The ‘rules in Hermeneutics | by which. fides -corre- 
*  * ® Heb. ix., 9, 10, 11228) 24, ; 2 
we 


# 22 


78 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 
Y j 4 RUS 


spondences are governed, are obvious and defimt 

They are as follows. “ No’external institution or fact 

the Old Testament is a type of an external institution. 
or fact in the New Testament. Hzternal institutions 
and facts in the Old Testament are invariably types of 
internal and spiritual institutions and facts in the New 
Testament.” These rules are, | am happy to say, rec- 
ognized as legitimate by the learned among pedobap- - 

tists themselves. ‘l'urrettine, for example, the distin- 
guished successor of Calvin, referring to doctrines of 
Cardinal Bellarmine, says:—‘<For what Bellarmine sets 
forth, that these [J ewish rites| were not so much sacra- 
ments as types of sacraments is absurd, inasmuch as a 

sacrament is an evternal thing, and whatever is a type 
of any internal or spiritual thing has no need of any 


other type by which it may be represented. “Two ion 


types may indeed’ be*given similar’ and corresponding 
to each other of one and the same truth, ane so far the 
ancient sacraments were similar to ours;” “ but one. 
type cannot be shadowed forth by another type, = since’ 
“both are brought forward to represent one truth. 
So circumcision shadowed forth not baptism, but the 
grace of regeneration ; ; and the passover represented 
not the Lord’s supper, but Christ set forth in the 
supper.”’* : 
With these fixed ares of exposition before us, 
we will pursue, in order that the subject may be ren- 
dered if, possible still more plain and certain, ss “ the 
analogy of.the church” somewhat more in detail. — 
Abraham, the great type of Messiah, was the head 
of the Jewish covenant and chur ch; Messiah himself i is” 


* Opera., tom. av. Ps 842. 


o 


JUDAISM UPON THE CHUROH. 19 
“e 


the head of the Christian covenant and church. The 
natural, seed of Abraham were entitled by virtue of 
their carnal relationship ‘to him as their father, to mem- 
bership 1 in the Jewish church, and to all the ordinances, 
rights, and immunities of that church; the spiritual 
seed of- Abraham by virtue of their holy relationship 
to Jesus Christ as their father, are entitled to member- 
ship i in the Christian church, and to all the ordinances, 
rights, and immunities of that. church. The natural 
seed of Abraham in right of their father inherited the 
earthly Canaan; the spiritual seed in right of ,their fa- 
ther Jesus Christ, inherit the Canaan above. In the 
Jewish church sacrifices were Uteral. They were all 
types, and. pointed to the great sacrifice in the person 
of Christ, to be in the fulness of time offered by him 
upon the cross. In the Christian church sacrifices are . 
spiritual. “The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit ; 
a broken and acontrite heart.”* In the Jewish church 
offerings were presented to God in behalf of the people 
by priests only ; in the Christian church all the people 
are priests, and through Jesus Christ, present to God 
their own offerings ; for “ye are built up [not a literal 
house, as was the temple, but] a spiritual house, a holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to 
God through Jesus Christ.’ Every believer offers 
anew daily, the one infinitely glorious satisfaction of 
the Redeemer, by the power of which “he ‘hath per- 
fected forever them. that are sanctified.» -In the Jew- 
ish church the’ high priest entered once a year into the 
most holy place, “made with hands,” “not without 
blood, which he offered for himself, and for, the - errors 


* Psalm iii, ily een ae? Up #1 Pet. ii, DB. 


v 


ae 
80 : INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


of the people ;” oe which was a figure for the time Hees 
present, in which were offered both gifts and’ sacrifices 
which could not make him that did the service perfect 
as pertaining to the conscience.” » In the Christian 
church “Christ being come a high priest of good 
things to come by [the ministry of ] a greater and more 
perfect tabernacle, [than that upon earth) neither by 
the blood of goats and’ of calves, but by his own 
blood, be entered in once into the [true] most ‘holy 
place, [heaven itself] having obtained eternal redemp- 

tion foreus. For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and 


the ashes of an-heifer, sprinkling the unclean; sanctifieth 


[in the Jewish church] to the-[ceremonial] } pur ify) ing ‘of 
the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Chrast 

[the infinite sacrifice, and who is also the great and only, 
high priest in’ the Chri istian chureh] who through the 
eternal Spirit offered © himself richout spot to: God, 
purge your consciences [spiritually, and truly] from 
dead works to serve the living God?” “Tt was neces- 


sary that the patterns. of things in the heavens should 


be purified with these [priestly services of the J ewish 
church] but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these: F or Christ is not entered intd 
the holy places ‘made with hands, which are the figures 
of the true, but mto heaven, ‘itself, there to appear in. 
the presence of God for us,” our _adorable Intereessor, 
and Advocate. “And as it is ‘appointed unto men 
once to die, but ‘after this the judgment, se) Christ was 
once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them 
that: look for him shall he Appear the second | time with- 
out sin unto’ salvation.) ~°. 

* Thes¢ are, pe teachings of “the tied of God. They 


~ st 


demonstrate that the alleged Balcisy does not exist, but 
on the contrary is the very essence’ of Judaism. The 
figure and the thing signified by it, cannot be one. 
The type and the reality are not identical. The shadow 
and the substance are never the same thing. The Jew- 
ish church and the Christidn church are not therefore 
the same church. But the Jewish church, with its in- 
stitutions and facts, were external and literal, and were 
types or figures of the Christian church, which with 
its institutions and facts, are internal and spiritual. 
That this is the doctrine of Paul it is impossible to 
doubt. So also are we instructed by the “rules of in- 
terpretation” before recited. “No external institution or 
fact in the Old Testament is a type of an external in- 
stitution or fact, but always of internal and spiritua? 
institutions and facts, in. the New Testament. The 
whole subject of analogy is thus perfectly plain. The 
Jewish church, the type, was external, and composec 
of all: the natural seed’ of Abraham; the Christian 
church, the reality, must therefore be internal, and 
composed of all the spiritual seed. No one was per- 
mitted to enter the Jewish—the external typical— 
church, who was not, either by natural birth, or as a 
proselyte, already among the covenant people. The 
analogy therefore requires that no one be permitted to 
‘enter the Christian—the true spiritual church—who is. 
not, by the new birth, and faith in our Lord Jesus « 
Christ, already among the true covenant people of God. 
A correspondence exists In several respects between cir. — 
eumcision and baptism. pe circumcision the natural 
seed were recognized as the > children of Abraham, and 
received as members of the. > Jewish church; by baptism 


JUDAISM UPON Tee CHURCH. 


em = * in ° See oe ** od > 


82 ¥ INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


Eeetee sine seed are recognized as believers in Christ, 
and received as members of the Christian church.  Cir- 
cumcision was instituted expressly for literal infants,* 
and it was commanded to be administered to them soon 
after they were born; baptism was instituted expressly 
for spiritual infants—believers in Christ—and it is com- 
manded to be administered to them as soon as they 
are born again. Circumcision was an. essential pre- 
liminary to the passover ; baptism is an essential pre- 
liminary to the Lord’s supper. All this is clear, but 
our pedobaptist brethren pervert the whole subject, 
and cover it with confusion, by supposing that because 
Abraham’s natural seed was circumcised, that there- 
fore the natural seed of christians should be bap- 


tized! How infinitely unworthy as you at once see, | 


is this conclusion! It is. unreasonable, evidently 
forced, and contradictory of the true “ angleey of the 
church. * 

The pedobaptist doctrine is in fact, a misnomer ;_ it 
is not analogy, but Judaism. It is confused, it is un- 
intelligible. The true evangelical analogy is clear, rea- 
sonable, and scriptural. Nor does it even intimate 
infant baptism ; but on the contrary teaches such great 
truths and principles, as are wholly inconsistent with 


the practice, and as indeed, must ever forbid the bap- 


tism of infants. 
4, This pedobaptist argument, I remark in the last 

Place, is palpably antiseriptural. 

i OE mapiniing,, that.the Jewish church and the Chris- 

tian church are the: e enol in idifienent Pires: 

— tions; or in the. la xe 


* With the exceptio 8 Pvininee with money. 
‘ ee | 1 . 
“3 oy S on i 
gia ts 4 Ki. 23 z Yast a 


Ae 


JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 83 
. < a F 


[circumcision] the ancient sign and seal of the cove- 
nant which God, made with his people for an everlast- 
ing covenant was abolished, another ‘ordinance [ bap- 
tism] was instituted in the same church, under the 
same covenant, of precisely the samé “import, and for 
the same purpose.” i Ghure bh and the 
Christian church, the same, chattem’ a S06, 
only christian church now exi8tin %, we hay fe seen, 
‘the Roman Catholic! It is not thes piseopalian, the 


any other Protestant church, since Judaized as all these 
are, they fall far short of the Jewish church. Only the 
Catholic is a tolerable copy of the original. But if 
they were the same church, why did Christ deny it, 
when he told the Jews that his was a church unlike 
theirs, and into which none could enter by virtue of 
carnal relationship to Abraham, or to any other good 
men, but only by repentance of sin, and faith in him ? 
Why did Messiah deny it on another occasion, when he 
said: “The law and the prophets [the Jewish church] 
* continued until John, since whom the kingdom of heay- 
én [the Christian church] is preached, and all men 
press into it?” Why did Paul deny the identity of the 
Jewish and Christian churches by comparing the former 
- to, Hagar and her posterity, and the latter to Sarah and 
hers? Why did Nicodemus, and Paul, and the rest, 
trouble themselves about the Christian church 2 They 
were already members, and officers of the Jewish . 
church, and that was the same church! Strange in- 
' fatuation! How surprising ‘that any man with the 
Bible before him should fall into an error so palpable! 


ee 


This however, has already been, sufficiently elaborated. 
rd 


ale 


eo 
84 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


2 


But we are told that the Jewish church and the , 
Christian church subsisted under the same covenant ! 
Were this true, then there would be no distinction be-_ 
tween the law and the gospel. They would be the 
same in every correct sense. Very different from this, 
howeyer, are the: eeichings of the word of God, Abra- 
ham, as ree one’ may | see who will be at the trouble of 
examining the Bible on the subject, was concerned in 
two covenants, which were made at different times, ‘and 


related to distinct things. The former had regard to — 
Christ ; the latter to his natural posterity; the one — 


was called the covenant of grace ; the other the covenant 
of circumcision. The original promise in respect to the 
covenant of grace, was made to Abraham when he was 
seventy-five years old, in these words :—“ In thee shall 
all families of the earth be blessed.”* This promise 
was afterwards renewed, and ratified with an oath :-— 
“ By myself have I sworn, saith the. Lord” —« In thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.’’t 


This Paul declares to have been the covenant of grace _ 


in Jesus Christ. He says :—“ God willing more abun- 
dantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immuta-- 
bility of his counsel, confirmed it with an oath, that by 
two immutable things [the oath and the promise] in: 
. which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have 
strong consolation, who have fied for refuge to the hope 
set before us.”{ The promises of this covenant, Paul 
teaches you, constituted the ‘gospel, in relation to which 
he says :—*“ The’ scripture foreseeing that God would. 


justify [not the Jews only, but also] the heathen é 


through faith, preached before, the gospel unto Abra-— 
* Gen, aii., 8. + Gen. xxii., 16-18. t Heb. vi., 17-20. 


JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 85 


cae saying, In thy seed [Christ] shall all’ snort 
blessed.” It is proper to say in passing, that the 
gospel covenant now described was not really. ‘made 

vith Abraham, but in the language of an apostle, was 
¥ confirmed to Abraham. of God in Christ.” It was” 
therefore ‘previously made. ~ The same covenant was 
announced to Adam in Eden, immediately after thé 
_ dal in a promise the language of which strikingly re- 
sembles that t_to Abraham, ‘and which was repeated to 
ic, to “Jacob, and to David :—*“ The seed of the 
oman shall bruise the ser pent’s head.” The nature 
of this covenant was indicated-to our first parents, by 
the institution of sacrifices, pointing to the great atone- 
ment afterwards to be accomplished for man, in the 
blood of Messiah. Who, I now ask, were the parties 
to this covenant for the redemption and salvation of 
men? Were they God and Abraham ? No _ more 
than they were God and Adam, or God and | avid. 
They were God the Father, and God the Son the lat- 
ter of whom “took on’ him” for the puiptee of our. 
redemption, “not the nature of angels, but the seed 
of Abraham:;” and in relation to this event it was 
that the promise was given, to “the Father of the 
faithful,” which promise pedobaptists have so generally, 
and unhappily mistaken for the ‘nde tall ! So 
much for the covenant of grace. 

The covenant of circumcision, Pabeivedl this name be- 
cause of the peculiar ordinance attached to it. This 
covenant was made, in the true sense of that word, wath 
Abraham, twenty-four years after the.promise above 
referred to, and when he was ninety-nine years old, for 
himself, and for all his natural seed. In it: nothing 

, 8 ‘ 


alk we ae ee ee a 


a . 


INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS: . 


ever iS said regarding, Messiah. It stipulated, in 
e, that his-descendants should be. — 

and Happy ; in the~second: Le 

he id? posse’ n.aseapeoltigg: territory-; and i 

hitd inde that sé lon, “as, th € 

God, he would surround’ them 


which God made with Israel, when he %6 Ik 
the hand to lead them out of the- latins me 
saic law. was the formal exhibition, the’ poets. 
Canaan: was the practical fulfilment, and the 

i religion of the Hebrews was the visible pre- 


* t 


sentation, of the covenant of circumcision. a rel 
it is seen that > there. w i 100 - covenants, dis- 

_ Thus ' 
“tinct: from: “each voter, of . differ a , designed: for 
nt: purposes, and “aidstinilar in them characters. 


really and truly i tical with. that’ “ cov: 


1°. 


Accordin gly the apostles speak familiarly of “ the cove- 
nants ;” of “the old covenant;” of ‘the new covenant ;” 
and chase “covenants” they everywhere represent, con- 
sider, and contrast, a8 separate and distinct from each 
other: ie cckine the language of Jeremiah,* 


s 
cs 


thus spe relation to this itportant topic :— Be- 
hold the-days. come, s ith the Lord, when I will make 
a new covenant with housé of Israel, and with the 
* house of Judah ; not according: to the,covenant which I 
made with. their fathers when I took them by the hand 
to lead them out of the land of Egypt.” And-“in 
that he saith ‘a new covenant,’ he hath made the JSirst 
old.”’+ ‘There. are therefore tw. covenants ; the one the 
covenant of the law, the organized: develope of . the 
* Jer, xxxi., 31-84, t Heb. viii., 8-12. 


<. 


ee Te 


JUDAISM UPON THE OHURCE. 87 


covenant of circumcision made with Abraham, which i is 
“the old covenant ;” the other the covenant of. the gos- 
pel, the covenant Walereeti God the Father and the Son, 
the promise of which was announced to Abraham, which 
is “ the new covenant.” The covenant of the law consti- 
tuted the dispensation of Moses, and was the covenant 
of the Jewish church ; the covenant of the gospel is the 
covenant of grace and redemption, the covenant of the 
Christian church. The covenant of the law had cir- 
“eumeision ‘annexed ; the covenant of grace, in Christ 
Jesus, which was not visibly administered until after 
the law, or old covenant, ‘had passed away, has baptism 
annexed. And yet pedobaptists declare in the face of all 
these facts, that the Jewish and the Christian are the same 
church, and subsist under the same covenant! Never 
was there a conclusion more palpably antiscriptural. 

» Pedobaptists also declare that circumcision and bap- 
tism “ were instituted in the same church, under the 
same covenant ;” that they are “of the same import, 
and for the same purpose.’ But the declarations. of 
our Lord Jesus Christ on the subject contradict them 
in every particular. He asserts distinctly, that cireum- 
cision belonged to the law of Moses, and was identified 
with the covenant of Sinai. It never was therefore of 
the gospel, since the gospel covenant is “not according 
to,” or like “the covenant” of Sinai. To.thée Jews 
the Saviour said :—‘‘ Moses gave you circumcision.” 
And again. ‘“ A man on the sabbath day received cir 
cumcision that the law of Moses be not broken.”* Did 
Moses give them circumcision ?. Then circumcision was 
a part of his ceremonial law. Is it objected that the 
rite was in existence before Moses? Sacrifices were 

* John vii., 22, 23. 


&8 INFANT BAPTISM ENGRAFTS 


also in existence before Moses. Circumcision may 
therefore be said to have belonged to his law, as prop- 
erly as sacrifices may be said: to have belonged to his 
law. Or if it is still insisted that cireumcision belonged 
to the gospel, and was succeeded by baptism; with the 
same truth may it be asserted that the offering of slain 
beasts in sacrifice belonged to the gospel and. is now 
‘succeeded by the sacrifice of the mass. Circumcision 
and baptism are both types ; but they are not the‘same 
type in different forms, since circumcision according to 
Paul, was a type of regeneration by the Spirit, and 
baptism, as John avers, is a representation, or type, of 
the burial and resurrection of Christ.* And since cir- 
cumcision and baptism are both types, the former is not 
4 type of the latter, because one type ‘cannot be a type 
of another type. Nor can one-type ever be substitu- 
ted for another type. Baptism, therefore, cannot take 
the place of circumcision. They. are distinct things, 
and must ever so remain. The claim of pedobap- 
tists that circumcision ‘“‘ was instituted in the same 
church, pnd the same covenant, and for the same 
purpose,” with baptism, that is, in the gospel church, 
amounts to the declaration that the gospel church is in 
fact, built upon the law of Moses! We have now seen 
that the Jewish church and the Christian church are 
not the same church in different dispensations; that they 
are not under the same covenant, that baptism does not 
.come in the place of circumcision, and that the pedo- 
baptist argument that mathtains the opposite of our 
conclusions, is palpably. antiscriptural. * 
“Thave been necessar ily somewhat prolix in this dis- 
eussion, but.I could not in a narrower compass present 
* 1 John v..8 e 


JUDAISM UPON THE CHURCH. 89 

the subject clearly and intelligibly. I have shown con- 
clusively how for the support of infant baptism Judaism 
is engrafted upon the gospel of Christ. It has been 
seen that the argument, by which this great evil is 
perpetrated, proves vastly too much, and leads directly 
‘into all the extremes of popery; that it is in conflict 
‘with christianity as taught by Christ and his apostles, 
who deprecated Judaism as destructive of true re- 
ligion ; that it perverts and renders unintelligible. the 
true analogy between the Jewish church and the Chris- 
tian church, and which J have explained at some length, 
showing that it does not intimate the legitimacy of in- ~ 
fant baptism, but teaches such doctrines as necessarily 
forbid it; and that it is utterly antiscriptural, confound- 
‘ing the law and the gospel, and leading men into con- 
fusion and error.. Judaism in the gospel church is what 
Hagar and Ishmael were in the family of Abraham, a 
shame, and an offence. ‘Therefore cast out the bond 
woman and her son.” Sever the chains by which the 
bride of Messiah is manacled, and bound to the chariot 
of Sinai. Be it ours to contemplate the church of *the 
Redeemer, not under the clouds of Judaism in which 
infant baptism has involved it, not obscured among the 
shadows of a former dispensation, but as developed in 
the gospel, distinct, spiritual, sanctified, the glory of 
our Lora Jesus Christ. 

In conclusion, I will only observe that by how much 
the gospel i is thus corrupted, rendered difficult of com- 
prehension, its forms changed, and its benevolent designs 
rendered inoperative, by so much is infant baptism, to 

-which all this may be justly ascribed, a lamentable, a 
most melancholy evil. 
; git 


CHAPTER IV. 


ro 
Pad 


INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT FALSIFIES 
THE DOCTRINE OF UNIVERSAL DEPRAVITY. 


Statement of the subject; nature of alleged infant claims; their conflict 
_ with the doctrine of depravity ; incompatibility of these sentiments. 


Tux children of those parents “who profess the 
true religion,” are born, it.is alleged, in the covenant, 
and church of our Lord Jesus Christ ! ! On this ground 
mainly, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and other 
Calvinists, maintain their right to _baptis . Pe glim- 
mering of the same doctrine runs ‘through the teach- 
ings of all the other sects. It is true as. Bushnell 
justly remarks :—That “no. settled opinions ~ of the 
grounds, or import of infant baptism has ever been at- 
tained to”. by them all.* In this, however, they agree 
as nearly as they do in any. other’ doctrine regarding 
that ordinance. It is my purpose in the present chap- 
ter, to. show that this aspect of the subject develops 
prominently, another of its evils, since it Jalsifies the 
doctrine of universal depravity. 

Pedobaptists claim that the infant offspring of be- 
lievers enjoy hereditary rights to the covenant of grace, 
and their attendant paileces of baptism, and member- 
ship i in the visible church. The truth of this statement, 


* Christian Nurture, p. 60. 


‘ ; A rs 
INFANT BAPTISM, “ETO. OL 


I shall now’ certify in such a manner as to render it in- 
disputable. : 

“Tt is an important inquiry,” says a distinguished 
writer upon the Symbols and Rubric of the English 
church, “to what infants that title belongs. For not 
all even in the sight of man, can be sonsidierd’ as fit 
subjects for that holy rite,” baptism. “Are the chil- 
dren of infidels fit subjects?” ‘“ Baptism administered 
to them is not warranted by our church.”* Bishop 
Jewell says :—‘ No person which will profess Christ’s 
name ought to be restrained or kept-back therefrom, no 
not even the babes of christians, forasmuch as they” 
“do pertain unto the people of God.”+ Nowell, Bev- 
- eridge, and the other British fathers, teach the same 
doctrine. ‘We see then,” says Mr. Goode, “the ne- 
cessity of ‘inquiring \ whether the child [brought to be 
baptized] is the offspring of parents who are at least 
professed christians.” “Here is a question not decided 
by the church.” ” More unscrupulous ministers will bap- 
tize any child for whom sponsors can be procured. 
“ But it is at least reasonable to think that our church, 
administering baptism on the grounds ‘stated by Jew- 
ell and Nowell, administers it on the supposition” that 
" the parents are believers. +“ ‘The faith of the parent is 
‘to the infant, as an infant,” “mercifully reckoned by 
God as*imputable to the infant, and on the strength of 
this it is baptized ; faith and baptism together, as in the 
case of adults, perfecting the work of infantine. ‘regen- 
‘eration.”*{ We have in these passages, the doctrine 
on the subject of the more evangelical of the English 


%* Goode on Bap., p. 80. + Works, p: 216. 
¢ Goode on Bap., pp..81-83. ; 


92 INFANT BAPTISM 


church, and her doctrine in the premises is the’ doc- 
trine of the Methodist church, and of the Episcopal 
church in the United States. Dr. A. Clarke therefore 
confidently says :—‘ Though infants have not, and can- 
not have actual faith, yet they are sanctified by being 
born of religious parents. They are already in some 
sense, within the limits of the church and covenant ot 
promise.”* The Westminster Confession, however, is 
definite. Its language is :—‘‘ The visible church, which 
is also catholic, consists of all those throughout the 
world that profess the true religion, together with their 
children ; and is the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
the house and family of God.”+ The Directory is still 
more explicit. It is there affirmed that the children. 
of believers are “ Born within the church, have by their 
birth inheritance in the covenant, and right to [baptism] 
the seal of it ;” “that they are christians, and federally 
holy before baptism, and therefore are they baptized.” 
On this subject Mr. Baxter remarks :—“ God hath 
made, and offered to the world a covenant of grace, 
and in it the pardon of sin to all true penitent. believ- 
ers, and power to become the sons of God, and heirs 
of heaven. This covenant is extended also to the seed 
of the faithful to give them the benefits suitable to - 
their age, the parents dedicating them to God, and en” 
tering ‘them into the covenant, and so God in Christ 
will be their God, and number them with his people.” 

Mr. Baxter further says —“ As children are made sin- 
ners and miserable by their parents without any act of 
their own, so they are delivered out of it by the free. — 
grace of Christ, not through their-own faith, but upon 


* Essays, p. 81. is + Chap. xxv. 


FALSIFIES UNIVERSAL DEPRAVITY. 93 


conditions performed by their parents.”* And still 
further.. ‘Of those baptized in infancy, some do be- 
times receive the secret. seeds of grace, which by the 
blessing of a holy education is stirring in them accord- 
ing to*their capacity, ..... so that they never were 
actual ungodly persons!” The late Dr. Miller says :— 
“The children of professing christians are already in 
the church. They a¥e.born members. They are bap- 
tized because they were members. ‘They receive the 
seal of the covenant because they are already in the 
covenant by virtue of their birth.”’} 

From these expositions we learn that, according to 

our pedobaptist brethren, the children of believers . 
are born in the covenant of grace, and have, by right 
of birth, the enjoyment of all its blessings; are born 
members of the church, and by hereditary descent are 
entitled to the privileges of membership in the house 
of God, and to the promises of salvation. These are. 
prerogatives arising exclusively from: their hereditary 
relations. Their parents are holy. - Therefore their chil- 
_ dren are holy. Of: all such Dr. Hopkins says :—“ The 
_ church receive and look upon them as holy. So they 
are as visibly holy, or as really a in their view, as s their 
_ parents are.” ° 

With these doctrines distineily before us we turn to 
consider the subject’ of wniversal depravity, that we may 
ascertain to what.extent these two principles harmonize 
with each other. 

Depravity, I remark, consists essentially ina state of» 
mind the opposite of that which is required by the law 


* Works, vol. xv., p. 486, vol, xix., p. 261-264. 
t Miller on Bap. F t Theol., p. 819. 


94. * INFANT BAPTISM * 


of God. The law commands, and the obligation is im- 
perative upon every human being, “Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy soul, with. all thy mind, 

and with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy- 
self.”* The want of this love on the one hand, ‘and 
the love of the world on the other, places the soul in 
that moral position known as depravity. By nature, 

men prefer the world and its sinful’ gratifications, to the 
love of God and of their neighbor, - The creature 

usurps in their affections. the place of the Creator, 
The moral powers are perverted, and turned aside 
from God. This is depravity. And. I now remark — 
_ that it is universal. It attaches to every human being. 
All are naturally affected by it in the same manner, 
and tO the same extent.’ In this respect no material 
original difference exists between the children of the 
rich and the poor, the free and the bond, the holy and 
the unholy, the believer and the unbeliever. In sub- 
sequent life their characters are often very different. 
But this: arises not from any difference in moral quali- 
- ties, but in constitutional temperament, in instruction, 
in gisexptine, and in associations. These facts are ap- 
“parent to every intelligent observer. We see: in the 
children of all classes, .the same. inclination to evil, and 
the same estrangement from God, more or less strongly 
developed. But they are fully eonfirmed by the word 
of God. ‘The lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, 
and the pride of life,” all by nature pursue-in prefer- 


"ence to “the things of the Spirit” of God. The chil- 


dren of religious parents are involved in this depravity, 
to an extent fully as greet, 4 as the children of others, 
> * Matt. xxii, 87. 5 BE 


4 


FALSIFIES UNIVERSAL DEPRAVITY. 93 


who occupy with them the same social position. « Ad/ 
haye sinned and come short of the glory of God.”* 
" By one man sin entered into the world, and death by: « 
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that add have 
sinnéed.”’+ “The scripture hath concluded al/ under 


-sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be 


given to them that believe.”{ Than this what. lan- 
guage can be more conclusive? It is therefore unde- 
niably true that all are corrupt; that all are alike de-» 
praved. 

Our brethren themselves, notwithstanding their doc- 


» trine of the’holiness of the children of believers, maintain, 


and emphatically teach universal depravity. The Epis- 
copal church thus expresses herself :—* Original “sin” 

“is the fault, or corruption of every man that naturally 
is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby every 


man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is _ 


of hes own nature inclined to evil. "6 The Methodist 
church says :—“ Original sin” “is the corruption of the 
nature of every man that i is naturally engendered of the. 
offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from 


original righteousness, and of his own nature inclined to 


evil, and that continually.”|| Calvinism in all its ‘sects 


_ speaks thus :—Our first parents by sin “fell from their. 
| original righteousness and communion with God, and 


so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the fac- | 


ulties and parts of soul and body. They being the 
root of all mankind, the guilt of their sin was imputed, _ 
' and the same death in sin, and corrupted nature, were 
| conveyed to all their posierity, descending from them 


e % 
* Rom. iii., 28. + Rom. v., 12. t Gall. ifi., 10-22. 
§ Thirty-Nine Ait. P « | Discip. Art. Rel., vii. 


a 
% 


y 


96 . INFANT BAPTISM | 


by ordinary generation. From this original corrup- 
tion, Guctby" we are naturally indisposed,, disabled, 
vand made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to 
all evil, do proceed all acts of transgréssion.”* All 
other evangelical denominations hold the same princi- 
ples. They all teach universal depravity. Every man - 
therefore, descended of Adam, all thé posterity of our 
first parents, are naturally imdisposed. to good, wholly 
inclined to evil, and that continually. 

Let the doctrine of infant baptism, as based upon 
hereditary claims of the children of believers to the 

covenant of grace, be now compared with the doctrine ™ 
-of universal depravity. We take them both as set 
forth by pedobaptists themselves, On the one hand 
they earnestly teach that the children of peionor “are 
sanctified by being born of religious parents,” are 
“born within the church, and have by their birth in- 
heritance in the covenant,” “are federally holy,” and. 
for these and like reasons, are baptized. Persons can- 
not have, at birth, all these endowments, and be at the 
same time wholly corrupt. - Therefore the infant off- - 
spring of believers are not naturally depraved. On 
the other hand, they all earnestly’ teach that “every 
one” is wholly depraved. ‘“ Hvery man” descended of 
Adam, is “ defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul 
and body,” all “ are naturally indisposed, disabled, and 
made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all 
evil.” With this corrupt nature “all that_are naturally 
engendered of the offspring of Adam” are born. The 
children’ of believing parents are not excepted, but 
fully included, since they too “are naturally engen- 

* Westmin. Confes., ch. vii. ; 


he 


, 


“FALSIFIES, UNIVERSAL DEPRAVITY 97 


“dered of the offspring of Adam,” and are a part of. 


* “ qll_men.” » Are such corrupt and depraved persons 


holy 2 Are they born members of the church? Are 
‘they naturally inheritors of all the benefits of the cove- 
nant of grace? It is impossible. They cannot at the 
same time be holy and corrupt, sanctified and ‘depraved, 
in the gospel covenant and “ naturally indisposed, dis- 
abled, and made ‘opposite to all good, and wholly in- 
clined to all evil.” Both these propositions cannot be 
true. The one falsifies the other. But. that ail are 


» born in sin, and are by nature, depraved, is true. * The 


word of God emphatically declares it. The whole doc- 
trine of hereditary claims to the covenant of grace, 
. therefore, upow which. our brethren so confidently pred- 
_ leate infant’ baptism, falsifies the doctrine of universal 
depravity ; it is baseless in itself,and upon their own 
re cand it is fraught with mischief, “ fall of 
deadly e 

‘There are at least, I may now addy, tw other, ahi 
collateral disastrous consequences which arise from this 
aspect ‘of infant baptism, and which must ‘here be 
briefly noticed. The former is the absurdity t that re- 
ligion is ‘Hereditary; and the latter that the children of 
believers have no need of the regenerating influences 
of the Spirit of God! 

In the first place, 5 children are “ holy,” are “in 
the covenant of grace,” are “ members of the church” 
“by being born of religious parents,” thén these chil- 
dren inherit “by their birth,” all the blessings of re- 
ligion, and of course,.become religious by ndtird? gener- 
ation. The infant children of ‘believers are in the 
“covenant and church of Christ, because their parents 

. 9 


‘ 


98 INFANT BAPTISM 4 


are in the covenant and church ‘of Christ. . The. infant 
children of - unbelievers are: notin’ the-covenant. and ~ 


thirch of Christ, because their parents are-not in, the 


covenant and church of Christ. Religion and. irre- * 


ligion therefore are results of idathralepeneration Paul 
the apostle declares this whole hypothesis untrue. “ The ‘ 
children of the flesh,” he aflirfns, “are not [therefore]. 
the children of the covenant.°* But pedobaptists al- 
lege, that the children of the flesh of believers, dre the 
heirs of the covenant, and. for the very reason.that they 
are the children of the flesh. “Which shall we believe ? 
Paul, or our pedobaptist brethren? The Bible or ‘the 
Confessions of Faith? We éannot believe both,. since, 
in the plainest terms, they contradict each other: 

In the second place, if the infant children of b ieving 
parents are “holy,” .are ‘in’ the covenant of adc 
are “born in the church,” then of course, ther nature’ 
is pure. The work of the Spirit is: not necessary + to 
cleanse their hearts, and fit them for a higher. life. 
They are the children of believing parents, and there- 
fore “sanctified. ” They are born Holy) All this they 
are ‘carefully taught. from ‘childhood. Are. they not 
likely to believe it? If they do, they cannot also be-. 
lieve that they “have a depraved dnd corrupt heart, 
Consequently they can never fee] very deeply, their mis- 
erable scondition as sinners, nor appreciate highly the 
grace of. God in the gift of a Saviour. They are thus, 
and by their teachers, made ignorant of their own hearts, 
and deceived in a most vital point. I will not’say that 
they never. willbe converted. It is, evident, however, 
that their salyation is thus placed in fearful- jeopardy. 


**Gal. ili, 12-20. a . 


e 


FALSIFIES UNIVERSAL DEPRAVITY. 99 


Tt is now demonstrated that, by arrogating hereditary 
claims to the covenant of grace, infant-baptism falsifies 
’ the doctrine of universal depravity, teaches that religion 
is propagated by natural generation, and that. the chil- 
dren of believing parents have no need of. the renewing 
power of the Holy Spirit of God. Thus infant baptism 
~inculcates a religion that is neither moral nor spiritual, 
but: merely physical. It is. therefore a most revolting 
evil, " JE 


WF 


e . - 


CHAPTER V. pecs 


" 


> 


INFANT ‘BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE THE DOCTRINES © 
UPON WHICH IT RESTS CONTRADICT THE GREAT FUN- 
DAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. 


“s 


Justification by faith; infant baptism ; "the two contrasted reciprocal in- 
fluence in the primitive churches; justification by faith, restored at the 
Reformation; embodied with infant baptism in all the Confessions of 
Faith; effect upon protestantism; one or the Chet. must be aban- 
doned. a ae - Sere 


Tue doctrinés upon which infant baptism rests, on 
the great fundamental principle of justification by faith, 


are in irreconcilable contradiction. They are through- 


out, the antagonists of each other. To them both no 
church, nor: individual, can consistently adhere. One. 
or the other must, sooner or later, be abandoned. 
Their opposite characters indicate this result, and the 
history of the church, primitive, popish, and protestant, 


evinces that it is inevitable. Let the doctrines in ques- ‘ 


tion be separately stated, and compared. 

The great fundamental principle of justification by ~ 
faith, is taught in the word. of God, in term’ pertectly 
full and explicit. We are, says an, apostle, “J ustified 
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is: in 
Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a propi- 
tiation through faith in his blood, to declare’ his right- 
eousness for fhe remission of sins,” “ that he “ave be 
just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Je- 

‘ ty. 


& 


INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. : 101 


sus.”* And “ being justified by faith, we have peace 
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. "+  Justifica- 
tion is the act of God by which he declares a man just 
“and righteous. » The justified are, accepted, and ap- 
proved, as’ if they had never sinned. This is an act of 
God’s own free and sovereign grace, and therefore ne- 
_ cessarily. irrespective of any en worthiness on the 
part of the justified. It is by faith, not as a meritori- 
ous agency to procure justification, but as the medium 
through which it is bestowed. We are not justified for 
fits as if it were of itself a sufficient righteousness, 
. since faith no more than works can constitute such 
righteousness, but by faith through grace. “ It-is: of. 
faith; that, it might bé-by grace ;” faith being charac- 
terized bya peculiarity. which harmonizes with ‘grace, 
and which looks not to itself, but to Christ for right- 
eousness and salvation: This, briefly, is justification by 
faith, as taught i in the word of God. 
“How shall we ascertain the doctrines of: infant bap- 
‘tism? They are not made known to us in the Bible. 
Revelation i is silent on that whole subject. We must, 
_ of course, rely upon the statements of protestant Pedo- | 
" baptists for our authority. With Papists | I have at 
present nothing to do. Dr. Wall ‘is more “definite on 
this topic than any other writer now before me. He 
says :—“ Most of .the Pedobaptists go no further than 
St. Austin does. They hold that God by his Spirit, 
does, at the time of baptism, seal and apply to the in- 
fant that is-there dedicated to him, the promises of the 
covenant of which he is capable, viz. : adoption, pardon 
of sins, {and] translation from the state of nature to. that 


= ~* Rom, .dii., 24-26. ots + Bom. v., a” 
#8 : Q* 


102 INFANT BAPTISM: 7 

of grace.”* The doctrines upon which infant baptism 
rests’ teach, therefore, that in that ordinance the child 
receives adoption, pardon, and translation into the state 
of «grace, and of course that he receives: justification ! 
Davenant, the Bishop of Salisbury, thus speaks on this . 
subject :—‘ The justification, regeneration, . and adop- 
tion of little children baptized, sonia upon, them a 
state of salvation.”+ Archbishop Usher writes. thus :-— 
“The branches of-this reconciliation [received by = 
fants in their baptism] are justification, and adoption.” 
So--teach all the other divines, and all the protestant 
Confessions of Faith and Catechisms. . Infants. are _ 
therefore, according to this doctrine, justified before 
God in. baptism. 

Let now the great siata hee of justification ~~ faith 
and the doctrines of infant baptism be compared. » If 
you are justified by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, ; 
through grace, you are not justified by baptism, either 
in infancy, or at-any other time; and if you are justi- 
fied by baptism; then you are pe justified by faith. 
This conclusion is perfectly plain. - These doctrines are 
therefore as opposite as darkness and. light. 'They-em- | 
phatically contradict and. falsify each other.. 

Justification _by faith, | have said, is a fundamental 
doctrine of the gospel. It is»vital. It is “ the faith 
once delivered to the saints.” No system from which 
it is excluded, ‘can ever bé ‘justly. regarded as embody- 
ing the religion of Christ. © It was taught’ by the 
apostles, and early ininisters, constantly, foreibly, em= 
Phatically. It was cherished by the primitive churches 


* Hist! Inf. Bap.,-vol, ii, ps 148. cella ‘ . 3 Leen 
+ Letters to Dr. Ward, p. 25.. { Brief Method, &e. 


, CONTRADICTS, JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. 103 
asa priceless truth... How can we account for its aban- 
donment by the professed followers. of, Jesus Christ ¢ 
_ There i is, I answer,-an inherent tendency in human na- 
ture, renewed though it may be, to-pass from the sub- 
* stance to the forms of religion. The transition is so 
easy that it can only be prévented by perpetual vigi- 
lance. The influence of «this propensity -the early 
churches ‘did not-very long escape. -Among the first 
~ of the. corruptions they admitted and embraced, was 
the undue importance ‘which became attached. to re- 
ligious ceremonials. They gradually exalted the. rites 
-sabove the doctrines of christianity, while both were 
perverted ; and misapplied, Baptism, especially, was 
imagined to possess great, and peculiar virtues. Thus 
. justification through grace by faith, was ultimately dis- 
Placed by justification through grace by baptism. Po 
* pery was the result, the doctrine of which, on this 
subject, is thus expressed by the Council of Trent :— 
“Justification is by means of the sacraments, either 
originally. infused into us, or subsequently increased, or 
when lost, again restored.”* Thus the christian world 
was plunged into darkness, which remained unbroken 
for a thousand years: . : 

But justification by: faith was restored at ic Refor- 
mation: Noble efforts to give back to men this truth 
had’ previously been made by Tindall, and Wicliff, and 
- Huss, and others, but they all fell martyrs to their be- 
nevolent designs. Finally arose “the monk of ‘Witten- © 
berg,” the iron-nerved Luther. “He Wag previously a 
blind slave of popery, and in. his. own “esteem « irre- 
°"* Cone . Trid., — iit decret.. Saciam., apud Moehlor, Pp 


ara 3 aoe 


104 INFANT BAPTISM 


proachably holy.” His penances, snl iutot aad 
obedience, were exemplary ; ‘but of true religion he 
knew nothing. In his monastery, apparently. by acci-» 
dent, he found a copy of the-Bible: It was the first 


he had ever seen. He read it with mingled surprise : 


and delight. He began to be enlightened, but his soul 
rebelled against its teachings. Referring to his state. of 


mind at this period, he himeélf says ats could not. 


endure the expression, ‘ The righteous justice of God.’ 
I-did nip love that Just, a and holy being ‘that punishes 
sinners.” But the study ofthe Bible, with prayer, 
was continued daily. — At length that striking. passage 
attracted his attention, “The just shall live by faith.” 
It originated a train of thought; and feeling, wholly 
new. ‘There is then,” it occurred to him, “ another 
life for the just than that possessed by other men, and 
this life is the fruit of faith!’ Thus dawned ‘upon his ° 
mind the great, doctrine: of justification by faith, which 
led first. to his.own teconciliation to God, and then to 
other consequences of infinite moment.’ In allusion to 


this event Luther remarks in another place :—*“ When | 
by the Spirit of God I understood these words, “The 


just shall live by faith ;’ when I learned how the justi- 


fication of the sinner proceeds from God’s mere mercy, * 
by the way of faith ; then I felt myself born agdin asa - 


new man, and I entered by am opened- door into the 
very paradise of God. From that hour I saw the pre- 
cious and holy scriptures with néw eyes. ~I went 
through the. whole- Bible. _I collated a multitude of 
passages, which taught me what the work of God was, 


and as I Bad before heartily» hated that expression, + 
‘ The righteous justice of God I began from this time 


*» 


| is Sas 
CONTRADICTS JUSTIFICATION By PAITH. 105 


to value and love it, as the ‘sweetest and most ’consola- 
tory truth. Truly this text, ‘The just shall live by 
faith,’ was to me’the very gate of heaven.” * 

Wes’ Luther now free from those delusions which had 
so. long led men to rely for justification upon works of 
various kinds, ordinances, penances, and mortifications ? re 
It-would be very natural to suppose that he was. But 
che had gained no such fréedom. - The profoundést i ig- 
norance rested in those days, upon the minds of men. 
Thick darkness, in many respects, still covered his own 
soul. He dared not quit his secluded cell, and- very 
’ naturally hesitated to act in. opposition to the whole re- . 
ligious world. His fetters were not-broken until some 
years after, when on business of his monaster y»he visit- 
ed Rome. While there he determined; for the sake of ~ 
the indulgence promised, to ascend in the’ prescribed 
manner “a Scala Santa,” a sacred staircase preserved 
in that city, up which our Saviour is said to have pass- _ 
ed when’ brought before Pilate. “He began, but had’ 
not dragged his prone body many steps before a voice 
arrested him in tones of thunder, ‘The just shall live 
by faith.’ . Startled at these accents of terror, he hur- 
ried like a guilty thing, from the spot, and from that 
hour the doctrine, although mingled with other and 
contradictory doctrines,’ toll full possession of his soul. 
He planted himself upon it as upon a rock, and looked 
serenely back on the wild sea through which he had 
been struggling. The last rivet in his chain was. sev- 
ered, and he stood up ‘a freeman.”t Justification by - 
faith was thus recalled from the oblivion into which it 
had bken.: so long driven, and through the instrumental- 


—* D’Aubigné’s Reformation. © . "+ Headley. | 


(106 a INFANT BAPTISM © | 


ity of the leading mind, became thespentaghininaeat 
‘tue neformation. ; Po a 
All the denominations that then sprang out of: popery, 
did not-agree as to the detailsiof religion. Hence. their 
separate organizations. . But they all’ concurred in the — 
doctrine of justification by faith, whether Lutheran, 
Calvinist, or Episcopalian. « They -each embodied: it 
fully -in their separate Confessions, and other standards. 
- And strange. as it may appear, they also embodied in 
the same‘symbols, that opposite and contradictory sys- 
tem, infant baptism, | Why they did this will more 
_ fully appear hereafter. I now speak of facts only. Lam 
not attempting to account for them. Thus they threw 
together conflicting elements, which, as they had before 
done, gradually destroyed the blessings which had been 
gained. “To the sublimest truths they united the rank- 
est corruption. To the gospel. of Christ they chained 
the»main supports of Popery, ignorance, and worldly 
‘conformity. These facts are most readily demonstrated 
by reference to the standards themselves. 
_ In the first place, I shall show that the Confessions 
of all the protestant sects embody the doctrine of justi- 
fication by faith. The Augsburg Confession is the 
symbol of Lutheranism. Its fourth article is in the 
following words :—“ They teach also that men cannot 
be justified. before God by’ their own efforts, merits, or 
works, but are. justified freely through Christ: by “faith, : 
and are received into favor, and: enjoy the remission of 
sins, through Christ, who by his death Brsein a sat- 
isfaction for sin.””* © nae 
_ Tn full agreement with shes is the Westminster Con. 


P * Cox's. Mélancthon. en. PY 


CONTRADICTS JUSTIFICATION BY FaITH. 107 
, 


fession, which doctrinally is embraced*by all classes. .of 
Calvinists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Independ- 
ents, and others :—* Those whom God effectually call- 
eth he also freely justifieth’; not’ by infusing righteous-' 
ness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by 
accounting, and accepting their persons as righteous ; 
not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, 

but for Christ’s sake alone ; not by imputing faith itself, 

the act of believing, or any other evangelical obedience 
_to them as their righteousness, but by imputing the 
obedience and. ao ere of Christ unto them, they 
resting” on him.as their righteousness by faith ; which’ 
faith they. have not of themselves, it is the gift of God. 

Faith thus received, and resting on” Christ, and his 
‘righteousness, is. the alone instrument ,.of -justifica- 
tion.”’* , 2, 

The doctrine of the Rpiscopal Chureh i in all its sects, 
is contained in the eleventh of the Thirty-Nine Articles, 
in the following language :—“ We are accounted. right~ 
eous before God only for the merits. of our Lord and 
Saviour’ Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our works or 
deservings. © Therefore that we are justified. by faith 
only, is a most wholesome doctrine, ‘and very full of 
comfort.” 

Of the doctrine of the Methodist each in all its 
departments, the “ Aiticles of Religion, sa 13) the Dis- 
cipline, is the symbol. . Their ninth «article speaks 
thus :—‘ We'are accounted righteous before God’ only 
for the merits of our Lord and. Saviour Jesus ‘Christ 
by faith; and not for any of our own works’ or de- 
servings. _ Wherefore that we are justified by faith 

<.  “* West. Conf,, cb. ii. sects. 1, 2. ed 


* 


108 ‘ INFANT BAPTISM 


bd 


only, is a most*wholesome doetrine,, and very i of 
comfort.” . tM. 

"These are the principal Confessions of Faith of all 
the Protestant sects, and we’ have now seen’ their teach- 
ing on this.subject. If they are to be believed, we are 
justified before-God, not by our own efforts, merits, ‘or 
worthiness, not by any-thing done by us, or in us, not 
of course by baptism, or by any other act of obedience 
whatever, but alone through grace by faith in our 
Lord Jesus Christ.’ How great, how vital, how evan- 
gelical, how infinitely important’ this truth! “Who 
Srcla have supposed that they would have, inserted in 
each one of these very formularies any principle di- 
rectly and plainly contradicting that already so fully 
and elaborately stated? Yet they. did so. Infant 
‘baptism finds a place there, sustained by all the doc- 

trines with which, Popery had surrounded it. For 
proof in the premises we retrace these several Con: 
fessions. a 

The Augsburg is as follows >—*They teach concern- 
ing baptism that it is necessary to salvation, because by 
baptism the grace of God is offered. Infants are to be 
baptized, who being brought to God by baptism, are 
received into his favor.””* 

: The Westminster Confession says :—“ Baptism is a 
sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus 
Christ, not only for the*solemn admission of the party 
baptized into the church, ‘but. also to bé unto him a 
sign and seal of the covenant of grace, of remission of* 
sins, and: of his giving up’ unto God through Jesus 
Christ, to walk in newness of life.”+ “By the right 
\ * Aug. Conf., ott. Bt . 4Corlf., ch. xxviii., sect. 1, 


CONTRADICTS JUSTIFIOATION BY FarrH. 109 


use of this ordinance. the grace-promised is not: only of- 
‘fered, but really’ exhibited,* and conferred. ” 
The Thirty- Nine Articles teach thus :—“ Baptism is 
not only a sign ‘of profession,-and a mark of difference 
wherein christian men are discerned from others that 
be not christened, but it is also a’ sign < of regeneration 
- or the new birth, whereby as by an instrument; they 
that receive baptism rightly, are engrafted into the 
church. The promise of the fea of sins, of our 
“adoption to be the sons of God b the Holy Ghost, are 
visibly signed and. sealed,” “The baptism of young 
children i is in any wise to be retained 4 in the church, as 
most agreeable to the institution of Christ.’’t is 
“« The Methodist Articles of Religion” speak as fol- 
lows eee Baptism is nét only a sign. of profession, and 


mark of difference whereby christians are distinguished ° 


from others that are not baptized, but is also a sign of 
regeneration, or the new birth. » The baptism of young 
children is in any wise to be retained in the church.” ° 
Thus we have the “teachings of all these, Confessions. 
on baptism. | The summary may ‘be embraced: ima few . 
words. ‘Lutherans declare that baptism i is necessary to. 
salvation, and that by it infants are received into the 
favor of God, and sayed. Presbyterians, with all their 
kindred sects, maintain that baptism 4 4s to the child a 
sign and seal of the covenant, of grace, of his -engr afting 
mto Christ, of regeneration, and of the remission of 
sins, and that all these are by baptism not only offéred 
to the child, but really exhibited and conferred upon 


ii Used i in the ip chiiou sense of the Latin ewhibere, to apply or 
convey. + Conf., ch. XXVii., sect. 6. 
} Thirty-Nine Art., 27. § Dadetys ., Art. of Relig., xvii 
10 . 


© 


wi 


71006 CO INFANT BAPTISM 


him. And Episcopalians and Methodists ae tha 
by baptism the new birth, the forgiveness. of sins, and’ 
adoption, are all to the child, abby signed and sealed. 
The child therefore, in baptism, is* pardoned ‘of sin, is 
regenerated, is adopted, is received into the church, re- 
ceived into the favor of God, and saved. AJ] this cer- 


tainly involves justification, or the declaring the person © 


innocent of crime. ‘These Confessions gence therefore, 
the justification of the ‘sinner by baptism. Conse- 
quently on ‘the _dostrine of justification by faith, cand” 
the doctrines upon which they rest infant baptism, the 
Confessions, each and all of them, plainly, palpably, 
unmistakably ’contradict*themselves. If ‘you are justi- 
fied, pardoned, and saved through grace by faith, and 
not. by works, merit, or obedience of any kind, then 
you cannot be justifed, pardoned, and saved by bap- i 
tism. But it may be objected that infants are not ca- 
pable of faith. Neither therefore, I answer, are they 
capable of baptism. They are saved. by grace through 
Christ, and without baptism. — _Is baptism necessary to 
their salvation? God forbid. Why then baptize them, 
since the act is without authority, and without benefit ? 
And especially why . teach that baptism gives them 
pardon, regeneration, adoption, and salvation?. . 

Do I deal unjustly with these, several sects when 3 
thus represent them as in collision. with themselves ? 
Their inconsistencies on this point have been. noticed 
and condemned by others as well as Baptists. Moehler, 
a Catholic priest, and recently Professor of Divinity in 
Munich, one of the most eminent Roman Catholic schol- 
ars of the age, says :—“ At the commencement of the 
Ralornation’ Luther and Melancthon evinced on this 


. 


CONTRADICTS JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. 111 
“matter the. most decided opposition to the Catholic 
church ; and . the internal ground. of their opposition 
lay entirely i in. their one-sided: conception of ‘the justifi-’ 
cation of man before God. Hereby especially the com- 
* munication of really sanctifying’ graces by means of the 
sacraments was thrown.into the background, nay even 
- totally -called in. question.” “The “highest. point . to 
which ‘they could rise ‘was the one-sided view of the 
sacraments considered as pledges of the truth of the. 
divine promises for the forgiveness of sins. ‘The ’sacra- 
ments accordingly were to have no other destination 
than to make the faithful receiver assured that his debt 
of siris was remitted, and: ‘to console and quiet him.” 
“So mean a conception of the sacraments necessarily 
‘led to the view that they operate only. through faith in 
“the divine promise of the forgiveness’ of sins. It was 
only in course of the disputes with the fanatics, as 
Luther. called them, or with the Sacramentarians, that 
the reformers of Wittenberg approximated again’ to 
the doctrine of the [Papal] church. : Already the Con- 
fession of Augsburg expresses itself, _though indefi- 
nitely enough, yet still in a. manner to enable Catholics 
to declare themselves tolerably satisfied with it.” “By. 
degrees the Lutherans {and all other ‘pointe again 
adopted the entire notion of the opus operatum, al- 
though they continue even’ down to the present day to 
protest: against it.» Thus in course - of time no im- 
portant difference [in the premises] inherent.in the na- 
ture of things, could -be pointed,out” between Catholics 
an Protestants:* This * testinvony from an enemy ‘is 
‘true, Still’ Protestants of all classes, as everywhere 


* Symbolism, pp. 282-285. 


, 


. - 


“ 


112 _ INFANT BAPTISM ~* - 


else, so among us, in their sermons, and. their conversa- 
tions, from the pulpit, and the press, continue to protest 


- that they do not attribute to baptism any justifying or 


saving power. And do they not? . I have fairly recited 
the very words of their Confessions of Faith! .Do they 


_ believe these. Confessions? Let us turn to~ “some of 


their standard writers, and see how okey express. them- : 
selves on this subject. See 
“The gospel,” says Henry, the ‘distinguished Pres- 
byterian commentator, ‘contains not only a doctrine, 
but a covenant, and by baptism we are brought into 
that covenant. Baptism wrests the keys of the heart 
out. of the hand of the strong man armed, that. the 
possession may be surrendered to him whose right it is. 
The- water of baptism is designed for our cléansing 
from the spots and defilements of the flesh, In bap-* 
tism our names are engraven. upon the breast-plate of 
the High Priest. .-This, then, is ‘the. efficacy of bap- 
tism ; it is putting the child’s’ name into “the gospel 
grant. We. are baptized into Christ’s “death ; that is, 
God doth in that ordinance seal, confirm, and; make 
over to us, all. ‘the’ benefits of the death of Christ,”* 
among which, of course, must be embraced justification. 
Professor .Charles Hodge, one’ of the Theological’ In- 
structors at, Princeton, ssays':—“ We are baptized in 
order. that we should die with hint, [Christ] i. e., that 
we should be united to him in his death, and partakers 
of his benefits. This “baptism unto repentance, Matt. 
iy, esis baptism j m order to repentance ; baptism unto. 
the. remission of sins, Mark i., 4, that remission of sins. 
may be obtained.”+ Bishop Bedell says :—« This I 


* Treat. on Bapte +'Comm. on Rom. vi., 8. 


| CONTRADICTS JUSTIFICATION BY FArru. 118 


viele’ to my Pant of Batuta most willingly, that the 
justification, and ‘adoption which children-have.in bap-.' 
tism: is not wnivoce the same With that whieh adulti 
have. ‘And this I likewise do yield to you, thateit is 
vera solutio. reatus, et veraciter, et in ret veritate per- 
_formed i in all the like emphatical forms, eté.”* . Bishop ~ 
“Burnet says :—* Here, .then, is the Inward effect of 
baptism ; it is'a death to sin, and 4 new life in Christ.” 
ad fue are not only ‘ baptized into’one body,’ but also 
d by. baptism.” The Episcopal Catechism affirms 
Bit the child is-by his. « ‘baptism, made a member of 
Christ; thé child 6f. God, and an inheritor - of the bes, 
dom of heaven.” 


These ‘are the expositions of standard writers among - 


pedobaptists: themselves, of all classes, ‘explanatory of 
the. efficacy of baptism as taught in thei Confessions. 
They effectually shield me from the charge*of misrep- 
resentation; and at the same time evince that, their doc- 
trine is such, in the language of* Moehler, ; as “to-enable 
* Catholics to ‘declare themselves toler ably satisfied with 
ae They; nculeate, as'do their Conféssions, justifica- ” 
tion by faith, and also justification *by Bllpcism: Thus 
they contradict in. one place what they teach in another, 
But Presbyterians, Congregatidnalists, and Methodists, 
do not surely. believe these baptismal doctrines ! Many 
of them, I admit, edrnestly deny it.! Gladly would we 
credit their disavowals. But we -take up their stand- 
ards,” catechisms, and writers ‘of authority, and there, . 
word for word, are. the passages I ‘have recited, and 
iach, ‘very auch more of the same character, They 


ba ~ 


+ ne 
dl Letters to Dr. Ward, Letter 161. ees 


% ~“ 


oe re + Expos. pThirty-Nine 2 Arts, pp. 8955 896. ° ‘ 
P ro* 


~ 


114. ~ INFANT BAPTISM. ee 


deny that they believe their. doctrines, aid yet ‘they 
continue to publish them to the world as expressing — 
truly: their faith. From: the pulpit and from the press 


they disclaim and repudiate thems; but when called to 
the sacred altar, in their vows of office, they solemnly 
declare before.God and-men, that. they do believetthem 
“ex animo !”” What now shall we say? They deny; * 


they affirm ; they again deny’; and again affirm! The 
same contradictions which ‘so str ikingly mark their Con 
fessions and Catechisms, we find ‘pervading all their’ 
teachings, and practice! I lament. these facts, ‘but. 


they are so natural to their’ position, that. from them 


there seems to be, without changing their. ecclesiastical, 
relations, no ‘way of escape: 4 mY gate 

We now. turn to consider briefly, the: results of ‘hs 
condition of things submitted. They are: evil, and evil, 
only, Looks over, the protestant christian-world as it 
exists at the presént moment, and*you will find that in- 
fant baptism is again rapidly expelling, as it did-in ‘early 
times, the. aghtione of justification by faith from :the 
churches, .Amony the -Lutherans- of: Germany, the . 
Calvinists in continental ‘Europe, the Episcopalians. in 
England, and others—I speak.of them as communities— 


the baptism of infants is. observed with the utmost care- 


‘fulness, but justification by faith has: no ‘practical influ- 
ence whatever. It is still in their Confessions, but it 
has been: banished. from their pulpits, from their hearts, 


and from the. faith of their people. Justification: by... 


faith they receive. from the Bible. - infant baptism and 
its accompanying doctrines, they receive from Popery, » 
The former is of God. The, latter.is of men. They 
“gannot Jertinne to exist together. All those churches, 


~ 
é * 


* 


29a, <= = 
ae 


__. CONTRADICTS JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. 115. 


afiPopyartied as evangelical, will, sooner: or later, give 
“up justification by faith, or they will give up infant bap- 

_tism. What has been*will be again. “Coming events 
cast their shadows’ before.” * Jistification by-faith from 

: one’ direction, and*the doctrines of infant baptism. from 
the othér, like opposing currents in the ocean, meet and 
form a whirlpool, in which no church exposed to its 
widlence ean long survive. : 

We have now seén the doétrine of justification by 

3 faith, and -the principles of infant baptism, and con- 

. trasting them, have found that they are wholly contra- y 
dictory: -and. irreconcilable; we have seen .that it was 
infant baptism mainly, which expelled the doctrine of 
justification by faith from the early churches, and “ 
brought ‘on Popery;-by which the world was shrouded 

- dn darkness for a thousand years ; we have seen through 

what providential agency this great doctrine’ was re= 

* stored; and how it became the peel principle of the 

. Reformation; ‘we have seen that though justification. by 
faith is embodied in all the Protestant Confessions, Cat- 
echisms, and other fofmularies, it is placed in them side 
by side with-infant baptism, and its doetrines, and. that, . 
as elsewhere, they reciprocally cotitradict, ‘refute, “and 

qoopaty. each other; we have seen, in .the: history of 
otestantisin, the practical results of, uniting these’ 

” Btictog elements, and have found that they cannot 
exist together, but that the destruction of this funda- 
mental doctrine is the’ inevitable result of maintaining 
infant baptism ; and we have seen that the tendency of 
all the ‘other protestant sects is in the same direction, - 
anid that they also, must ultimately abandon practically, 

if not’ Professedly, either ands by faith, or infant 


{ 


3 . 
* r 


—. 


baptism, with the principles upon which it is maint 


+ a Ay — le 


116-9, INFANT BAPTISM, Who: | 
7 _ 4s Rss & 


ed, and defended. It is now démonstrated fully; th 


the doctrines, upon which infant baptism rests, contra a 


1 


dict the great fundamental principle of justification by 
faith. It is therefore, in all its bearings and influences, — E. 
an alarming and most disastrous evil. was 


ss ++ 
w . « ji - 


ws 
iP Bees 
+ Sate 


s oe « % * 
oe ; (s 4 a. 
¥ i Wet 
% + » Hee * we 
- * + 
. é = © es 


4 . 
a > 
r * « 
' 2 
+> Le . - 
+> a = . t 
+ =e ‘. 
= 
> re = 
es « - anos = 
o 
« ~ A. 3 
5 > e .* _ Rae? 
* = 
Ps ty ®. t — = ee ‘ 
i] z s J 7 
> > +s ad 
. i] ‘ Lal *. 7 ¢ - © 
. ¥ + wd > 
> * ®, 7 
| 7 z 5 ate = ae 4 
2 x ; ‘s > . ‘ 
ou % : oa : ee oo 
z= ~~ s > * 
Pr a ns . t,7 2 
K ~~ ay ¥ 
ars j 
2 EE ms Se 
i Nay + 
WA) = * s < 
iz » 
Soe = \ ‘ 
<I 
- ms 
i ‘ 
7 * . * 
. » - 
€ 
= . . 
Dine :* E 
r _ 
4 . , 
* * 
» 
= * 
x * - * 
Ws € 
& ¥ : rut 
1 : 
ah ge ") - ' - 


CHAPTER Vi. 


INFANT BAPTISM. IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT IS iN DIRECT 
- © CONFLICT WITH THE DOCTRINE OF REGENERATION BY 
wy _ THE HOLY SPIRIT; 
‘ * 


ree of regeneration; its early identity with baptism ;.popish doctrine 

_ on the subject; true principle restored at the Reformation; again con- 
founded ; Confession’ of Faith, Catechisms, standard writers; contra- 
dictions ; evils inflicted. f 


‘Tan relations. of infant baptism to the doctrines of 
justification by faith, and regeneration by the Holy 

_ Spirit, are in many respects the same..’ In the precediig 

. chapter we considered the former. We now proceed 
to' examine the latter. This also is a vital topic. It 
must not’ be summarily. dispatched.- It is necessary to 
both your happiness, and your, safety) that you should 
understand it. You may easily be misled. God forbid 
‘gm that any obstruction should be thrown in the way, of 
©... obtaining a full knowledge of all that concerns 

your everlasting life. 

Our brethren of all the protestant denominations* 

teach that we are ‘regenerated. by the Spirit of God ; 
- and they also teach that we are regenerated by buplisia 
—- these propositions cannot be true. ‘This is self- 


: « ‘Baptists: are not protestants. That ‘you are ‘aware of this is 
teken for granted. See the proof in‘my work on Communion. 
° All protestants are pedobaptists. ner 


: 


118 INFANT “BAPTISM CONTRADICTS : es. 


evident, since they are in direct conflict ith each oti, 
By the word of God, we are instructed that, while, on. 
the one hand, regeneration is a spiritual change wrought 


‘in the soul by the Holy Ghost, baptism, on the~other, 


is merely an outward. ordinance of" our religion’. The 
one is the work of God; ‘the other is the work of 
man. Believers only, can be admitted to baptism ; - 


every believer ‘is regenerate: consequently ‘none but 
the regenerate néh be lawfully baptized. Regenera- 


tion must then, as you perceive, come before baptism. — 
And. besides, the supposition that baptism is essential 
to° regeneration, or ever produces it, is absurd! ‘He 
who is. regenerate is “born again,” “born of God,” 
“born of the Spirit, ” « quickened” into new life, has 
“Christ formed in him ‘the hope of glory,” and is 
“made a partaker of. the divine nature.”. The moral 
image of God, lost by sin, in seidnaniion is restored 
to the soul. Is baptism, or any other’ ordinance, or 


all the ordinances together, competent to this great 


work? Why should it be effected in baptism rather. 
than in any other christian duty? Is it obtained. by 
these, or by any similar acts? . Then it is certainly, in 
part at least, the work of man. But can regeneratio 
be so accomplished? The’supposition is at war equal 
with reason, and the word of God.- ‘He only who cre- 
ated us originally, has. power to renew, and so to change 
our nature’ that we shall be confornied to, the charictar 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, enabled. to. love him. -su-- 


4 


premely, ‘todelight in his service, and to overcome all . 


; our corrupt propensities, and dispositions. » Regenera- 


tion ,is one thing, and baptism: is another- and wholly 
different thing ; nor. are they, in any sense, dependent’ 


REGENERATION ‘BY THE SPIRIT oF cop. 119 


the one upon the other. How profoundly to be dep- 
-recated the fact that they should be confounded, and 
- that, by any class of _men, the latter should be substi- 
tuted for the former! This deplorable. evil, to all who 
truly love our Lord “Jesus Christ, and have any just 
» conceptions *of the gospel, is matter of the deepest 
_ regret. Regeneration is: essential to salvation. “ Ex- 
cept @ man be born again he can in no case enter 
into ‘the kingdom of heaven.”  “ Ye must be born 
- again.” But he who has mistaken baptism for ‘the 
“new birth is never regenerated, How then can he be 
saved 2 z 

“Dangerous, however, and fear fully fatal, as is this 
insidious error, it nevertheless. arose in the church at-a 
‘very early period. Its appearance was simultaneous 
with the perversion of the doctrine of justification by 
faith. It was a result, evidently, of a-misconception of 
the design of baptism. According to the apostles, 
“baptism is one of the witnesses of God, for our Lord 
Jesus Christ, (the other two being the Spirit, and ‘the 
blood, that is, the sacred supper,) andiit bears ‘testi- 
mony to the amazing facts that he died for our sins, 
and was buried, and rose again for our justification. 
Chin receiving baptism we express our faith in the pri- 
‘mary truth that “we have redemption by his blood, 
“the. ragga of sins, according to the riches: of his 
sgrace.” Had the church adhered anwaiteringly to apos-. 
tolic instruction on this topic, the defection we now de- 
plore never could have occurred. But the fathers be- | 
came, unhappily, wiser than the apostles, and they 
determined. that it was necessary to have some sacra- 
mental emblem of the work not only of ;God the Son, 


% 


120 4 as INFANT BAPTISM Be ; nig 


but. Bice of God the. Holy Spitit. aa 
being commemorative of the sufferings and death “of 
Christ, they thought that sufficient for’ him, and § 80 re- 
moved baptism from its legal, place, as a concurring 
“witness, and not only Without authority, but expressly 
against authority, made it a witness, and’ significant. of 
regeneration. They accordingly defined it, “the: out- 


* ward re fee sign of «the inward and °s 


wigrace..” the perversion commenced. 
soon establish The work. of. deterioration hones 
idly progressed. Ere long all distinction was forgo 
ten, and the church and he? teachers confounded hope- 
Jessly, what they called “the sign,” with “the thing 
signified.” With them baptism-was now regeneration, 
and regeneration was baptism ! ! his delusion: fixed it- 
self permanently, and remains to the present hour the 
‘strong fortress of: popery. Both by* Papists ofthe 
“ West, and Greeks of the Easi, it is uncompromisingly 
maintained. The Council of Trent accordingly deé- 
creed thus ;—‘ If any man shall say that baptism is 
not essentialeto’ salvation, let. him be accursed. Sin, 
whether contracted by birth from our first parents, or 
committed ourselves, is by the admirable virtue of this... 
sacrament, ‘remitted and pardoned. - In baptism not. 
only our sins are remitted, but also all the punishments 
of sins and wickedness are_graciously pardoned of God.. 
By. virtue of this sacrament we are not only delivered 
from: these’ evils, but also we are enriched with the best. 
and most excellent endowments. For our. souls ‘are 
filled. with divine grace, whereby*being made: just, and 
the children of God, we are trained up to be heirs of 
salyation also, To this is added a most“hoble train: of 


* 


Iw CONFLICT. WITH REGENERATION... 121 


eshovhic, together with grace, is poured into the 
soul. _ By Beriied: we are joined and knit to Christ. as 
SB aeaters. to the head. By baptism we. are signed with 
a eharacter which can never be blotted out of, our soul, 
Besides the other things we obtain by baptism, it opens 
to every,one of us the gate of heaven; which before 
, through sin was shut.”’* | - 
eS these facts sufficiently explain the manner in carta 
sgeneration and baptism were at tog nfounded, and 
he fatal extent of the consequent delusion. Baptism. 
‘was a panacea which: cured every malady. This was 
the condition of things everywhere prevailing, when 
the Reformation dawned upon the world. Spiritual. 
religion—except among a few who were denounced as 
heretics, and hunted omen with fire and sword—was 
lost, and grace, and salvation, were communicated, and 
obtained, only through sacraments. “ Darkness -cov- 
ered the earth, and gross darkness the people. The 
Reformation poured a flood of light upon the world. 
It restored the doctrine of justification by faith, as we 
saw in the last chapter; and it restored also, though 
much less perfectly, the doctrine of regeneration by 
the Holy Spirit. It did both by giving back to the 
people the Bible, of which for many centuries, priestly 
jealousy, -and priestly domirfation, had deprived them. 
The minds of men were ‘recalled to first principles. 
True ‘penitents turned to God, and obtained as in 
primitive times, by faith in. Christ, assurance of the 
divine favor, the Spirit bearing witness with their 
spirit that they were born of God. Luther,sand. Me- 
lancthon, and Calvin, and Zuingle, and Ridley, ‘and 
* Concil. Trid., Sess, 7, Can.5. + 
11 


4 


192 - SNRANT BAPTISM 


Latimer, and their Soa were’ themselvéh done 
less regenerated. 

In Germany, and England, and: France, eit even in 
Spain, men awoke as from a sleep of ages. They 
shuddered when they beheld the’ gulf from which 
“they were barely delivered. They commenced the 
work-of reform. They exposed the abuses of popery 
in terms of indignant eloquence, They. stated some — 
of the doctrines” of Christ: with great clearness, but | 
this, it must be confessed, is exhibited. with. painful 
obscurity. In none of the German Confessions is it 
* presented with satisfactory distinctness. Nor is it set 
forth with more plainness in the Thirty-Nine Articles, 
or in the Articles of Religion of Mr. Wesley. The 
“Calvinists had evidently a better comprehension of the 
doctrine than the other protestants. ‘The. Westminster 
“Confession thus speaks :—God is pleased “ effectually 
‘to call [men] by his word and Spirit, out of that state 
of sin and death in which they are by nature, to grace 
and salvation by Jesus Christ; enlightening their 
ininds spiritually and savingly.to understand ‘the things 
of God, taking away their heart of stone, and giving 
‘unto them a heart. of flesh ; , renewing their wills, and 
by his almighty power, deter mining them to osha which 
isigood.”"* 4 : 

I am gratified to say, however, tliat all ‘hee de- 
nominations, but especially those portions of them 
who have preserved their evangelical ‘character, have 
gradually acquired, as they became better instructed-in 
the word of God, more distinct and full conceptions of 
the work be the. Spit in regenemtion, and a ecerech 

mi ae a aa ws : 


i IN CONFLICT WITH REGENERATION. 193. 


ae 
1s this true of ee various classes of Methodists, Con- . 
gregationalists, and Presbyterians in our country and in 
Europe. _Apart. from infant baptism, they~ recognize 
amply the great truth as stated by us, that regenera-: 


tion is a change of heart, effected exclusively by the ©. 


Holy Ghost. More* than this; they give in their life 
and character, most gratifying evidence that they are 
seas the subjects of this heavanty renovation. 
hus happy, in its influence upon the character and 
destiny of the: church and people of God, has. been 
the Reformation. 
But has ‘any portion of the. protestant pedobaptist 
world fully renounced the old popish» dogma which 
teaches that infants are regenerated in baptigar? 24 Do 
they believe in the doctrine: of regeneration as exclu- 
sively the work of the Holy Sia, and also in the 
antagonistic ‘and conflicting doctrine of regeneration 
by baptism ? Such inconsistency, it would seem, ‘is 
almost incredible. Yet when infant baptism is. to be 
administered; or defended, all their evangelical prinei- 
“ples are apparently forgotten, This relic of popery 
can only be sustained by the dogmas of popery.  Bap- 
tism and regeneration are not now esteemed by | them 
as separate and distinct things, but are declared’ es- 
sentially identical. ‘This statement is not hazarded 
carelessly. It is made.after mature thought, and full 
investigation. I am aware that it is not a-light im- 
putation. I shall therefore” ion i its by.the sonia! 
evidence, _ 
~ What kind of testimony, may 5 ie bo as satis- 
factory i in. proof of so grave a proposition? . The dec- 
larations of Confessions of Faith, Catechisms, ‘and ac- 


124 INFANT BAPTISM. “x “ 


v1 


edited writers, must, of course; 5 the concave “To 
these, therefore, I direct your® attention. The Augs- 
burg Confession says :—‘ Our church likewise teaches 
that since the fall: of Adam, all men who are natu- 
rally engendered, are born with a depraved nature, 
‘that is, without the fear of God, or confidence. to- 
wards him, but with sinful propensities ; and that this 
‘disease, or natural depravity, is really: sin, and still 
condemned, and causes eternal death to those who are 
not born again by baptism and the Holy Spirit. ne 
The earlier Helvetic, another Lutheran Confession, is 
still more explicit. Its language is :—“ Baptism is, by 
the institution of the Lord, the law of regeneration. 
With which holy’ law, we, on that account, baptize 
our infants.”. The Thirty-Nine Articles embrace in 
substance the declarations of the Aug sburg Confession, 
and add, “There is no Sonidbnnbaniot to them “that 
believe, apa are. baptized.”+ For this reason they also 
baptize their infants! The Articles of Religion: ‘of the 
Methodist church assert that, baptism is” “ey sign of 
regeneration, or-the new birth,” and is to be admin- 
istered to infants.{| The Westminster Confession says ¢ 
. —“ Regeneration,” with various . other’ blessings, is 
“ offered” in baptism, and that “ by the right use of 

this ordinance the grace-promised is not only offered, 
but really exhibited and conferred by the Holy Ghost, . 
to such, whether of age, or infants, as that grace be-. 
longeth unto according to the counsel of God’s own 
will, in. his appointed time.’§ Other Confessions not 
yet noticed concur with these. The Belgic Confession ~ 
* Conf. Art, 11. é + Art. 9 


 f Art. 17. _~  ° § Art. 28, sectss1, 6. 


_ IN CONFLICT WITH REGENERATION. 125 


* 
* 


“says :-—“ The ‘sacraments are signs, and visible sym- 
ols of things internal, and invisible, by which, as by 


means, God himself works in us by the power of the 


; Holy Ghost.” _The Heidelberg Catechism, or Confes- 


sion, written by Zachary Ursinus, says :—‘ Christ com- 
manded the external laws of baptisnr with this prom- a 
ise annexed, that [in it] I am not less certainly washed © 
by his blood and Spirit, «from. thie pollutions of the 
soul, that is, from all my sins.” The Gallican Con- * 


fession says :—‘‘ God really, that is, truly and effica- . 


ciously, does whatever he there [in our baptism in 


“infancy | sacramentally shadéws forth, and therefore we * 


+ 


annex to the signs the true possession of that thing 
[regeneration] which is thus offered us.”* .The same 
doctrine is maintained in the Bohemian, the Sea and. 
all the others. » ; 

These’ are the teachings of the Goutessionst Their 


Jessons .cannot. readily be mistaken. The Catechisms— 


maintain the same doctrine. ‘The Bishops of the Eng-. 
lish church, in their ““Answers-to the Ministers of the « 


_ Savoy Conference,” remark :—‘ We’ may say in faith, ” 


of every child. that is baptized, that it is regenerate by. 
God’s Holy Spirit ; and thevdenial -of it tends to Ana- 
baptism, and the contempt: of this holy sacrament, as 
nothing worthy, nor material whether it be administer- 
ed to-children or‘no.”+ , Tlie. present Bishop of Exeter 
thus states the doctrine’ of his church :— The grace 
of God so certainly attends this ceremony of baptism, 
that. regeneration and baptism -are contemporaneous, 
and the terms* aire convertible, and mayrbe used. inter- 
i * Bylloge ‘Conf’, Pp. 74, et seq. 
. + Caldwell’s Cont Pp 225, oy 
; 1t*. 


126 ase INFANT BAPTISM i 
changeably.”* And did not Mr. Wesley express him: 
self in similar terms? He says:—“By baptism we — 
who are by nature thé children of wrath, are made the: 
children of God. And this regeneration whieh! our 
church in*so many places. ascribes’ to baptism, is more 

than barely being admitted — the church, though: 
commonly aBiinected: therewith.” .. “ By water then«as » 

“a means, the water of op we are regenerated and — 


born again, whence it is called by the apostle, ‘the 


washing of regeneration.’ ‘In ‘alleages the oudwar 
baptisin is a means of the wmwoard. Herein we receive 
‘a title toand an earnest of" the kingdom, that cannot. ” 
be. moved: Inthe ordinary. way, “there? is no ¢ 
way of entering. into’ the church, or into -he; 
“Tf infants are “guilty. of original sin, then’ they. are 
proper Subjects of baptism, seeing in the*ordinary way,” 
they cannot be saved” unless this be washed away in 
baptism. ea Mie Henry; Prof. Hodge,. and others ‘of » 
their class, teach, as we ‘saw in the. last chapter, doc 
trines essentially the same.» Mr. ‘Ainsworth says = 

«Thus to whom God giveth the sign and the’ aie 


* 


righteousness by faith, “and of regeneration, ‘they [the - 


infants] have faith and regeneration ; for God giveth no 
lying sign 5 he ‘sealeth no’ vain or false covenants.” 
“«If-we:! “cannot justly object against ‘God vk 
nature, but do- believe that our infants’ are re nable. a 
creatures, and are born not brute . beasts, ‘but men, 
though actually they can manifest no reason, or un- 
derstanding more* than: beasts, then neither can we 
object to Gi iwrork in grace, but are itor i Satie 


* Gorham Trial, 


t ‘Works, N. Yeedit.; voli ppersyte : 2 , 


4 


* 


IN ‘conriion WITH REGENERATION. 124 a 
“ 
our infants are eauatiied creatures, and are born bex 
lievers, not infidels, though: actually they ¢an manifest. 
no faith, or sanctification.”* But Calvin himself ought 
to be heard in behalf of his followers. He says :-— 
“We agree.that sacraments are not empty figures, but: 


do steak supply whatever ‘they represent; that the». 


efficacy of the Spirit is present in baptism*to cleanse and 
-regenerate-us.”+ With the divines of Zurich, he had 


however, in..this matter, one. sad difficulty, which" is, 


ore than. intimated in the Westminster Confession... 
In Ld “<The Argument,” drawn up in 1549, Calvin says’:., 
—‘ ‘We diligently teach that God -doés, not put forth 
his er without distinction “to all who. receive the. 
“stint but only to the elect.” If then the child. 
is not one of the elect} it is not regenerated 4 in baptism. 3 
Ift i is elect, it is certainly. regenerated. in baptism. . 
_volume might be filled-with similar passages, but” 
further proof is.deemed useless.’ The Catechisms, and’. 
standard writers, even more conclusively than the Con=. 
fessions. of Faith, demonstrate, as you must plainly see; 


all. ‘that I -have alleged. The fact.is now placed /be- 


yond. question ‘that, whatever they may avow, or main-. 
tain at. other times, whenever this ordinance i As, in ques-— 
tion they all connect infant baptisoa and regeneration. 
Lutherans infants are, born again by baptism ; 
opalians baptism and regeneration are con- » 
‘temporaneous, and the terms are convertible ; with the” 
‘Methodists baptism is the meas by which their infants 
are.regenerated and born again ; and with Presbyterians,” 
since God gives no lying signs, nor seals, infants of be» 


“* Hanbury’s: Histor,.Memor., vol. i., pp. 418, 414, 
t se ad Melane. Op., voliix., Epist. 82°, — * 


128 - INFANT BAPTISM _ 


aS 


lievers are believers, anid if they are elect infants, they ~ 
are regenerated, sanctified, adopted, have conferred upon 


them, in a word, “ail. the benefits of the death of 


Christ.” “The denial of this tends,” in the language 
of the bishops, “to Anabaptism, and the contempt of 
this holy sacrament:as nothing worthy, or material 
whether. it be “administered to: children or no.” They 


all teach, therefore, that wee are regenerated exclusively 


by the Holy Spirit of God ; and ‘they also teach that. 
we are regenerated by baptism ! These propositions - 
are the opposites of each other. They cannot both be 
rue. But the doctrine of regeneration by the. Holy 


Spirit is true.- -Therefore: the doctrine of infant baptism : 


is not true. WED 26 

» Lam-here again met, however, with the declaration, 
that the best and most pious of all these-classes utterly 
deny that they believe at all, as charged, in baptismal.re- 


generation. To this disclaimer-I have already replied in 


“such terms.as I think appropriate. I have said that their 


positions are irreconcilably at variance. I have myself 
often heard them assure these same baptized: children. 
when grown up, who had been regenerated in their infan- 
cy, that they must yet be regenerated or they could not 
be saved! The attitude in which they are thus placed 
is most perplexing, and .pitiable. .Phey solemnly de- 
clare to the world that they do not believe the very 
dogmas that in théir books they solemnly declare that 
they do believe! They repudiate them, and adhere to 
them! In this dilemma they have involved themselves. 
I lament. it sincerely, and trust that they may yet. see” 
their, SBCORNISI ERIS) and embracg the whole “ truth aa 
it is in Jesus.” é 


s ae re : * Y 


BY CONFLICT WITH REGENERATION. _ 129 


pe 
_ In these facts and considerations we have revealed 
another of the evils of infant baptism. It withdraws 
the mind from. truth, and places it upon a fiction. It 
» seduces men-from the reality to the mere forms of re- 
ligion. It attributes to an ordinance, which since it is. 
despoiled of its form, and applied. to unlawful subjects, 
“is no ordinance of Jesus, a.work which the Holy Ghost 
ly can do. . It is utterly subversive of the fundamental 
rine of. ‘the work of regeneration by the Spirit of 
o It is a most deplorable evil. 


= 


*4 


t be 


a CHAPTER VERS = “= 


-» 


ace ere ete Lem 
INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT-TESPOILS TH. 


oe Oe ae 


CHURCH OF THOSE PECULIAR QUALITIES: WHICH ARk - 


ESSENTIAL TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. (7% [> ¢ = 


Pre % =) gh Fo Si es 
Qualities essential to the church ;, how destroyed by. infant baptism 5 ex 
amples drawn from protostantism in its various forms ; recovery 6 of the. 
church hopeless. pr ae 


gout 


Tre true visible church of our Lord Jeane’ Christ" 


upon earth, is necessarily spzretual, and pure. If de- 
prived of these qualities, itis evidently no longer his 
church. Its form, and or ganization, may still be re: 
tained ; it may be great, and powerful, and. honored ; 
but it Is a mere worldly corporation. It is not the 
church of Christ. ; : 

Do you inquire what I mean by’ spirituality, and 


purity? By spirituality I mean, that disposition of - 


mind implanted by the Holy Ghost, by which men are 
inclined to love, delight, in, and attend to the things of 
the Spirit of »God, Those who are spiritual seek: 
spiritual blessings, engage in spiritual exercises, pursue 
spiritual objects, are .influenced by spiritual motives, 
and experience spiritual joys. Paul describes their 
character in terms, as clear as they are -comprehen- 
sive. “They that are after the flesh, do mind the 
things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit, 
* the things of the'Spirit. For to be carnally-minded is * 


~ 


Tae “% he 


INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. . 131 


* deaths; but to’ be spiritually- studed is lite;. and ° peace. 

Because the carnal mind i is enmity against God ;“for it 
is not subject: to the law of God, neither indeed can be. 

So then, they that are-in the flesh cannot please God.”* 
Such is spirituality. And purity is a® fixed. habit of 
abhorrence of whatever holiness forbids, whether in the’ 
heart or in the life, It is the disposition that discovers it- 


self by a cautious fear of all that leads to sin, and by 


~ perseverance in prayer, devotion, and the service of God. 


-* 


_ Where’ thése two qualities éxist, all the others that dis- 
tinguish true christians, will ever be present. A’ con- 
" gregation: -of such will be “ living: stones, built up a 
Spiritual house, -a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual 
sacrifices, acceptable: to God ‘by Jesus Christ.” All 


~ those from whom they are absent, are carnal and un- 
. holy. . And-can men of this class legitimately compose 


Christ’s church upon'earth? The supposition is pre-’ 


‘ posterous. Spirituality, and purity, must- distinguish 
those who are entitled to a place in the sanctuary of 
God. ae at i 


Of this character were all those who formed the 
‘church in its original organization. The King in Zion 
‘intended and required that the holiness of his church 


» should. ‘be preserved, and perpetuated. But ‘how can 


this be done ?. Its accomplishment demands evidently, 
the strictest regard to appropriate laws of membership. 
That the required character cannot otherwise be at- 
- tained must, to every thinking man, be perfectly ob- 
vious. Who does not know that the «haracter of any 
association, among men, is determined, and ever must 
be determined, -by its laws of membership? These 
* Rom. viii., 5-8. © : + 1 Pet. in, 5. 


~ 


isa. 5. “INFANT BAPTISM: 


laws decide. the qualifications. of the individuals of. 
whom" the association is composed... The-aggregate is 
made up of: the individuals. * The character of the -in- 
dividuals will inevitably be the ‘character of the. asso- 
ciation, This truth is self-ewdent., .That- would not. 
be a. Temperance society, however vehemently it. might 
demand. the name, which should, receive, and retain, 


large numbers of men. who continue in. the. daily use~ 


of, ardent spirits as a beverage. A Literary society 
would not remain such, ia any proper. sézise, when — 
filled «ap with- uneducated men, who neither-study, nor 


intend to study literature. ‘Nor would a Medical so-* : 


ciety deserve the name, if composed mostly. of plank 


ers, merchants, and lawyers, who designed to give no +. 


special attention to medicine: -If the ‘specific iemetek 


> 


* 


<j 


of the association is preserved: and perpetuated, those _ — . 


‘only must. be admitted to membership,-and retained in 
the body, who are qualified by thé necessary acquire: 
ments, and disposed to prosecute the objects had in 
view in its formation. Thése- great truths are espe- 
cially applicable to the church of Christ, Her spirit. 
udkty and purity as a body, can be preserved. and -per- 
petuated no otherwise. than’ by admitting to member: » 
ship, and retain 


In accordance with these. facts, and. ones | 
their truth, the laws of membership enacted by our 
Lord Jesus Christ, are’ fixed with the greatest possi-_ 
ble plainness and particularity. Baptism is the out-, 
ward-form in which this membership’is ‘given and ‘as- 
sumed. ‘This ordinance is. essential .to admission “into’ 
_the visible church, and-of ‘that church all who receive, 


in communion, those. iadibilinea only» « 


= 


* 4 


x 


DESTROYS THE CHURCH. 183 
j 7,” . . J 
it are members. - Paul so, teaches us when he says :-— 
SAS many- “of, you asshave, ‘been’ “baptized into ‘Christ, 
» havé put on Christ.”’* _All'the denominations around 
us receive, and act ‘upon. this truth. . At. the baptism ‘of 
a child in the. Episcopal church; the minister says:—“ We 
receive this.child into the consregation of Christ’s.flock.”+ 
The*Methodist minister says hen atehild is baptized, it 
‘is done that :—°" He [this child] being delivered from thy 
[God’ s] wrath, may be received into the ark of Christ?s 
_ ehurch,”t -And the Presbyterian says :— Baptism is 
a sacr auch of the New Testament,” “ whereby the - 
‘parties ba tized: are solemnly: admitted into the visible 
‘church, and enter into’an open and professed engage-— 
“ment to be. wholly: and-only the Lord’s.”8 “The laws 


of baptism, therefore, are -confessedly included in the laws 


e ; 


Ditadeiaterchipe _ Let these laws, as enacted by Messiah, 
now be indicated. « Teach,” said he, sand» “ baptize” 


the instructed. “Preach the. gospel,” and “him that 
va b p 


believeth” the gospel; baptize.” In all your adminis- 
- trations let the fact be yemembered, that “My kingdom . 
“is not of this world.”|| . The kingdom, andthe domin- 


-. jon, and the greatness of ethe:kingdom under the-whole 
: _ “heaven, shall be «given to the pespichad the ‘saints of 


~ the Most High.” The-language of the New-Cove- 
“nant describes truly, without ee the character of 
- those who ‘are in-that covenant, and such only are -ie- 
ogitimately,, church» inembers. «y will,” says. God, 


+553, 4 put my laws into.their mind, and write thenr in thee 


heart ; andy I will be to. tiem a God, and they ell be 


id 


. Gal. iii., 27. ay) The Litureye 
“)-f Discipline; cli. 8; sect. 2. © “8 Larger ated, st 165, 
¢ belo x ais, 26. 4 Dan. vii, 27,0 it 
ais oe 


” 


134 "INFANT BAPTISM 


ey” 


to me a people ; and they shall not (sili ‘every map - Me 


his neighbor, and every man his’ brother; saying, Know 
the herds for all shall know mie, from-the least to the 
greatest. re By the laws of Christ, therefore, only those 
are to be admitted into the church who have been 


taught, who believe, who’ are not of this world, who * 


are saints, in-whose mind and heart the law of © God is 
incorporated, and who know the Lord as their God. 


“This character is required of them ‘also by their. rela- 


tions to Jehovah. The church of God offer him ae- 
ceptable worship, but this can be done by no others 
than those described ; “for God is a Spirit, and they 
that worship him; must worship him ‘in’ spirit and ine 
truth.”+ ~ It is also demanded by their: relations to 


mankind. “Ye are the saltof the earth. But if the _ 


salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted ? 9 
It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, » 
and to be trodden under foot of men. Ye care the — 
light: of the world. . A city that is set on-a bill cannot » 
be hid. Neither ao men light a candle, and put it un- 


der a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it giveth light 


unto all that arein the house. Let your light so shitie 


before men, that they may see your good works, and — 
glorify your Father which isin heaven.” _ 


These are some of the laws of picraberehip in ns 
church as fixed by Christ himself. How definite! How 


precise in all things ! They describe, with. the. iitmost 


clearness, the spiritual, and the pure. None others can 


enter his church, since it is his purpose to. perpetuate 


in the body these holy qualities. The execution of these _ 
laws is.confided to his ministers and people. If they 
* Heb. vilii6 Roms vill, 2-6, sf Math v.p78-i7. 


y 


— 


% _ DESTROYS THE CHURCH. 135 


? 7 

swerve from their duty, the: result. is lost. . The strict- 
est obedience on their part, is consequently commanded, 
and enforced. by the most solemn sanctions. He who 
fails in-his fidelity, no matter who-he is, or what may 
be his official: position, sins against God, by disregard- 
ing his solemn. injunctions ; sins against the church, by 
corrupting and degrading it;.sins' against. the world, 
becatse he removes eid puiioeuienes the. light by 
‘which it is to be guided to salvation; and sins against 
his “own. soul, covering himself with crime, and con- 
demnation. : . : 

We. are now prepared to inquire into the effect pro- 
duced upon the character of the church by infant bap.» 
- tism: It sets aside all. the laws of membership enacted. 
by ‘Christ for her préseryation “and glory ; it proceeds 
upon. others of its:own creation, and substitution; it 
brings into the body, not the spiritual and pure only, 
but. also all classes of mens; and it thus impresses. upon | 
it such a,character as effectually destroys its claims to 
be regarded. as the’ true visible church of Christ. It 
is thenceforth necessarily cdrnal-and mony It ts not 
the church of Christ. . 

“Infant baptism, I have. said, ‘necessarily leads to this 
gr Mee result. -Let this proposition be further 


: considered. Does it fiot, to the extent that it pre 


yails, throw'the whole population of ‘the country into 
the chutch? This fact no man will deny. Is it not 
_ also true, that. great multitudes 6f these baptized chil- 
_ dren grow up to maturity in the church, worldly, sen- 
sual, wicked men? ‘They: are all members, and some” 
of them ministersy and other ‘officers, in the church ! 
ff, as, we. have seen, the character of an_ association as 


> 


136 . Serie BAPTISM 


s ~ 


a body, is necessarily that of the individuals of which it 


is composed, then it follows with certainty, that infant 


baptism must soon despoil the church of its spirituality 
and purity, and render it carnal’ and unholy, since it is 
by this rite, filled with, members, officers,*and ministers, 
who are not themselves spiritual and pure, but_carnal, 
unholy, and worldly. -The church is shgpes the members 
are of which it is composed 

But the evil-influence in the connection in ach if 


now speak of it, is not negative merely, it is positive, — 


and: overwhelming. ‘It not only eacludes spirituality 
and purity from the church, but, it introduces wordy 
tions of the most destructive character, oo MEG 
How it corrupts the church in -her membership ds 
sufficiently apparent. ~ Its corrupting influence. upon. 
her doctrines has been seen in previous chapters. I 
will here recapitulate. It perverts the word of God to 
bring it apparently into its support; it engrafts Juda- 
ism upon the gospel of: Christ; its’ principles; contra- 
dict the doctrine of justification by faith ; they are in 
conflict with the'work of the Spirit in regeneration ; 
and they falsify the doctrine of iitiiversale depravity. 
What fearful destruction it has thus wrought in all that. 
is revered and holy! What now must’ be her general 
temper; and disposi ition? Will ‘she be as designed iy, * 
Jesus Christ, and ‘represented: by his’ apostles, “A glo- 
rious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 


thing, but holy, and without, blemish 2”* — Will she ; 


“crucify the flesh, with its affections and lusts ?” 
“Will she “live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit,” 
bringing forth the fraits of “<love, joy, peace, longesut- 

* Eph, v, a Na a 


a 
e a -* 


e 


* “ *. > » E . - 
. DESTROYS THE CHURCH. ECE 


: 


fering, gentleness, Siaaness, fait temperance? ge will 
she not rather be guided by ambition, pride, and vain- 
“glory, relying for Her advancement. upon méasures .of 
mere worldly*policy 2 Will’she not prefer a jearned, 
‘or. an eloquent, to a’ converted ministry ?. Will she not 
be ready to embrace any falsé doctrines, or unseriptural 
practices, which may be found’ congenial with her un- 
sanctified nature, and suited to her purposes of” “domin 
ion, and power ? With such *a spirit infant © baptism 
has always been’ found inspiring: the ‘church. “Nor ig 
'. this less true of Protestantism than it is “of Popery. 
Whence originated the } Neology* of. Lutheranism, the 
“Puseyism- of Episcopacy, and_ the Unitarianism and 
“Universalism of Calvinism? Had these’ churches: ‘ad- 
hered» ‘to the laws of membership established by Christ 
Jesus, ard admitted, or retained in. their communion, 
"none but the truly converted, could these* miserable 
dogmas ever have covered them with shame and misery ? 
They are all, therefore, the legitimate offspring of in- 
fant baptism. Its advocates wugé “sown the, wind, 
and as a natural * conseg uence, et have rer pee the 
“whirlwind.” = : ys 

Nor does: “We evil of infant’ baptism terminate even 
‘here. It blots out every vestige of the hurch “itself, by 
‘wholly destroying its visibility! 'T soy sition, may 
seem startling. Let us give it ‘aca ives 
tion, me ss # $ 

rie: doetiine: tauglit by- Bere acute Dring 
every child [upon. ea arth into ‘the church as soon as ‘it ‘is. . 
born ! © We will: ‘Silppose, for’the sake of the illustra- rs 
tion, ‘that. from this: ‘hour, the’ gospel i is known in every 
‘land, and these: ‘principles: univ ersally ‘protall’> What 

12* 


ISR ic: Se catia isis . 


would be the practical effect 2 2 “Bvidently that a. one 


generation thé- whole world would be in the church ! ‘The ' 


Presbyterians would baptize all the’children of believing. 
parents; the Episcopalians would baptize “upon the faith 
of the church,” all those for whom sponsors could be se- 


cured; and the Methodists, and others, would baptize the | k 


remainder! Nota livingbeing would be out of the church! 
What 1 now is the Soaditioa ‘ek things ? The church is 
‘the world ; and the world is the« sohurol They are 
identical ! Either there is no church ; or there is no 


world! ‘If the world is not the church—aud we know- 


that it is not—then there is no visible church of God 
upon earth! Its visibility is destroyed; and is. des 
stroyed by infant baptism. What do we now ‘see? 
The spirituality. ofthe church is gone! The purity 
of the church is gone! The visibility of the church is 


ol 


. 


gone! The church itself is gone! It’is-despoiled of « . 


those peculiar’ qualities which are. essential. to the, 
church of Christ. If there is no other than a Pedo- 
ba tist church, then theré is no true sibs church of | 
‘Christ upon earth! se 
But is not this an overatatenient of she case? Would 


‘not a laudable. christian charity draw a” much brighter | 


picture than the one I have now sketched? Tam re- 
minded that the Methodist church, the Presbyterian 
church, the Congregational church, and. several other 
churches in this country, and in England, are, , in their” 
numerous divisions, highly evangelical. ~All these, 
_with infant baptism, still hold and teach the- great fun- 
* ‘damerital truths of the’ ‘gospel. lam happy to con.” 

. ede that this is traé.- It is): however, the result, of a 


peculiar panies ‘of things, and cannot, therefore, dis: ° 


DESTROYS THE CHURCH. 139~ 
-eredit: any argument which has been submitted. on the | 
“subject. Four causes, continually acting upon them — 
all, have. hitherto preserved. them, in a great measure, 
from falling into. the same destruction which has over- 
whelmed others, . wig 
The first. is. the great Baptist pate es ig’ 
they are unceasingly in-contact: In North “America — 
the Baptist churches contain a million. of ‘communi-' 
-eants, Four millions. more, at least, are of their opin- 
ion, and under their influence.» Nearly one-fourth, - 
therefore, of all our population are strongly Baptistical. 
All these: regard. infant baptism, »and infant church —. 
membership, as wholly unauthorized, and treat them 
_as nonentities in ‘religion. . These Baptists are diffused 
in all the families of the land, high and low, rich and 
poor, bond and free, learned and hnnleaxned They-are 
associated with their Pedobaptist brethren upon equal, 
and most. intimate. terms. . AS a consequence of this 
state of things, the jnfluenicé of «infant: baptism. is, to a 
be great extent, neutralized, and destroyed.» - 
The second of these causes is the universal diffusion 
of the Bible... The word of God is now carefully stud- 
ied; in Sabbath- schools, in’ Bible-classes, in families, and 
in the closet, not by scholars only, but also. by all © 
classes: of our people, and it is probably better under- 
stood by them all, than it has ever been at any period _ 
‘since the days of the apostles, The masses are en- 
lightened ; they exercise their, own judgment; and 
their religious opinions. are approaching,. consequently, « 
much nearer the scriptural standard, In allsthe teach- 
ings « of that. holy book they find not one word.to justify _ 
‘infant “baptism. » Thousands, - consequently, who have 


A 


“140 


% 


ie Ya 
a INFANT BAPTISM ae 


_ received: the rite,” 2Shise utt terlyy to” adits in’ accordance 
with it. “They ‘do not regard »themselves: as church 
members, ‘or in any way privileged spiritually, because - 
- of their infant-baptism: That, sdy they; was only» a 


» form. ~ Ands indeed, so far has this ‘conviction, proceed. 


"avert in part its deleterious influ 


~ éd, ‘that: many, very many members, even of! Pedobap 
tist -churches, do not’ Hiesitate to avow their entire dis+ 


* 


> 


belief: in. “the. whole ‘theory. ‘Hence its wide-spread’ 


> spoglent throughout our whole land... In. proportion’: as 
. ‘the Bible is nde stood, loved,.and obeyed, does: infant 
baptism, i in all its relations and’ isi savin and 


* 


recede from-publiesview. © >> : . 


The: third: cause is found: in the aeoneshil x our Pe- 


dobaptist ministry. The great body’ of them, and: es- ” 


pecially of those connected with. the denominations» « 
have named, are converted men) Their. réligion » -and 
good sense lead them involuntarily: to discard, except . 
‘in its forms, the puerilities, of theirs distinguishing rite, | 
“They preach to all alike}? andy boldly declare to. sinners. 
of *every. class, that if they are’ saved ab all).it must.be- 


alone by the grace of God in Jesus Christ our Lord,” 


whom they can approach only as ‘penitent.’ believers, 
“and whose Spirit’ must renew and sanctify their heartse 
» Thus preaching the fnidaonctial truths of the gospel, 
they ee infant baptism,” keep it out, of aight and © 


< The Fourth and. last cause, is th 
which have so. long, and so eatenst 


; cowntry. “Of these, in common > aathe -our’ churches, 


theirs have largely, sand happily partaken, ” These. re- 


4 


vivals cal] the 4 thoughts of men directly, to the ¢ _corrups a 


- tions: of their own:nature, to. phe light of the word: of 


e 
é - 


DESTROYS THE CHURCH. * 141 


@e 


SE 


* 


Ged; +0°Rbe: cross of the Redeemer,:to eaten by. 


the Holy ‘Ghost; and to pardon, justification; and. salva- : 


tion, “through ‘faith in’ Christ: »Drue religion | is thus « 


everywhere epread: -abroad,, and: many, nobwithstanding ‘a 


the: -érrors of their: Standards, and other authorities. me" 


| whose forms they: einehserve: ate conver ted, and saved. 
) » These, ‘mainly; are the causes which in. America, and. 
thé British dominions, have thus far averted f from them, 
_itgnatural and inherent evils, and preserved their church- 
8S from total “overthrow. . Take these away, and naphilie 
/— eanesave: “them from. utter ‘disaster. ‘ 

We have now established our proposition by ser vee - 


| veasonfand facts. We proceed:still further to illustrate 


P 
and confirm ‘it, by the: -history and present: state ef the 


| | Pedobaptist world. >." é 
_* ‘Infant baptism swept the innit churches into — 
“pery, with all its darkness, and. horrors, The earthly 
| 


- 


Head and Ruler,” thus brought. whole nations into ~~ 


_ the- ‘church, and.made’ them subject to his authority. 
“National ‘governments -wers: ewithin, and’ subordinate ro! 
his, and all the people. of. which’ they were composed 


owed to the ‘Holy See” their ‘personal and primary 


allegiance. Thus the pope ruled the-nations with “a 
“rod of iron.” © That all this is.due to infant ‘baptisnr is 
demonstrated by. these two facts : <n the first place, 
that he exercised. this authority, sélely upon the ground” 
thatthe people, a | princes, ‘were- all members of his” 
church ; and in- the «second place, we’ all know, that 
they never. could ‘have been of his chutch, but for ime 
fant, baptism: May [£ not add, that, it*is by the same 
“means. that» he still retains his influence “over nations, 

and ‘communities, “keeps them in vawe reat his spiritual 


: 


= * 


* te t42 NAR ‘BAPTISM © 


_ prerogatives; and holds ‘them » in. servile: subjection to. 
~ his will 2 For what. other’ purpose than to ‘force them 
-under his: authority, does he so‘ sedulously” inewleate 


~ the pernicious dogma, that by their. baptism received. 


ae ih infancy, they are brought into the fold of the church,’ 


_ 


' within which they’ will be saved, and_ outs (of which. 
_ they will be~ damned ; and that _therefore, af they re- 
nounce. their baptism, or apostatize’ from popery, their: 
everlasting destruction is certain? . Do» any “of .these _ 
nations, or communities, dare at any time, to oppose - 
his authority, or disobey his orders. “He ‘immediately 
~ Jays them under an interdict, suspending the sacraments, 
all public prayers, burials, and baptisms, the: obsequious | 
' priests implicitly obeying. his. mandates: A» supersti-- 
“tious dread of these prohibitions, and» particularly: of 
that which withholds baptism from their children,” soon 
reduces the people to an humble compliance, since to. 
~ parents it. seems most. horrible. that, their children thus 


-deprived. must, if they die, ber inevitably lost. Whole 


kingdoms therefore: yield’ to his’ exactions; however ar 
bitrary or, oppressive,, because thereby, as. they. ‘sup- 
‘pose, they save their own, ‘souls, and the souls of: their 
children, which would ‘be. lost. if. they.did not. submit 
to the “ Vicar of Christ!” * Whatia tremendous influ- 
ence doés infant baptism: give to | opery! How cun- 
“nitigly is it adapted to uphold its | bg ‘i 
Protestant Hierarchies "in the old: wars were not, in 
adopting infant’ baptism, indifferent to the power which 
they would: bé ‘able through its means, to exert -over 
the people. But, we are, now, considering its effect 


* Consult Dr, - Gills Ing, Bee a Pat and Pilar —_  Popery, E 
“Obs, 2. Se Pay Hy ; 
a 


1 / eo ot e 
‘* 


| DESTROYS THE CHURCH. 148 
upon the. spirituality the purity, and oui quali- 
Kies, which are? essential to the true “church of Christ. 
In these. respevts what, when uninfluenced by antago- 

snistie’ causes; ‘such. ‘as those 1. have. recited, has been. 

its effects upon the ‘churches ofethe Reformation ? a - Sur- 

vey the present aspect ‘of the Episcopal Pintelis and © 
especially” in England. Her creed was in the main, 

“evangelical. Many of her early ministers were men of. 
great learning; energy, and" piety, She took 2 firm 


hold upon a ge proportion of the people... She abol- 


ca 


ished the: mass, and with it purged outa most of ‘the 
grosser’ ‘abominations of popery, but she retained infant 
bdptism, ‘with its sacramental doctrines. It has had’ 
time to produce its’ mature “fruits, « And what" are 
they? 2 «The land which around the tartyr-fires of 
Smithfiéld, swore’ eternal’ hatred to popery; is now full 
of popish dignitaries, popish priests, and. popish prose- 
lytes?” Almost every week announces the conversion 
to Romanism’ of some of her ministers; and people | 
“Infant baptism has ‘destroyed her gospel faith, and 
“transformed her worship into a beggarly imitation of 
“Htalian pageantry. Of the Methodist church, a late 


and vigorous offshoot of ‘Episcopacy, it is proper ‘to 


2 


say, that it has noi yet ewisted lony enotgh to feel 
the evils in question. But since it is following 
d eps, it’ must, at length, veach the same 
results. How many already, of her ministers, and 
frienabers; tare found going over to the« Episcopal 
church, and some of them go on.to Puseyism, and to 
Rome! Thus Methodism evinces that the blood of the 
mother courses In the veins of the daughter... 

Tum now to Lutheranism.: “Hse fabric: reared by 


: 


Lah 2 Se J INFANT. BAPTISM 


t 


the reformers _ af Germany, was. originally, massive, : 


lofty, and glorious. . But ofante baptism was left, ap= 
parently. a little rill beneath its. foundation, - ‘It*has 
continued to flow on, slowly but. cer tainly undermining. 
the structure, and. now it is. ov erturned,, and lies ~pros- 
trate, i in stately ruins! “For. two” ‘centuries the doc- 
trines taught by Luther, were rigidly maintained. ¥ But 
they were by many, held merely asa dead Jetter:” 
They constituted “a theological creed « for *which-men 


would buckle on the armor. of. conttover: rsy, but which. 
had no place in their hear ts, and no influence over their ; 


hives.” “ There came. at last a change over thes public: 


mind.” ‘There was “a breaking away from: old paths - 


of thought, and. a reckless pushing into. néw ones.” ~ | 


What power existed to. check this current of things ? qe 


The whole of. the people were in the “church, * Infant 


baptism. had placed. them there. Very few were \con- 


verted. “Byen hey, pastors, and theological professors, * 


were. ‘in most, instances, ‘destitute entirely’ of any ex- 
’ ‘perimental acquaintance with the power of christianity. . 
- Such.could have no inward’ witness of the truth of: the® 
gospel, and 0 illumination of ‘the Spirit to guide them 
in their inquiries. . Led exclusively, by ansnieakedt: 
reason, and a.skeptical philosophy, they plunged into 
speculations” the most wild’and extravagant. The 
Bible was either perverted to sustain their infidel theo- 
ries, or. regardéd’ by them asa ‘mere mythical repre- 


sentation, _ Its’ inspiration they discarded as a fond | 


conceit of former days. © ““Lhis condition. ‘of things has 


“continued untilthe church of Lmiher, the eldest: deughs P- 


ter” of the Reformation, ‘has, to a-great’ exteht, hata 
crowded i. all her Sspbipants, with anenewho, while, 


> 


a. Se 4. 


“DESTROYS THE CHURCH. 145 


partaking of her ordinances, and filling her offices, 
laugh at her doctrines,” and trample upon the word of 
God! Tholuck, a distinguished minister of her own, 
says of the present state ‘of the Lutheran church, that, 


it is “a huge mass, stiff, cold, and livid. What. in. 


many of its parts appears like life, is but the life of the 
corruption itself by which these parts are dissolving. 
Only here and there among its dying members is there 
a living one, that with difficulty averts death from it- 


$ 


- 


sélf.”* This is the deplorable condition of protestant 


christianity in all the German states. By what means 
has it been produced? By infant baptism. The bar- 
riers with which Jesus Christ surrounded his church, 
were by this rite, thrown down, and the unregenerate, 
profane, and worldly filled her sanctuary. : 

The church of Calvin offers to our consideration, and 


from the same cause, a similar history. Like Luther, — 


he did not return to the gospel laws of membership, 
but continued the initiatory ordinance as practised by 
popery. The light of his doctrines, with the piety of 
his people, gradually waned. The very city where he 
~~ dwelt, is now covered by “the black night of Socin- 
: ianism ! Her radiance is quenched. Her voice of 


; truth is hushed: The very pulpit in which he preach-» 


ed, is pe lips that deny the divinity of the Son 
1 t] e renewing agency of his Holy Spirit.” 


esults to which infant baptism has al- 
piscopacy, Lutheranism, and Calvinism, 


ready ordugte k 


in Europe. But a still more striking instance, if possi- 


ble, of its pernicious effects is furnished in the history 
of Puritanism in our own country. “ The founders of 


* Predigten, Band 1, § 25. 
13 


Pe rae 


x 


146 INFANT BAPTISM 


the New England churches had cast off the fetters of 
a tyrannical Hierarchy in the old world, and they 
brought with them to the new, views respecting the 
spiritual nature of christian communities, and the sim- 
plicity of christian worship, much more correct than 
those generally entertained in that age. They were 
men profoundly read in the scriptures, of great faith 
and zeal, and of exemplary holiness.” “Their situation 
removed them far from the corrupting influence of 
‘other less evangelical societies. They were alone in 
the wilderness, with themselves, their offspring, and 
their God.” Here, then, if it ever can be anywhere, 
infant baptism would surely have been harmless. The 
process by which it inevitably leads to deterioration is 
thus described by Dr. Wisner, who being himself a 
Puritan Pedobaptist, cannot be suspected of having 
colored his picture too highly. “As to the promises 
[made at their baptism, by parents and friends] of 
educating children in the fear of the Lord,” “they 
soon came to be alike disregarded by both those who 
exacted, and those who made them.” “The most 
solemn and impressive acts of religion, came to be re- 
' garded as unmeaning ceremonies, the form only to’ be 
thought important, while the substance was overlooked, 


_and rapidly passing away.” “And now another and 


still more fatal step, was taken in this downward 
course. Why should such a difference be made [in the 


persons receiving them] between the two christian sac- 


raments, which reason infers ‘from the nature of the 
case, and the-scriptures clearly determine, require pre- 
cisely the same qualifications? If persons were qual- 
ified to make in’ order to come to one ordinance, jbap- 


= 


_ DESTROYS THE CHURCH. ‘ 147 


tism] the very same profession, both in meaning and 
terms, required to come to the other, [the communion] 
~why should they be excluded from that other? The 
practical result, every one sees, would be, that if the 
innovation already made [known among them as the 
Half-Way Covenant, according to which all the bap- 
tized, if not openly immoral, were regarded as church 
members*] were not abandoned, another would be 
speedily introduced. And such was the fact. Cor- 
rect moral deportment, with profession of correct de- 
votional opinions, and a desire for regeneration, soon 
came to be regarded as thg only qualification for admis- 
sion to the communion.” The churches soon came to 
consist very considerably, in many places, of wnregen- 
erate persons; of those who regarded themselves, and 
were regarded by others, as unregenerate. Of all these 


_ things the consequence was, that within thirty years 


after the commencement of the eighteenth century, a 
large portion of the clergy throughout the “country, 
were either only speculatively correct, or to some ex- 
‘tent actually erroneous in their religious opinions ; 


* maintaining regularly the forms of religion, but in some 


instances having well-nigh dost, and in others having, it 
is to be feared, never felt its power.” 

“To such a state,” remarks Dr. Ide,{ “had the Pie 
ritan churches of New England been brought by in- 
fant baptism within a single céntury! Silently, but 
surely, it had ¢ done its work!” Successively it had, de- 

* Vide Mather’s Magnalia, Book 6. 


+ History of the Old South Church. 
t In his excellent chapter in Gill’s Part and Pular, ch. 4, from 


which Dhave here drawn my statements regarding "Episcopacy, 
Lutheranism, Calvinism, and Puritanism. . 


= Ys Ped 
148 4 INFANT BAPTISM 


stroyed the spirituality, and the purity of the church 
Truth was abandoned. Religion expired. <“ Every. 
where men avowedly Vedas el, belonged to her 
communion, presided over her interests, and served at 
her altars. With such a membership, and such a 
ministry, both alike carnal, it was not to be supposed 
that the church would long retam even a theoretical 
belief in the. grand teachings of*revelation. These, 
however, were not at once repudiated. The forms of 
faith which have become fixed ina community, do not 
suddenly pass away. ‘Truth leaves the heart, and the 
lips, long before it leaves the creed. ‘For a consider- 
able period, therefore, a dead, leaden orthodoxy hung 
over New England, hiding like a shroud the rottenness 
beneath. But this could not continue. An incipient 
change began tobe perceived. The distinguishing 
doctrines of the gospel were not, indeed, denounced - 
and opposed. They were passed over. While keep- 
ing their place in the Confessions, and Articles, they 
were quietly dismissed from the pulpit, to make room. 
for moral essays, and panegyrics on the beauty of nat- 
ural virtue. The downward progress having gone thus 
far, must go further. Men are never satisfied with 
what is merely negative. They demand a positive. 
When once they have discarded positive truth, their 
next step is to embrace positive error, Hence we find 
that as early as the middle of the last century, opin- 
ions involving a denial of the prof r divinity of Christ, 
the depravity of human nature, the need of atone-. 
ment, and the work of the Holy Spirit in regenera- 
tion, were extensively adopted in _ Massachusetts.” 
“They spread for fifty"years through the country, per- 


DESTROYS THE CHURCH. 149 


. 


vading the graceless clergy, and more graceless laity.” 
“At last the great U7 nitarian apostasy stood revealed in 
all its hideous deformity !” 

All these facts are authenticated by the stern voice 
of impartial history. They afford a demonstration most 
perfect, that infant baptism, wherever it is not coun- 
teracted by mitigating influences, will destroy, and must 
destroy, the spirituality, the purity, the very visibility 
of the church. It inevitably despoils her of all those 
qualities which are essential to the true church of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 4 

Infant baptism, as must be seen, in the light of all 
the facts and considerations now before you, is not 
merely a question of an ordinance, it is also a ques- 
tion of membership in the church of Christ. In the 
former sense it is unlawful. In the latter it is fear- 
fully. destructive. It must always give character to 

church in which it is practised. It inevitably fills 
it with the unregenerate, and unholy, with skeptics, 
and unbelievers. And still more. Against this de- 
terioration and moral death, there is for Pedobaptist 
churches, as such, no possible remedy. They possess 
within themselves no power to throw them off. They 
must wither and expire under their influence, .Not so 
with us. Do corruptions, no matter of what char- 
acter, invade Baptist churches? They contain in- 
herently all the elements of restoration.. They have 
only to recur to first principles, to their inspired laws 
of membership, and discipline. By the former, no per- 
sons are admitted to a place among them, but those 
who are decided, in a judgment. of cchatity, to be true 
penitent believers in Christ, born of the Holy Ghost; 

13* 


150 INFANT BAPTISM 


and by the latter laws, all those who depart from piety 
in life, or truth in principle, are promptly separated 
from their communion. By this simple, but effective 
process, how often have they purged themselves from 
evils of all kinds! Striking instances are perhaps, 
within your own memory. Antinomianism attempted 
to fasten itself upon our churches. It was promptly 
thrown off. Campbellism came, with its Pedobaptist 
doctrine of sacramental efficacy. They arose and cast 
out this source of impurity. Thus they have acted 
in all ages. They have only to enforce the fundamental 
laws of their constitution, which require that God’s 

spiritual house shall be composed of spiritual mate- 
rials. While they do this, they will ever rejoice in a 
pure doctrine, a pure membership, a pure and able 
ministry, and a vigorous life. With Pedobaptist churches 
the case is wholly different. From a resort to: first 
principles they can derive no help. These very first 
principles, embracing, as they do, infant baptism, and 
infant church membership, have done all the mischief. 

While they preserve and cherish the sowrce whence 
they arise, they can never escape the corruptions that 
necessarily result. They may manifest occasional 
amendment. There may be in their history, intervals 
of revival. There have been such, in this country, 
among Presbyterians, and Congregationalists, and in 
the Methodist branch of the Episcopal church. Com- 
parative spirituality and purity, will in such cases, for a 
while prevail. But these periods must be evanescent. 

The same prolific fountain is perpetually sending forth 
its streams, and they must soon again be deluged. 

They have no remedy. -They must renounce their first 


Ce o 
tx 


a 
DESTROYS THE CHURCH. — 151 


principles, and adopt the laws of church membership 
contained in the word of God. The annals of history 
contain not an instance of a Pedobaptist church, that 
has continued a Pedobaptist church, which has radical- 
ly and permanently reformed itself. The Church .of 
England has not done it. The Church of Germany 
has not done it. The Church of Calvin has not done 
it. No Pedobaptist church ever has done it. None 
ever will, except those who cease to receive into their 
bosom the worldly and the profane. In a word, if 
they would be what the church was designed to be by 
Christ, they must cease to be Pedobaptists. 

With Baptists, I remark in conclusion, are lodged, 
as you must plainly see, the only conservative influences 
now existing in the universe. It is ours, with the 
blessing of God, to save from being eee ue that — 
eis which is “the world’s only hope.” It is ours 

, to save Pedobapti8ts themselves, of all classes, 
fi the consequences of their own errors. If we do 
not save them, they must sink. It is ours to spread 
the gospel throughout the round earth. How exalted, 
therefore, how responsible, how far-reaching, is our 
mission! It is fearfully sublime. It has, however, 
been assigned us by our God. Sustained by his grace, 
et us diseharge it with fidelity. He is even now, cloth- 
ing us with strength for the work. How wnexampled 
‘8 our multiplication ! How rapid our diffusion over 
the whole earth! Jehovah is evidently about to vin- 
ticate his gospel ; to sweep away the clouds’ of igno- 
ance, superstition, and error ; to restore to man a 
pure snd glorious christianity. Of this great conflict 
whe will consent to remain an idle spectator? Who 


% oa 


152 INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. 


can refrain from participating in the Battle? Who 
does not involuntarily exclaim with the ‘princely proph- 
et, “ For Zion’s sake I will-not hold: my peace, and 
for Jerusalem’s sake I will not be silent, until the 
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the 
salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth?” ~ 


CHAPTER VIII. 


INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE ITS PRACTICE 
PERPETUATES THE SUPERSTITIONS BY WHICH IT WAS 
ORIGINALLY PRODUCED. . 


w 


Canses which produced infant baptism; hypothesis by which it was jus 
* tified; protestants adopted it with all its ancient absurdities; its orf- 
ginal superstitions still prevail. ‘ 


Inranr baptism is the offspring of superstition. Nor 
has any of the progeny of. that most prolific mother 
been more productive of evil to the cause of truth and 
salvation. In these respects it has amply justified its 
origin, It is not the eldest born, but it is the most 
sopular and insidious of them all. 

‘During the apostolic age, and until two tiagied 
years of the church had been told, infant-baptism was 
wholly unknown. The history of that period, whether 
sacred or profane, makes not the remotest allusion to 
such a practice. This of itself, is sufficient proof that 
it did not exist. But it is not the only testimony. The 
fathers in the church who then lived and wrote, often 
speak of baptism, and always in such terms as to con- 
vince us that it was not administered to children. One 
of them—Justin—contrasts the state of christians at 

their birth with their state-at their baptism. “ Then 
{at-their birth, says he] they were involuntary and un- 
_ conscious - of what they experienced; but at their 


154 INFANT BAPTISM 


baptism they had choice, and knowledge, and iJlumina- 
tion.”* And Tertullian observes :—*“ The laver of bap- 
tism is the seal of faith, which faith begins from pena- 
ence. We are not washed [baptized] in order that we 
may cease from sinning, but because we have ceased, 
since.we are already cleansed in heart.”+ Infant: bap- 
tism, therefore, could not have as yet been introduced. 
Origen, who lived in the middle of the third century, 
was the first who defended it. It was, as he tells us, 
a subject of “frequent inquiry among brethren.”{ Con- 
sequently it must have been.a new topic. ‘“Brethren’”s 
did not understand it. Up to this time evidently, none 
received baptism, but such as with “choice and knowl- 
edge,” made a credible profession of their “faith.” In 
this ordinance they publitly “put on Christ.” But 
now, whether infants, or persons too young to under- 
stand the rudiments of religion, should be baptized, ex- 
cited “frequent inquiry among brethren.” Thence om 
ward the practice rapidly gained ground, and soon 1a 
quired universal prevalence. 

Why, I may ask, should such a thing as. the banat 
of infants ever have suggested itself to the minds of. 
men? It is not eultited 4 in the word of God. Rea- 
son does not approve it. To religion it is plainly re- 
pugnant. From whence did it arise? It owes its 
existence, I answer, exclusively to blind superstition, 
which first persuaded men that there is a mysterious, 


* Christian Rev., No. 22. 

+ De Penitentia, ‘sect. 5, p. 128: 

t There is great uncertainty whether Origen wrote what is at- 
tributed to him. His works have been’ whply, vitiated by inter- 
pours - 


* & 


PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 155 


secret, inexplicable efficacy in baptism, which conveys 
the grace of God to. the soul of the recipient; then, 
that without baptism no one, whether adult or infant, 
could be saved ; and Jastly, that infants really do, by 
some incomprehensible power of God, repent of their 
sins, believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore, 
according to the gospel, are entitled to receive bap- 
tism ! We will examine each of these propositions sep- 
arately. 2 

1. The opinion beg an to prevail as early as the ann 
dle of the second century, that there is in baptism some’ 
mysterious, secret, inexplicable efficacy which conveys 
the grace of God to the soul of the recipient ! 

Of this fact: testimony so ample has already been 
submitted that you need not here be detained with its 
répetition. This super stitious absurdity, seems to have 
been first taught by the Gnostics, borrowed doubtless 

‘the “Eugenia”* of the pagan Greeks. © Gnosti- 

was a popular and inveterate heresy.t As a 
sect, it was nominally put down, and destroyed ; but 
its. dogmas lived. Many of them were embraced: by 
the teachers reputed orthodox, and perpetuated in the 
Frith of all subsequent ages. _ Among them, this is not 
the least ‘striking: or conspicuous. . The spiritual bene- 
fits they attributed to baptism were supposed not to be 
‘in the ordinance itself, but through that as a medium 
conveyed to the soul by the administrator, in virtue of 
the prayers, and the faith of the church, and as readily 
_to one individual as to another. No one, whether 
adult. or infant, was considered safe who should die 
ee * evyena. Vide Stovel on Discipleship. 

+ Vide Neander’s Eccl. Hist. 


156 INFANT BAPTISM _ 


without: having obtained the benefits of these cleanaing 
influences. Gregory Nazianzen, for example, suppos- 
ing, in one .of his discourses, that he might be request- 
ed to express his opinion in the premises, proceeds to 
advise that’ in case of any apparent danger of death, 
children. should be baptized, “Inasmuch,” says he, 
“as it were better they should be sanctified without 
knowing it, than that they should die without being 
sealed and initiated.” In all other cases he prefers 
that baptism should be delayed until those who re- 
ceive it are of sufficient age to allow the impression 
intended to be made by the recital of the mystic 
words.* On these accounts the ordinance continued 
to grow in importance until it assumed all the conse- 
quence with which it ase been invested in subsequent, 
ages. 

2. Avkindred doctrine grew up with this, and soon 
took possession of the general mind, that no oneal 
whatever age, without baptism could be saved. —" 

And if indeed baptism conveys grace and salvation, 
which without it cannot be received, how can any one 
be saved to whom it has not been given? On this 
subject, Cyprian, the Bishop of Carthage, says :+— 
“As far as in us lies, no soul is to be lost. It is not 
for us to hinder any person from baptism, and the 
grace of God. Which rule, as it holds to all, so we 
think it more especially to be observed in reference fo 
infants, to whom our help, and*the divine mercy, are 
rather to be granted.” Ambrose also, the Bishop of 
Milan,t remarks :—‘ No’ person comes to the kingdom 


* Sacks on Bapt., p. 138, ae + Anno Dom. 250. 
$A. D. 390. 4 


PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. ; 157 


of -heayen but by baptism. ‘Infants that are’ baptized, ; 
are reformed back again = wickedness to the primi- 
tive state of their nature.” “And Chrysostom, the 
Patriarch of Constantinople,* observes :— The ‘grace 
of baptism gives us cure without pain, and fills us with 
the grace of the Spirit.” “If sudden death seize us 
before we are baptized, there is nothing to be expected 
but hell.” Thus do these great men express the doc- 
trine, which in their age prevailed among all who were 
considered orthodox. They - believed “that salvation 
without ‘baptism was impossible. The effect upon the 
minds of” parents and others, may readily be ima- 
gined. All, as- we may Suppose, were baptized with- 
out delay. 

‘Concurrent with these snovements arose an institu- 
tion in the church, the workings of which had a pow- 
erful influence in hastening infant baptism. I allude 
to Catechumenical Schools;. of which a full account 

y be.seen in any extended ecclesiastical history. 
Concerning them I shall state but two or three facts. 
They originated in the second century, and were at- 
tached, as Sabbath- -schools now are, to the several 
christian congregations. They proposed to instruct 
children, and proselytes in the principles of religion, 
preparatory to their admission to baptism and member- 
ship in the church. For several centuries they enjoy- 
ed boundless popularity. Into these schools were re- 
ceived children of al] classes, and persons of all ages 
and circumstances. None of them, however, were bap- 
tized, except in cases of “danger of death,” until they 
had passed through their regular novitiate, and could 

* A, D, 400. e 
14 


158 INFANT, BAPTISM 


= 


_answer intelligibly the questions proposed i in the rubric . 
of the times. But’as we have seen, the impression of 
the importance. and necessity of baptism was constantly 
increasing in intensity, and the result was, proportionally 
to shorten the catechumenical period. The qualifica- 
tions for baptism were also of course diminished ‘in 
their number and extent, and finally, if the children 

could not themselves answer the questions, their friends 
were permitted to answer for them. 

The litur ey then, as now, required that all oie were 
baptized should, preparatory to receiving the ordinance, 
renounce the, world, the flesh and the devil, profesa 
their faith in Christ, and promise to walk in obedience 
to the gospel all the days of their life. This of course 
infants could not do. But the deficiency was ‘supplied 
by sponsors, who did all. this in. their names, pledging 
themselves to the church and her ministry, that these 
little. ones should subsequently receive the necessary 
instruction, admonition, and guidance, and at a suitable 
time, be brought before the bishop to be examined, 
and confirmed in their christian profession. In these 
facts we have the true history of the origin of Spon- 
sors, or sureties for infants, in baptism. Such sureties had 
previously been employed only for older, or adult cate- 
chumens, having been first used for Pagans, and _after- 
wards for others on their baptism. Ask you for tésti- 
mony in proof of this statement? It is abundant, and 
at hand. We satisfy ourselves with one only. . The 
Edinburgh Encyclopedia says :—“ In the second cen- 
tury christians began to be. divided into believers, or 
such as were baptized, and catechumens, or such - as 
were receiving instruction to qualify them for baptism, 


~ 


* 


-PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 159 


To answer for these [last] persons, sponsors or God 
fathers were first mtroduced.”* By this device the 
consciences ofall were quieted.’ Infant baptism thus 
gradually extended itself. And since preparatory in- 


* “structions "Were no longer necessary, the catechumeni- 


* ¢al schools were not wanted; and they at last ceased to 
exist. _Murmurings were doubtless uttered. occasion- 
ally, by those who knew any thing of religion as taught 
in the word of God.” But for these there was a ready 
.remedy. ‘They were all silenced, and the policy of the 
Catholic church fixed, by decrees such as the following 
established at the Council of Trent :—‘ Whoever shall 
affirm that the sacraments: of the new law [the gospel] 
are not necessary to salvation,” “and ‘that they do not 
contain the grace they signify,” “let him be ac- 
eursed,”’t | é ~ 

3. Infant baptism was now established, and justified, 
by the grace. conferred in the ordinance, its necessity to 


‘salvation, and the expedient of sponsors to answer for 


the child. Yet the difficulty was not entirely over- 
‘come. In those early days, repentance for sin, and 
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, were acknowledged as 


“indispensable preliminaries to baptism. These condi- _ 


tions are so plainly set forth in all parts of the New 
Testament, that no Pedobaptist then pretended.to call 
them in question. They felt, on the contrary, that 
they were obliged to. comply with them. They knew 
also that the repentance and faith of the sponsor, were 
_ only those of the proxy or substitute, and not of the 
child. But it was the child who was to receive the or- 
‘inance, not the sponsor, and the Biblé requires these 

: ne Art. Sponsors. * + Cone. Tridy Arts Bapt. ' 


160 * INFANT BAPTISM ” 


conditions of the very person to be hatpticddh himself. 
Here, it would seem, was an insuperable impediment. 
What was to be done? A most convenient discover ry 
was ‘now made and announced to the world. It ‘was 
an effectudl remedy. It was found: that infants do, by” 


‘some unexplained and incomprehensible power of God 


imparted to them, really possess, truly exercise, and , 
acceptably profess repentance of sin and faith in Christ, 
and are therefore, according to the conditions prescribed 
in the gospel, the proper subjects, and legally entitled , 
to receive baptism | “ 

This assumption is so monstrous that many may doubt 
whether it was ever made. Since then it may, per- 
chance, be called in question, I shall here pause until 
the amplest proof has been submitted. When first 
announced, it is not surprising that the proposition did 
not, at once, command universal assent. It seemed, 
even to some high ecclesiastics, to be an absurdity. 
Bishop Boniface, for example, wrote on the subject, a 
St. Augustine, as follows :—*If I should set before 
theé a young infant, and should ask of thee whether 
that. infant, when he cometh to riper years, will be 
honest and just,” “thou wouldest, I know, answer, ~ 
that to tell in these things what shall come to pass, is 
not in the power of mortal man. If I should ask 
what, good or evil such an infant thinketh, thine an- 
swer would be with the like uncertainty. If thou nei- 
ther canst promise for the time to come, nor for the 
present pronounce any thing in this case, how is it that 
when such are brought to baptism, their parents there 
undertake what. the child shall afterwards do? Yeay 
they: are? ‘not-doubtful to: say it doth [believe], which is - 


a- 


‘a - ee ‘ 
PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 161 


impossible to be done by infants; at least there is.no 
precisely : able to affitm it done. Vouchsafe me 


hereu ato some short answer, such as not only to press 


ime with the bare authority of -custom, but also instruct, 
me with the-cause thereof.” To this very modest and 
sensible address Augustine thus replies : :—* In the in- 


fant there is not a present actual habit Of faith. There 


is delivered unto them that sacr ament a part of the due 
celebration whereof’ consisteth in answering to the Arti- 
cles of Faith, because the habit of faith that doth after- 
‘wards come with years, is but further building up the same 
edifice, the foundation whereof was laid by the sacrament 
of baptism. For that ‘which we professed without any 
understanding, when we afterwards come to acknowl- 
édge, do we any thing else but only bring into ripeness 
the very seed which was sown before ? ave are then 
[in infaney] believers, because we then begin to be that 
which process of time doth make perfect. And until 

e come to actual belief, the very sacrament of faith 
_ [baptism] i is a shield as strong as after this, the faith 


» of the sacrament, against all contrary infernal powers, 


which whoever doth think ‘ ¢mpossible’ is “undoubtedly, 
farther off from christian belief, though he be baptized, 
than are those innocents who at ther baptism, albeit 
they have no concert or cogitation of faith, are not, 
withstanding pure and free from all opposite cogita- 
tions, whereas the other is not free. If, therefore, 
without any fear or scruple, we may account them, 
and term them believers, only for their outward pro- 
_ fessions’ sake, who inwardly are farther off from faith 
“than. infants, why not infants much more at the time. 
of their solemn initiation by baptism the sacrament of 
14* 


ae 


162 ’ INFANT BAPTISM 


faith, whereunto they not only conceive nothing oppo ie 
site, but have also that grace given them which isthe, 
best and most effectual cause out of which our belief 
doth grow. In sum, the whole church [infants’ and all] 
is a multitude of believers, alJ honored with that title, 
even hypocrites for their professions’ sake, as well as saints 
because of their inward sincere profession, and infants 
as being in their first degree of ghostly motion towards 
the actual habit of faith... The first sort are faithful in 
the eyes of the world; the second faithful in the sight, 
of God; the last in the ready, direct way to become. 
both.”* Again :—‘ Infants do profess repentance by 
the words of those who bring’ them, when they do by 
them renounce the devil and this world.”+ Mr. Bmg- ' 
ham of the Episcopal denomination, in his learned work 
on the Antiquities of the Christian Church, writing of 
this early period, says :—‘ Another sort of names giv- 
en to baptism were taken from the conditions required 
of all those who received it, which were the profession 
of a true faith, and a sincere repentance. Upon this ac- 
count baptism is sometimes called the sacrament of * 
faith, and the sacrament of repentance. St. Austin 
uses this name to explain how children may be said to 
have faith, though they are not capable of making any 
profession of themselves.” “And upon this account, 
when the answer [in the church] is made that an infant 
believes who has not yet the habit of faith) the mean- 
ing is that, he has faith because of the sacrament of 
faith ; and that he turns to God because of the sacra- 
meni of conversion.” Fulgentius.uses the same* terms 


* Hooker’s Works, vol. i., pp. 680-637. 
+ Wall, Hist. Int, vol. ii, pp. 485, 488. 


? 


¥- 


* 


Pe 


: aG s &* 


‘PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 163 

* * * x * « 
ele, urging the necessity of baptist 2¢ Firmly: believe 
_and doubt not, that excepting. such as are baptized in 
3 thee own blood: for abe name of Christ, no man ‘shall 


have eternal life who is’ ot here first turned from: his 


_ sins. by repentance and’ faith, and set» at liberty by. 


the sacrament of faith aad repentance, that is, ‘by 
baptism. go 
Such are the teachings of the fathers. on this Miidet. 


‘But we shave still miore- indubitable authority. The. 


whole doctrine,, in all-its absurdity, 1 183 embodied unmis- 


takably, in the liturgy of, the aneient church...’ The 


‘priest there asks.the child, and the sponsor answers, ‘as 
follows:  «. is 
at Question. —Dost’ thou. [the child. renounce: thie 


devil. and all his works, all his age and all his ‘ser- 


vice, and his pomps?”" liga 
ue Answer. =—J [ the sponsor. in his sae ‘do re- 


m9 


nounce. 
“ Quest.—Dost thow [the child] believe in. Christ 2 a 


, See Ans.—[By sponsor] I do: believe.” © And he re: 


peats the creed. The infant, after some other ceremo- 
nies, is baptized, and of course “baptized as 4 penitent 
believer in Christ! Thus the proof is complete that 
neither the ancient church nor the - “papacy ever aban- 
doned the great truth that repentance and faith are 
unchangeable gospel preliminaries to baptism, and that 
‘from, the fourth century up to the Reformation, in- 
fants were believed to possess the required. repe a. 
and faith, upon a profession of which they were bap- 
tized. fe 

These were mainly, the superstitions that originally 

* Antig. Chris. Church, vol. iil, p. 120. 
2 


a a 


164 INFANT BAPTISM ee a 


onda: infant “Baptism the belief of a -myjsterion 
cleansing power. ‘in baptism itself ; the necessity i nal 
cases of baptism’ in order to salvation ; aie and the 
that. infants who are baptized . haye. the necessaiy pr 
liminaries demanded in the gospel. . From this accumu: 
lation of theological impurities, like Python’ from the 
mud of the deluge, sprang infant baptism, : 

I now proceed to the other ‘branch of, the proposition, 
and shall show conclusively,” that the practice of infant” 
baptism perpettiates the superstitions by whieh if was 
originally: produced. . 4, 

That all the sects of” protestant poiobebunse are under a 
the influence at this moment, to a’ greater or less. extent, 
of the first, and the second , of these forms* of ‘Supersti- 
tion, is a fact that no man ea, successfully deny. Their 
- standards and other authorities teach unquestionably, 
that baptism carries with it somé mysterious cleansing 
power,. and that it is connected somehow, with grace and. 
salvation! The ancients believed, moreover, that little 
children brought to ‘baptism are endowed ” with the» 
graces of repentance and faith, and have therefore the 
gospel preliminaries required for baptism! ‘Do modern 
enlightened_ protestant pedobaptists credit this absurdi- 
ty 2 The inquiry is worthy, of our attention. ete 

. We turn, first, to the great, -and, in “some respects, 
incomparable Martin Luther. He practises no conceal- 
ments, but expresses himself boldly, and without. equiv- . 
ocation,, He remarks :—‘*We here say.and. conclude 
that the children believe in baptism etself, and have their’ 
own faith which God works in them, through the th- 
tercession and hearty offering of the sponsors, in the 
faith” of the christian church, and. that is what we” call 


AL 


. 


| * es 
PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. zs — 


he power of another’s faith ; not that: any one can tbe 
3a ved by that, but he thereby (that i is, through -anoth- 

ers intercession and aid) may obtain faith of. bis’ own 
om God by which he {the infant] * is saved. ” This 
faith j is, he declares; the infants’ “own faith in which 
they peliéve, and are baptized for ‘themselves.”* In 
his larger Catechism, published 1529, he further says * 

—“The'gréat efficacy and usefulness of baptism be- 
ing thus understood, let. us further observe what sort 
of persons it is that. receive such things as are offeréd 
by baptism. < This, again, is most beaatifally and clearly 
“expressed in these words::. ‘He that believeth, and is 
- baptized, shall be saved,’ That is, faith alone makes a 
person worthy to receive with any profit, this salutary 
and divine water. ~ Without faith baptism profits noth- 
ing, although in itself it cannot be denied to be a heav- 
enly and inestimable. treasure.” * “ We bring a chald to 
a minister of the church to be baptized in this hope 
and persuasion, that 7d certainly believes, ye we pray 


that God may give it faith”. And again. In the 


e: Conference at Wittenberg,” ‘in 1536, when called 


| upon to explain how infants who do not think at all, 
* can ‘believe, Luther .answered : a As ‘we even when 
* asleep, are numbered among the faithful, and are in 
” truth ‘such although we are actually thinking nothing 
of God, so.a_certain beginning of faith (which never- 


’ theless is the work of God) exists in infants” according 


“to their measure and proportion, of which we are igno- 
sant.” } Thus, we have the doctrine ‘of LutheYanism on 
- ‘his subject. At cannot: be: mistaken, * That church 


* Hinton’s Hist. Bapt., p.'839. 


a a “id Bucer’s Notes of the i in Goode on Bapt, 


> 


we om 7 * aii Sp “a 
166 — es ak BAPTISM 

ca 
holds that it is layial to baptize those only who, exer- 
cise repentance of sin, and faith: in Christ + that infan 4 
do exercise petone of sin, -and faith in * Christ: 
therefore it is lawful, and indeed obligatory, to si 
infants ! ‘ : : ‘ sits 

Calvin next demands our Cetin What did. he he : 
teach, and what do his followers now hold, on this 
subject ? . ‘o ¢ tw 

Two incompatible and contradictory’ theories strug- 
gléd i in his mind. The.infants of believing parents, and - 
these only, he taught, are to be baptized. -He’says ‘— 
“This principle must always be maintained,” “ that bap+ 
tism.is'\ not conferred upon infants in order that they, +. 
may become the: children and heirs of God, but because 
they arealready [their parents being” such] in that rank 
and position Otherwise ‘Anabaptists would be right 
in excluding them from baptism:’”’* © The grace confer- 
red upon children, and. tthe faith upon whieh they. are 
baptized, are therefore hereditary /» This is the former 
theory. ° The latter refers to. his doctrine of election. 
He taught that some infants ‘are elect, and some none 
- elect, and* that only the elect children receive any ben- 
efit’ by baptism ! !, He. remarks : :—** We diligently 3 teac 
that God. does not. put forth his power without distine- ° 
tion to all who receiye the sacrament, but only to the” 
elect. vty “ How, it is inquired, are. infants regenerated, a 
who have’ no knowledge either of good “or evil ? We 
reply 2 that the work oe God. is not yet without exist- 
ence, becuse it is not observed or understood by us. a 
Calvi says: i Though. these graces [repentance « and — 


‘ 


, vt 


rad Agreement at Zurich, 1549. * + us kacied 
t Culvin’s Inst.> Mi ae Bicar , iS Be * 


* 
p ~, We a 


PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 167 
“S ae 

. faith] have not- yet been formed in them, the seeds of 
i both care neverthéless implanted in their-hearts by the 
ret operations of the Spirip. Beam, Dine grace and. bene 
Reiare therefore elective! But if they be hereditary 


oy, 
how can they be elective? And if elective how can they 
be hereditary ? These two theories are radically the 
opposites of each other, and never can be harmonized, 
» unless, indeed, God has elected to salvation only the 
Jnfants ‘of believing parents, whose faith and election 
“are the faith and elention of ‘their offspring ; in which 
‘ ease faith and election are propagated by natural gen: 
eration, and no man can*be saved whose parents before 
him were not believers in Christ. Thus does infant 
baptism overwhelm and destroy the scripture doctrine 
of Predestination ! 
*» ‘Apart, however; from these. considerations, the’ Cal- 
_  vinistic doctrine on the subject before us, may be stated 
in a few words, thus :—“ Faith is necessary to baptism. 
No child can be baptized without it. The parents of 
the child have faith. What belongs to the parents be- 
» longs to the child. Therefore the child has faith, and 
"upon that faith is baptized!” So taught Calvin, and 
so teach his disciples at this time. Of this fact I could 
introduce instantly a hundred witnesses. One, however, 
is sufficient. Dr. Miller, the late distinguished Profes- 
sor at. Princeton, to whom I have before several times 
referred, remarks :—‘ After all, the whole weight of 
the objection [to infant baptism] in this case, is founded 
on entire forgetfulness of the main principle of the pe-- 
dobaptist system. It i is forgotten that in ever "y case of 


* * Institutes, xvi, 20. Bufning Bushnell, p. 28; also p. 60 
; oe ae 


163° INFANT BAPTISM,” 


infant baptism faith is required, and if the — be * 
sincere is actually exercised. But it is ‘required | of the — 
parent, not “of the child» So that if the parent truly 
present his child in faith, the spirit of the ordina: 

is really met and» answered.” The Calvinistic doe- 
trine is therefore substantially the same as that of the 
Papists and.the Lutherans. Pr esbyterians, Congre- 
gationalists, and the others, arrive, although by a dif- 
ferent route, at the. conclusion that the “gospel does 
require *faith on the part of all those who ‘are bap- 
tized as an indispensable condition of their receiving © 
the ordinance; that the children to be baptized have 
faith, since their parents’ faith is their faith; and that 
infants are therefore baptized upon a profession of oe 
faith. ' 

The only other great parent class of oleae pedo: 

baptists whose principles remain to be examined, is the 

' Episcopal, embracing Methodists of all sects. Tum, if 
you please, to the liturgy of that church, whether of 
England or America, and you will find the doctrine dis- 
tinctly and unequivocally taught, that- infants are bap- » 
tized upon a profession of ‘eel own faith! “The office” ° 
of baptism prescribes that the minister shall ask, and 
the sponsor answer as follows :— 

» “ Minister —Dost thou in the name of this child re- 
nounce the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and 
glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, 
and the sinful desires of the-flesh, so that thou wilt not 
follow nér be led by them?” & 

© & Answer.—I renounce them all, and. by God’s help 
will endeavor not to follow, nor be led by them.” 


“ Minister.—Dost thou believe all the Articles of 
y 


PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 169 


the Christian Faith as _ contained in ne Apostles’ 


“Greed ? 

Pa nswer.—I\ do.” 

; inister.—Wilt thou be pees in this faith 2” 

“« Answer.—That is my desire.” 

“« Ministér—Wilt thou then obediently keep God’a 
holy will and commandments, and. mes, in the same all 
the days of thy life?” °. ‘ 

- © Answer.—I will by God’s help.” 

Will it be: pretended. that in these “answers the spon- 
sors speak only for themselves? This is a common 
plea, and very often made, but.it is :plainly preposter- 
ous, since it is the child, and not.the sponsor that is to 
be baptized, and it is the child who is asked, “Dost 

“thou believe ;” “wilt thow be baptized ;” Ny wilt thow . 
obediently keep God’s holy will.” It is the infant, 
therefore, that renounces. the world, the flesh, and the 
devil ; it is the cnfant that believes “ all the Articles of 
ws the Christian Faith ;” it is the enfant that desires to be 
baptized; it is the infant that binds itself to per- 
) petual obedience! These facts are so obvious, that no 
intelligent man will, J persuade myself, upon mature | 
| reflection, venture to call them in question.» These are. . 
the professions of their enfants, upon which they are 
a2 fe 2b 
The fathers. of all the protestant episcopal ee 
maintain infant repentance and’ faith at great length. 
Bucer, and Peter Martyr, taught the doctrine in the 
Universities of Cambridge ee Oxford, and Archbish= 
ops, Bishops, and iiérior clergy, in all the pulpits of 
the land. But it is necessary to pace 
Cartwright, a ‘distinguished divine ; ‘of the Calvinistic 
15 


4 


* 


170 . INFANT BAPTISM 5 | 

school, thought proper to “admonish” the British Par- 
liament on, this subject, and in a learned address, x7 
pressed his doubts whether all the infants baptized 1 were” 
elect, anid in’ case any were not, he’ insisted nee 
could not with propriety-be said to believe. — “ It can,’ 
he avowed,“ no-more be precisely said that it [the i in- 
fant] hath faith, than’ it may be said precisely that it 
is elected.””** This: paper called forth’a spirited reply 
from the famous Hooker, in which he severely rebukes 
the’ pFesumptious. Presbyterian. «Were St. Augustine 
now living,” says Hooker, “there ate [those] who would 
tell ‘him oe his better instruction, that to say of a child 
that it is elect, and to say it doth belzeve, is all one, for 
which cause sith no man is able precisely to affirm the 
one of any infant in- particular, it followeth that pre-* 
cisely and ‘absolutely, he ought not to’ say the other. 
Which precise and absolute terms are not necessary in 
this case. “We'speak of infants as‘ the rule of piety al- 
loweth both to speak and to think.” “Baptism impli- . 
eth a covenant or league between God and man, wherein 
as God doth bear presently remission of sins, and the. 
Holy Ghost, binding himself also to add (in-process of 
time) what grace soever shall be further necessary for 
the attainment of everlasting life, so every baptized soul 


receiving the same grace at the hands of God, tieth it- 


self Uikowise Rcetr to the observation of his law, no 
less than. the Jews by circumcision bound them- 
selves to the law of Moses. . The law of Christ re= 


_ quiring, ther efore, faith and newness of life in all men 


‘by virtue of the covenant of baptism, is it toyish 


that the church in baptism exacteth at every man’s 
~ * ‘Admonition to Parliament, 


* 


PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 171. 


hands [infants included] an express profession of faith, 
and an irrevocable promise of obedience by way. of 
stipulation 4 aor + Bishop. Beveridge asks, “‘ Why are in- 
a ts baptized 2 ?” and answers thus :—“ The .reason is, 
not only because they have the seeds of repentance, and 
faith in them, which may afterwards grow to perfec- 
tion, but chiefly because they then promise to perform 
them, which is, as much as we know adult persons et 
those of riper years do.”t } 
We may, however, appeal to still higher authority 
than that of Bucer, or. Peter Martyr, or Hooker, or 
Beveridge, or all these«together. Cranmer the Arch- 
bishop,-and Primate in his day, of all England, speaks. 
thus :—“In baptism are our sins taken away, and we 
from sins _purged and cleansed, and regenerated in a 
new man to live a holy-life, according to the spirit and 
will of God.” « They [the Anabaptists] say that those — 
that should be christened, must first believe, and then 
be christened. Children, they say, cannot believe, for 
faith is gotten by hearing, and hearing by the ‘word of 
God. So children cannot have faith, say the Anabap- 
tists. Wherefore they say that infants should. not be 
christened.{ ‘To this reason I answer and say’ that 
children. may have faith, although they have it not. by. 
hearing, yet they have faith by the infusion of the Holy- 
Ghost, as the holy prophets had, and many holy men 
in the old law had. Also: faith is the.gift of God and 
the work of the Holy Ghost. Who should let [hinder] 
God to give his gifts where he, will, seeing faith is the 


ie ‘Hooker's Works, vol. i pp. sascaate 
t Church Catechism Explained, | pp- 128, 129. 
 $ And they nay truly, ane, reason. conclusively. 


2 


172 "© INFANT BAPTISM 


gift of God? He may give faith as well to children 
as to old men. Faith also is the work of. God, and not 
of man, of man’s will or reason. Who ‘will let God 
‘to work where he lists? Therefore it is- not impos- 
sible for childrén to have faith,” as these Anabaptists 
falsely suppose.’ ‘God regardeth no persons, but 
giveth his gifts without all-regard of. persons. A 
child, or an old man, he counteth as a person in 
scripture, Wherefore. it followeth plainly © that “he 
giveth not faith to an old man, or denieth faith to a— 
child, because he is a child, for then God should’ re- 
gard persons, which he doth not.” « And when they 
[the Anabaptists] say they must express faith’ before 
they be christened, what will they do with deaf and 
dumb men, that get not faith by hearing, nor express 
their, faith by words? Will they exclude them from 
baptism, and condemn them to hell-pit?”* “Christ took 
little children i in his arms and blessed them, and. said, 
‘Of such is the kingdom of heaven.’ Here are tokens 
that God loved inet children, that they pleased hin, 
and that. they had fat ith, for without faith no man can 
please God.” , : 
With all these testimonies Dats you, and the num-+ 
~ ber might be increased indefinitely, can you doubt the 
. teachings of the Episcopal church, in itself, and in*all 
- its sects?- They hold with Lutherans, and Calvinists, 
that infants who’receive the or dinance, are divinely en- 


* Tt isnot at all surprising that this argument had no influence 
upon the hated Aflabaptists. They would have been in a pitiable 
» condition if they. had had no more common sense on this subject 
,than was shown by the: “Archbishop, . 

“+ Richmond’s Fathers of the. English Chureh, vol. ii., et seg.” 


¥ X 
* 


® 6) gt 3s 
PERPETUATES SUPERSTITIONS. 173 


i dowed with - ‘ mepenianey of sin, and faith in our Lord ° 
Jesus Christ ;/ upon the Ered profession of which 
ee baptized ! ! 

‘The fact is now incontrover tibly established that the 
"practice of infant babptisin: perpetuates the superstitions 
by which rt was originally produced. Protestant pedo-, 
baptists, on-all hands, still adhere to the old popish 
dogmas ‘that baptism contains*some “mysterious divine 
efficacy, and that through it the spititual state of in- 
" fants is materially affected, both as regards their union 
with Christ. in this” world, “ands their genvatiom in’ the 
world to come. 

. The evil thus Brogahit upon all ‘the interests. of brat 
and dalvation “is incalculable.’ Religion itself is degra- 
ded and caricatured. The minds of its votaries are 
besotted: with | miserable logomachy, such as that we 
have just examined. ‘Fanaticism. and bigotry. reign tri- 
umphantly. . Who that has not resigned his-reason, 
can believe that the baptism of an infant conveys to its 
soul the quickenmg grace_of God? Or-that it is pos- 
‘sible for an infant, at the age at which they are usu- 
ally baptized, tor exercise repentance; and faith in the 
,Redeemer? All this is taught in the Papal. church, 
and ‘in the Protestant church, by the Catholic fathers, 
and by all the great Reformers. They were on many 
subjects W wise and learned. On this subject they were. 
__ neither. ‘Do not, I pray you, oblige me to crediteab 
_ Surdities of any kind, and Specially 3 in religion. * Not 
; more insane than this is priestly pardon, the invocation 
of Saints, transubstantiation, or purgatory. Infant bap- 
tism must, ‘and does still look for support to the super- 
stitions by which it was originally produced. Who- 

15* 


~ 


174 INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. : 


ever submits to»such superstitions in one: department 


. of religion, will soon be ready to give up his judg- 


a 


ment, and common sense, in all the others. Thus a 
downward progress is commenced which cannot be 4 ar- 


rested short of the dark caverns: a poperv. — one 


2 
« 


CHAPTER IX. . 


Y 


INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT SUBVERTS THE 
TRUE DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 


“3 


Doctrine ‘stated ; arguments {n proofs manner in which subverted by in 
fant Peeks auroras sonclasions 


' Dzarz is a relentless aaaiaen He assails,. without 
distinction, all classes and conditions of men. The young 
and the old alike fall beneath his power. Upon infan- ° 
ey, however, his shafts descend most frequently, and 
with a deadlier aim. How large the proportion of man- 
kind who are hurried into eternity during the first years r, 
of their being! Where is the family that has not mourn- 
ed infants loved, and lost ? Bleeding hearts, and flow- 
ing tears, in all lands, tell of sorrows which no words. 
can ever adequately express! Millions of infant spirits 
have gone into the unseen world. Each is an immortal 
intelligence. In that world they all possess the sensi- 
bilities common to humanity. - With these facts before 
us, one question of surpassing interest, presses itself 
upon.us all. Of departed infants what is the eternal 
destiny? Are they happy, or miserable ? Parental af- 
fection implores, christian sympathy earnestly solicits, 
and ministerial faithfulness demands, that these inquiries 
receive a prompt, intelligible, and scriptural answer. 
We believe that all infants are saved unconditionally, 


’ 


176 ‘INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS i 


through the application to them, by the Holy Ghost, of 
the redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ. No matter 
whether they.are in the church or out of the church, 
whether they are baptized or uinbaptized, whether. they 
are the children of believers or unbelievers, of heathens. 
mohammedans, or christians, their everlasting blessed- 
ness is equally, and in all cases, secure. These, and all 
- other such.like circumstances, are irrelevant, and never 
can affect their relations -with Christ. Consequently 
they» can “have no bearing upon their future destiny. 
Every child dying in infancy is saved. ‘This is the 
doctrine of the Baptist denomination. Not of a few 
only, nor of our churches, and people, ofthe present 
day alone. © It is the doctrine which -has been inyaria- 
bly held by us in all countries, and in every’ age. * It 
-is the’ doctrine ‘taught. by thesword of God. Haviog 
_thus stated our position, I nee at once, to the 
‘proofs of its truth. A 

Infant salvation 2s Roget, in the first place, by” 
. the nature of the divine government: : 

God is infinitely good. His benevolence forbids the 
infliction of unnecessary suffering upon any of his crea-_ 
tures. Misery is never permitted, but when demanded 
by Justice, ‘as either the consequence, or the penalty of 
sin. The government of God is designed, not only to 
benefit his creatures, but also to manifest his glory. 
Through this medium, as well as through his works, 
and his word, he reveals his true character‘to all. in- 
telligent beings. - Infants have no personal, or individ- 

, ual aé¢ountability. For the condemnation of,the delib: 
erate and impefiitent rejecter of the gospel, and also 
of the wicked despisers of God, who violate the laws 


aes. CS “9 


yee eS ee B, 
‘THE DOGTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 177 


683 nature, and of. their own conscience, T can n perceive 


ample’ reasons. Tn such a dase 1 can readily compre: 


hend how Géd, as the®. “governor of the universe, will 
glorify. his infinite réghteousness. “But I cannot see 
how this could occur in: thé gase of infants. It is infi- 
nitely more in accordance with: afl our conceptions of 
God. to conclude that in thém ‘he will evince his _ spe- 
“a ‘beneficence.- “It. is? in truth, abhorrent to every 
feeling of kindness and Téve, to suppose that he will. 
cast. thém*off, ‘or that he will Dobe receive, and save 
“them. There” is no want. of fulness in the redemption 
‘Si Christ. » The power of the Holy Spirit is not limited. 
- God i is infinitely gracious. What then is to hinder their 
salvation 2” Rather, does not every ‘consideration con- 
» nected with him, with’ his government, and his glory, 
seem a dae to demand the salvation of in- 
fants ? ? “ 
‘But infants are, Is remark secondly, redeemed by our 
Lord’ Jésus Christ, and must therefore be saved. 
‘ Their redemption i is thus “tatight by an apostle :— 
“Death” [natural death | raipaed from. Adam to 
Moses, even over them that had. not sinned” after the si- 
~militude 6f Adam’s trafsgression.” Tn. other words, 
~ infants, who have not -committed. actual offences, as 
Adam did, have nevertheless all inherited his depravity, 
and are, therefore, subject to. physical suffering ‘and 
death. “As,” however, “ by the offence of one 
- [Adam] judgment [sentence] came upon all men to con- 
demnation, even so by the righteousness of one [Jesus 
Christ] the free gift [the offer of deliverance from con- 
demnation under a better covenant] came upon all men, 
[upon as many as were involved in the cdnsequences of 


—_—* 


178 | INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS — y ¢ 


Adam’s sin] unto justification of life. 8 Christ. Jesus _ 
suspended the* execution” of “the, sentence of sdeath’ un- 
der which men had fallen, and: introduced -another cov- 
enant in the place of the first; and so changed the rela-— 
tions of things that to man, though a sinner, destruction’ 
is not inevitable. The remedy is found: in: the. satisfac- 
tion made to divine come by Messiah, the promised 
“seed of the woman.” In consideration of: his atone- 
ment the ground of condemnation is changed. His in-' 
terposition has placgd: the whole subject in an entirely? 
new aspect. Previously, if I may so speak, all men’ 
were condemned, ‘Their relation to. Adam had. involved 
them allin the curse.- Subsequently the casé was dif- 
ferent. g This is [now] the condemnation, that light 
has come bate the world, and men. loved darkness rather 
than light, because their deeds were evil. bi rs* Via cea 
eoeiencts ” “« because ye have not believed on the 
name of the only begotten Son of God.”t{” Not now 
it is not so much becange of your’ rélation.to Adam, -_ 
disastrous as that relation»may: be, ‘psrbecayse: you do . 
not embrace Christ by faith. Hence all the” counsels, 
the warnings, the commands, the invitations, the prom _ 
ises of divine revelation, are addressed to those who are” 
capable’ of exercising ‘intelligence. And its denuneia: | 
tions are hurled only against -wilful rebellion, impeni- 
tency; and. unbelief. , What are we here taught « COG - 
cerning infants ? © They have not the capacity to ‘know 
any thing of the gosprs hey are not impenitent, or 
rebellious. They have not rejected Christ. They ara. 
‘Woclearly included in his mediation, since “ by his right ; 
eovsness the free gift came upon all men to justification- 
* Bom. v., 12-19. ~ + Jehniii., 19. } John iii, 18, 


. ee ‘ mr +» , i 
THE DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 179 


of lin2.” That free, gift must of course have come 
upon them: se They,” are redeemed by Christ. And 
again. The relation. to.us of our Lord-Jesus Christ in- 
the work of. redemption; is clearly, ‘to man as *man. 
Adam and Christ, are alike, heads of the race. ‘ The 
‘first'x man Adam: was made’ a livi ing soul; the last: Adam 


. [Christ] was made+a quickening spirit. Howbeit that 


» is. ‘not first which was spiritual, but that which is-natu- 
ral; and afterwards that, which was spiritual. The first 
man is -of the earth, eaxthy ; the second man is the 
Lord frony heaven. As is the. earthy, such are they 

-also that are earthy ; ~ and as is the heavenly, such are © 
they also that are heavenly. And as we have “borne 
the i image: of the earthy, we shall also béear thé i image 
6f the - heavenly. %* Both, therefore, : ‘according to this 
apostolic exposition, are heads of mankind as man. 
The first, Adam was the author of sin; the ‘second 
Adam was the authors of déliverance from sin. «The 
same terms ‘are employed to designate those» who 
are involved i in ruin by the former, and those to whom 
deliverance’ is offered by the mediation 6f the latter. 

oth events concern the. whole race, of whom some 
reach maturity of life, embrave Christ by faith, and are 
saved ; others reach maturity, do not receive Christ, 
and are lost; but great multitudes die in. infancy, and 
do neither good nor evil. These last stand, according. 
to Paul, in as stricta relation to Christ, as they do to 
Adam, with this difference, that ‘‘ Where sin abounded, 
grace- does mich more abound.” In bringing them 


into this world, divine sovereignty -has justly, ‘and with. 


out. any act. of theirs, entailed.on them the depravity 
; et sit SO 8, 1 Cor. xvey 45-40. wih A 


— 


180. —wFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS 
and corruption of the first, Adam. “In taking them - 
away from the world, the’ same divine sovereignty has 
graciously y, and without any act, of. theirs, conferred or 
them «the salvation of the second. Adam. Thus it is’ 
that, redeemed by the blood of Christ, they are os 
by the infinite grace of God.» om 

. But all infants» -are depraved “and Singakk How then ; 
can. they be saved?- To prepare thent for happiness, 3 at 
is. evident that the redemption of Christ must be ap- 
plied by the Holy Spirit, to theirepur ification from sin. 
Otherwise they would be incapable of eternal life.» 

Every one is’ obliged to exclaim with Dayid, “Be- : 
hold, I. was shapen. in iniquity, and in sin did: my . 
mother “conceive me.”** Truly. may it be. said, “The 
wicked are estr anged from the. womb. They go astray” 
as soon as they are porn. "+ All aré depraved, and 
depravity necessarily incapacitates those who are under 
its influence for the enjoyment of ‘happiness. From _ 
infants it must therefore, to ‘secure their salvation, be 
removed, and their naturé must be. cleansed, and puri- 
fied. This’ gfeat work can*be done only by the Holy 4 
Ghost. The work«of God the Spirit. is therefore : 
equally as necessary to their ee ieations and ours, as. 
the work of God the Son. None are saved bythe ab- 
stract redemption of the Son, irrespective of the per- 
sonal application of that redemption by the Spirit. 
Since, however, Christ died for: all, and consequently 
for infants ; and since the work of the Spirit is: neces- 
saryto complete the designs of grace thus commenced; 

“his sanctification is given in full measure, to every de- 
parting child. In all such, instances, his merits and 


~  * Psa. li, 6 “+ Psa. Iwi, 8.5 


“Sees, 


THE édtianes ov InFalyy BEY ATION. 184 


a ‘htedusness are thus applied pine, to fit them 
* fo 


the change. The scriptures nowhere teach that this 
‘is done through baptism, nor any other ordinance ; nor 


’ that at-as withheld for the want of it. Will..not the 


Holy Ghost « quicken: even your mortal *body’* ‘sleep-" 
ing in the grave, to prepare’ you for the resurrection of 
the last day ?° “Why then should it. be. ‘thought & 
thing” incredible,” and. especially ‘since they are -re- 
deemed® by Messiah, that he should sanctify the spir- 
its of departing’ children,,. and thus “make them meet 
tobe partakers of the inheritance of the ‘saints in 
light ? qu w pits 
There are, I observe in the third place, siibiahlees of 
infant salvation on record. in the word of God.. 
Disease had laid his withermg hand “upon the infant 
child of David.” He fasted, and wept, and prayed for 
. the life of his beloved’ boy.* All was: in vain. ‘It 
pleased the Lord to order otherwise than as he desired. 
The child died.” Now his servants were alarmed on 
‘account of their master. They were afraid. to com- 
municate to him the melancholy intelligence: “ For 
they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we 
‘Spake unto Kim, and he would not hearken’ unto our 
voice. How will he then vex himself if we tell him 
that the child is dead! But when David saw that his 


servants whispered, he perceived thatthe child was 


‘dead. Therefore he said unto his servants, Is the child 
‘dead? And they said, He i is dead. Then David arose 
from the earth, and washed _ and anointed himself, and 


e ‘geayed his apparel, and came: into the house of the 


and worshipped. “Phen he came to his own 


ae? 
aj . -* Rom, ville 1, : y 
' 16 


* - 


| 


182 | WNFAWT BAPTIsM —__, 


house, antl when he required they set: reat before 
him, and he did éat! ‘Then sdid’ his servants unto : 
him, What thing is this that thou hastedone ? Thou ; 
didst fast and weep for -the child’ while it was “yet 
«alive; but when the child swas.dead, thou didst. arise 

- and eat bread’! “And he said, While the. child was ‘yet 
alive I fasted. and wept; for I said? Who can tell 
whether God will be gracious unto mé, that the’ child 
may live? Can I bring him back again’? - L shall go 
to him ; but he will not return to me.”* “What isthe : 
lesson taught us by this touching incident? David 
did not*certainly console himself with the thought that” 
he, too, should go to the grave whither his childs had 
gone. This consideration ‘could surely, have afforded 
him no special pleasure. The grave is cold, and si- 
lent, and dismal. Nor could it have "been a grateful 
reietion® that since God had taken him ‘away, be must , 
submit to the necessity. If these, or any similar feel- — 
ings governed. him, why were they hot equally influ- ¥ 
ential, since they. were all fully as applicable, in the —_ 
case of another son, slain in battle? When tidings of F 
that unhappy event reached David, how then did he 
deport himself?* Did ‘he with calm and resigned ac- 
quiescence, say to those about him} Wherefore should 
I lament him? “Gan I bring him back again? «1 
shall go to him; but he will not. return to.me 2” ~ On.- 
the contrary, be owas wholly inconsolable: Overwhédlm-” 
ed by the ‘foie he tumed away from his friends, and 

_ trembling with agony, he “Went up to*the chamber 

‘over the gate of the city. And. a8 she went, ‘thushe , ° : 
said: 0”. tay son Absalom my son, tay son Absalom) 


‘j % Son xii, 15-28; “ 


Do OTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 183 


* Would God I had died for’ thee, O Absalom, my son, 

omy son!’* Why now. this 4 ansupportable grief? The 

‘reason is obvious. Absalom was of mature age. He 

* was a sinner against God. Besides, ther eisee! his af- 

~ fiction as a father on account of his death, he could 

entertain no ehope for him’ in another Jife. Regarding 

~his infant child’ the case was different. He had full 

.» confidence. that he would, when the scenes of this 

world were over, “go to’ him’ in the ,paradise above, 

_ where ‘they would be associated in eternal glory. 

- Therefore said he, -in -other words, He is happy now. 

» He is in heaven. I will not grieve on his account. “I 

*  also’shall go ere long. Then T shall join him on high. 

This. hope most» consolatory. It “is stronger than 

* the grave.” —_Itwis all. radiant . with joy ‘and. bright- 

\% ness. David Sg hah believed iat his. child was 
- saved: : 

Another instance, Ligeélly instructive,” occurred in the 

«family of Jeroboam.. He, too, was a king of Israel, 

but a vile apostate, and wicked idolater. ” His child, 

‘also,’ was ‘stricken with a deadly malady. He was 

greatly beloved; and his distressed father sought earn- 

“estly,. but. in.vain, to save his. life. The little sufferer 

sunk into the grave!. Inthe midst of the tumult of 

‘ sorrow produced by this, event, the -prophet Abijah, 

* . .sent of God for the purpose, disclosed to the. weeping 

F “mother,. the designs of God in his removal at a period 

“so. early. |“ All Israel,” said Jehovah, “ shall mourn 

~ for him, and bury him. He only of Jeroboam shall 

‘come to the grave. In him there is found some good. 

> thing,” - This: eae therefore, ¥7s removed, when so 


* 28am. xviii, 38. _ *° + Kings xiv,, etseq. 


Ps 


184 _, INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERIB. 


° Parvee eid 


-young that nothing of his personal history 1 ant recorded, «. 
as an act to him, of love, and bléssing. | But ow could 
this be? Had he. lived - would. probably have been. 
a king. el li children—those “of wicked parents, and of | 
idolaters, as well as “others—are not saved, he was lost. 
It is’ surely no blessing to. & child,, to take him away 
from the prospects of a kingly throne, ‘and send him to 
destruction! It is implied in Scripture that it.was an. 
act of kindness to this child to remove «him. from:all 
these prospects: Therefore God received him to him- 
self in heaven, And if’ he was saved, then the ehil- 
drén who die in infancy,. A; other wicked men ‘and. 
idolaters, are also saved. _ ‘ hag: © 
One other instance on record, of infant Sencha is 
worthy of our attention. The murder, of all the, chil- * 
dren of Bethlehem. and: its vicinity, by the jealous Ss 
Herod, perpetrated i in the hope that thereby he might y 
succeed in destroying Messiah, was a horrible tragedy 
It was foreseen, and prédicted by an ancient prophet, : 
in language full of mingled pathos and encouragement : A 
—‘ A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, ‘ana bit- 
ter weeping. Rachel weeping for her children, refused — ‘ 
to be comforted, bécause they were not. Thus saith * 
the Lord ; feign thy voice from weeping, and thine % 
eyes Y from tears.» “They shall come again. from the 
land: of the enemy. And there is hon in thine end, . 
saith the Lord, that thy children shall come again t ‘to. 
their own border.”* Is the design of this passage dif: 
ficult to perceive ? 9 Does it refer merely: to the captiy- 
ve in Babylon, under which. the. Hebrews were then. « 
ffering 2 ~Is the Mother of Israel. represented. as 


* Jere, xxx, AMT ey i ae 


oo OF INFANT SALVATION. 185 . 


‘weeping in her tenderness, only over the woes of her 
children ina distant land, writhing under the oppres- 
sions. of their masters? Does God comfort her merely 
with the -assurance that they shall yet return from 
their bondage, and inhabit, in peace. and prosperity, 
_the fields and the cities of Judea? “Whatever may 
_haye been the primary sense, of the prophecy, inspira- 
tion itself has given it a still higher, and more exalted 
meaning. .The evangelist Matthew furnishes the inter- 
pretation.. He says :—“ Herod, when ‘he saw that he 
was» mocked “by the wise men, was exceeding wroth, 
and sent forth and slew all the children that were in 
Bethlehem, and in all the. coasts ‘thereof, from two 
years old and under.” “ Then -was fulfilled that 
which was spoken by J eremy the prophet, saying, In 
Ramah was - there a voice heard, lamentation, and 
weeping, and great. mourning. » Rachel weeping for 
her children, and would not. be comforted, because. 
_ they are, not.”* This cruel act of Herod, theérefore,- 
>was in the mind-of the prophet. Of the children slain 
y him, consequently, it was more especially said, They 
é shall escape fromthe enemy ; there is hope for them ; 
they shall_possess their land! For these reasons their: 
_ bereayed parents were’ exhorted to ‘refrain their voice 
from: weeping, and their eyes from tears.”. But. how 
was it possible to fulfil such ‘promises ? These chil-_ 
dren were all dead ! They remained in their «graves. 
Literally, these promises could never be fulfilled. The. 
prophecy must. therefore necessarily refer. to ‘another 
life. It evidently teaches the three following facts:—" 
First, that. all these slain children. should be: delivered 
we cn. Me Matti; “Nestg, + 409 
= ‘ze* * 


See: ae | 


from the great enemy, stir death ; secondly; ’ ‘that 
there was hope for them, since they were all redeemed 
by Christ, that ‘they should enjoy eternal life; and 
thirdly, that they should ‘possess the heavenly land, of 
which the earthly Canaan was a type. hese are the 
grounds upon which our Heavenly Father offers com- 
“fort to'their parents, and exhorts: them to subdue their 
‘sorrows. Their children had been foully murdered. 
“The jealousy of the king had, with bloody and relent- 
less violence, tom. them from their bosoms. By this 
_ means, however, they had gone speedily, and safely, to 
‘eternal life. I have selected and laid before you. these 
‘instances of infant ‘salvation recorded in the word of 
God, and have’drawn them from the children of the 
; good and the pious, such as~David ; from.the ‘children 
of the .idolatrons and wickéd, such as Jeroboam ; and 
from the children of all ‘classes, such as. were the -be- 
. reaved parents “in Bethlehem, ’ and all the coasts 
~ thereof,” in order to prove to you that all infants are — 
- saved, without any regard to the character of thei 
parents, or. the circumstances under whieh they ere 
“removed from the present life. * 
We_-have now seen that all childreni who die in -ip- 
"fancy, are saved by the grace of God; that they-are- 
‘saved through the redemption of- Jesus Christ 3 that 
. this redemption’ is applied to them personally, and di- 
rectly, by the Holy Ghost; and that we haye many 
instances oftheir salvation recorded i in-God’s word + it 
_ remains-only to be pr oved that their seapibi gee 48 nee: 
“ditional. sa Oss , 
- They are involved, it is trie; on acoount of their 
"connection with ‘Adam, in thie -consequences_of his fall, 


a oF INFANT SALVATION. 187 


But. provision has been made’ for their unconditional. 
deliverance, in the satisfaction of the second Adam. 
One among the clearest’ demonstrations of this truth is 
presented to’ us in"connection with the doctrine of “their 
resurrection in. the last day.” «Since -by man came 
“death,” says ‘Paul, “by mani ~came’ also the resurrec- 
_tionof the dead. For as in Adam all die ; even so in 
Christ, shall all-be made alive —ratsedl from the. 
' dead.+ It is true, then, that*in the resurrection of the 
» body, all will be raised. The Yighteous and the wick- 
ed, the cliristian and the idolater, the adult and the in- 
_ fant, will alike participate ‘in that glorious event. Here 
there is no condition but that of humanity. Those who 
live to the age of personal responsibility, aré saved only 
upon ithe conditions of repentance, and faith. The wis-” 
dom of this provision, no one can fail to. perceive. . They 
have @ conscious being; a personal accountability. Yet 
it i8* not for their repentance, and faith ; nor by their 
repentance, ‘and faith; as a procuring cause, that even 
“ee saved, They, too, obtain salvation by the 
~ grace of God ‘in Jesus Christ: ‘“For by grace are 
ye. ‘saved, through faith, and that not of yourselves, 
it"is the gift of God. Not of works, lest* any man’ 
should boast.’’{ But repentance and faith are atts. of a 
mind enlightened, and ‘comparatively mature, They. 
are not demanded ‘of infants. Infants are saved uncon- 
ditionally. = : an 
* Thus is the salvation “of infants fully, and satisfacto- 
wily” established. Wherever in the wide world, and 
ee; any child dies “in Palais it enters. immedi- 


¢ 


oe f Cor. xv) 21, 2 a 3 %. + ndvres” Sevroinbnobveat. ‘e 
ay ; io) iliay anil il, ‘adhe 1 e 
7 os 


188 INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS 


? 


_ ately into the j joys of eternal life in heaven. ‘It niiate: 
forth dwells forever with the’ Redeemer. How full of 
the richest consolation is this glorious truth! Inne 
form more delightful, has. Jehovah manifested to us his 
abundant mercy, and grace. “ Thanks si to God for 
his unspeakable gift.” 

With all, these facts before us, we turn to hear the 
“expositions on the subject of our Pedobaptist brethren. 
We are immeasurably pained to find them in utter con- 
fusion! Their best conceptions ofthis subject. are en-° 
tirely inadequate, and) unworthy. All their teachings 
tend evidently to subvert théetrue scripture doctrine of 
infént salvation.. Most of them claim that infants 
must be brought into the church, since out of it there : 
“is no deliverance ; and all of them insist that the merits 
of Christ’s atonement and the sauptiabation of the Holy 
Spirit, without which no-one can be ‘saved, are com- 
municated to them through baptism. Thus they make 
the salvation of infants dependent upon conditions, and _ 
such conditions as no child can control, but must be — 
performed by parents, friends, and ministers ! © Infant by 
baptism and infant salvation are, thérefore, always 
-found more or less intimately associated in the minds 
of all: classés* of pedobaptists. These, I know, are 
grave chargés, but the testimony is at hand by which 
they are amply sustained. rn 

- Before I offer this testimony, however," I will ner to 
a Singular imputation against Baptists, and properly 
account for its existence. You have many a time, 
doubtless, heard the declaration*that “ Baptists , believe 
in’ the damnation: of. infants : 2” Some persons with 
whom you have ‘tet, have” Perhaps told you to your 


THE DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 189: 


face’ that they have themselves heard Baptist people, 
and 1 Baptist ministers, avow the sentiment. Pedobap- 
tists of all classes, repeat everywhere the charge, : and 
declare with indignant eloquence, that “ Baptists hold 
the damnation of infants!” If, as. I have professed to 
do in this chapter, I have properly repr esented Baptist 
sentiment on the subject, how could such an accusation 
against us ever have originated? And when produced 
and, put into’ circulation, how could it have been kept 
up for so many ages? The answers are easy. Pedo- 
baptists believe that the baptism of infants is necessary. 
to their salvation. According to their doctrinés, there- 
fore, if they are not. baptized they must be damned. 
Baptists refuse to baptize, infants. . Pedobaptists .m- 
stantly proclaim, as a consequence. of their own prin- 
ciples, without waiting to hear owr opinions on the ques- 
» tion, of their salvation, that therefore “ Baptists. hold 
the damnation of infants!” Nor will they give it up. 
To this’day they insist that it. must be so. Since 
we do not baptize infants, we surely believe that if 
they die in infancy they are damned ! One example 
will probably be sufficient to establish and illustrate 
the correctness of this account of the origin. of the 
charge. Archbishop Cranmer, in one of his discourses, 
speaks of the Baptists in the following. language :— 
“Children, of necessity, must -be christened, or else 
they cannot be purged of their sins, nor yet saved by 
Christ, and come to life everlasting. Wherefore the 
Anabaptists that would not have children.to be christen- 
ed; they show themselves that they would not have ° 
children to be purged from their sins, and be ‘saved, 
If they would have children saved, they would: no’ 


190 


deny ‘them the means whereby Christ purgeth “hi. 
church from sins, ‘and saveth it, which is baptism.’ 
Thus” thé slander arose, and was ‘continued. The au. 
thority for it was, derived from: Lords Archbishops, 
“‘ Bishops, and other clergy.” It is.not, therefore, sur- 
prising that it was taken up by the multitude, and re- 
peated without end. The’ whole Pedobaptist English 
mind thus became imbued with the odium, thr oughout 
Europe and America; and it. remains with them to the 
present hour. If we needed a defence against these 
allegations, it might be drawn from another class of our 
opponents; the Lutherans of all.the German states. ‘By. 
them we are, afd ever have heen, vilified and repreach- 

ed for holding that « Infants. are saved without. bap- 

tism.”» _The Augsburg Corifession of Faith contains, 
the following passage :-—“ They condemn the Anaba ap 
tists, who disallow the baptism’ of infants, and affirm 
that they may be saved without it.”’+. The German 

charge against us is true. We do believe that*infants 
are saved without baptism.. But the English charge is 
false, and they might, if they would, know it to be so, 

But in ‘respect to us they. do not wish to know the truth, 

It is the object of both parties, not to do us justice, 
but, if possible, to cover us with teproach, and thus, if 
they may, retard the: progress. of our principles. » But. 
our principles are those of the gospel. They ‘cannot 
be always, successfully resisted. They will ultimately _ 
find: their, way to the hearts of men. They must, in 
the end, gloriously prevail... Persecuted we may ‘be, 
and perpetwally¢ ‘denounced ; still we are really the 


_ * Richmond’s English Fathers, vol. ii. &o. . 
, t Augsburg Confession, Artwix. 


“num porns OF INFANT SALVATION. 191° 


only: christians whose doctrines on infant salvation are 
rational, scriptural, or true. We return ‘to. bee argue 
ment. +, 

Roman Catholics, ‘as is well known, universally hold 
and teach that no ous cari be saved unless it is bap- 
_ tized, and withine “the pale of the church.” The Fa- 
thers. and Standards, of the Lutheran church, and the. 
Episcopal church, ‘all .maintain the same doctrine. 
They insist that “‘ haptism-contains’ the grace which it 


represents,”’ and by its intrinsic pha conveys to the _ 


child» that’ grace “ ex opere operato.” Of .these’ facts 
the amplest testimony has been given in.the preceding 
chapters. The authorities there adduced need: not be. 
repeateda Their truth. will, by all intelligent men, 
be readily admitted. In this country, however, some 
Lutherans, and Episcopalians, are “evangelical. They . 
surely do not receive the absurdities believed, by’ their . 
Fathers! Ask thei, if you please. Will they answer 
you at all? 2? If they do, will it not be in evasive terms? 
Some of them will perhaps be indignant and tell you 
infants: may be saved without baptism: Press them: for 
an answer as’to the grounds of their salvation. They 
will tespond thus mf in such a case; infants are — 
saved, it is- “by the. uncovenanted mercies of God.” 
Ah, “The uncovenanted mercies! It may be so; > 
and it may not !. The matter is in their, minds, at best, * 
very doubtful! But Méthodists, Présbyterians, and 
others of those classes, surely know better. They believe 
that all infants are saved, baptized, or not- baptized. 
You ‘can’ readily try their faith upon that question, 
One form of the éxperiment may be seen at almost any 
time. They scarcely know themselves what they. be- 


eo 7 


192 INEANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS 
liéve ‘on the subject. They. will certainly resent the 
suspicion ‘that they suppose infants-may, under any cir- 
cumstances, be lost. .But let an unbaptized child of 
any of them, be sick, and.in danger of. death. “The 
utmost © trepidation ” arises, Aypalting fears of some 
disastrous consequences fill the-bosoms*of ‘parents, and 
friends. Alarm reigns. ‘The little sufferer must: not 
continue an hour “< unsealed,” 2 «6 uninitiated.” The 
minister is sent for, arid the® child is baptized at mid- 
night! The ‘baptism quiets every foreboding, and i is 
followed immediately by calmness, and rien! 
Why all this apprehension, and haste ? What 
should.” die—if die it must—without baptism : 2 Can’ 4 
suffer possible harm on that account ? Ah ! “disguise 
it as you may, the old superstition is still in. ‘their 
hearts. They! believe—and they. thus evince the fact— 
that there is .in baptism, some sort of a mysterious 
sacramental efficacy, that affects for ‘good, the Sata 
of the child in another world! =~ 

But we will try their opinions by a surer and more 
tangible standatd. What do pur Methodist brethren 
teach on the subject? 

The answer is’ found in the “ Déctrinal Tracts,” 
written by Mr. Wesley himself, and publishéd by order. 
of the “ General Conference,” as an. authoritative. ex- 
‘position. of Methodism. I invite you to examine the 
following passages :—“ What are the benefits,” says 
Mr. Wesley, “ we receive, by baptism,. is the next point 
to be considered, . And. the first of these is the wash- 
ing away of ori iginal’ sin, by the application of. ‘Christ's 
death. That we are all born under the guilt of Ad- 
am’s ‘sin, and that’ all sin deserves eternal misery, was 


cee, fe ° ME. i 
THE DOC INE OF INFANT SALVATION. 193 
the 1 unanimous sense “of. the’ ancient “snack; ‘andvis ex- 
presse d in the’ ninth - article of our own. And the 
seripture asserts that we were ‘shapen in iniquity, and 
in sin. did out mothers conceive us; that we were all 
by nature the children 6f wrath, and dead in ean 
and sins ; - that ‘in Adam all die; that ‘by one man’s 
disobedience all were made sinners ; that by one man 
sin entered into ‘the world, and déath by sin, which 
came upon all men, because all had ‘sinned. This 
plainly: includes infants, for they too die; therefore 
they ave sinned ; but: not by actual sin, therefore by 
original sin, else watt need have they of the death of 
Christ ? Yea, death reigned from “Adam to’ Moses, 
ve. no er those who had not sinned actually, according 
the  similitude of Adam’s transgression. This, which 
can relate to infants only, is a cleat proof that the. 
whole race, of mankind are obnoxious both to the guilt 
and*paaishnient of Adam’s transgression. But as by 
the offence .of one,- judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation, so by the righteousness of. one, the — 
gift came upon all meh unto justification of life.” 
“i And the virtue of that free Ift, the merits of Christ's 
life and death, are applied to us im baptism.” Here 
you Have a plain statement. “My. Wesley proves very” 
clearly, that all infants inherit sin from Adam, and are 
redeemed by our Lord Jesus Christ. But where is 
the proof that “the metits of pis | life and death are 
applied to them in. bate 4 “y None is produced. 
The scriptures contain none. But still proof is offered, 
satisfactory to Mr. ir celey Hear him. “The church 
declares in the 7ubric,” that “it is certain, by God’s 
word, that children who are baptieed, dying before 
17 


Feed 


“194 INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS rs ° 


they commit actual sin, me saved. Heres he” adds, 


“it Is plainly taught that infants” “can be saved: Only: 


by the merit of Christ's death, and: that this-merit is to 
be applied in baptism. "* The proof, then, is in the 


rubric! It is not in the Bible. -Chris?’s merits’ ean 


only be applied to infants by baptism / *Is not the con- 
clusion strangely absurd that, after having redeemed 
all children who die in ney by hi8* blood, Messiah 
should still be dependent for the application of his merits 
to them, and without which they cannot be saved, upon 
the. contingency of their baptism! Tf not baptized, 


they remain corrupt and -sinful, beéause his nierits and ~ 


righteousness can}in no other way ‘be applied to them. 
Cosrtipt and sinful beings must be lost.» _ Unbaptized 
children die corrupt and sinful beings.” ‘Therefore, ac-* 


cording to Mr, Wesley, cunbaptized children must be 


lost. In another place the Father. of Methodism. gives 
us the following argument : -—“Tf infants are. guilty of. 
original sin, dee they are proper-subjects of baptism, 
seeing, in the. ordinary way, they cannot be saved unless 
this be washed away in baptism. Infants need to-be 
washed from original sid. Therefore they are ‘proper 
subjects for baptism. “+ And. this is the authorized 
-and established doctrine of the whole Methodist church, 
English and American, on the subject of infant salva- 
tion! .It is approved by the people, and published for 
their instruction and guidance .by the General Confer- 
ence! Our Methodist brethren,,thercfore, believe that 
“The virtues of Christ’s free gift—the merits of his life 


and. death—are applied to iabants in baptism ;’ ca that © 


* Infants can. ,be saved only by the merit of Christ’s 
* Doctritial Tracts, p. 246. + Ib. p. 251. 


4 f 


* THE DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 195 
death, and this. merit is to be applied in - baptism’;” : 
that “ They cannot, in the ofdinary way, be saved un- 
less their. oreginal _ sin be washed away in baptism.” 
-And what is this but the sarfie old dogma, in substance, 
held by the Papists, the Lutherans, and the Episcopa- 
lians ?« They all teach that’ ‘‘ Baptism represents’ par- 
don; ‘sanctification, and salvation, through Jestis Christ ; 
and that it always conveys the ar: Which -it, repre- 
sents?” What a revolting subversion: we here Taw of 
* the scripture doctrine of infant salvation !- 

We will “now pays our respects to the doctrines 
-on the subject, of Presbyterians, and “ther Calvin 
ists. 

*. These sdootrines areeset forth im the Westaltaator 
_ Confession” of. Faith, and Catechisms. © We notice the 

» following passages : :-_“« The visible church” “ consists 
of all those throughout the’ world, that Peas the true 
religion, together . with. their. children,” “and “is the 
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, the hotise and -fam- 

ily of. God, out of which ‘there is no ) ordinary. possibil- 

ity of saluation.’>* It. follows, of course, necessarily, 


4 


‘strue religion’”—and such, in their estimation, are the 
children of ninety-nine hundredths of the ‘whole human 
race; are not of “the house and family of God ;” are 
not im the*church; are not to be baptized, and for 
_ them “there is no ordinary possibility of salvation !”’ 
But Calvinists also tell us that they confer « benefits” 
upon ‘the children they baptize. What. are these bene- 
fits? The Confession. answers :—‘ Although it be a 
great sin to contemn, or néglect this ordinance, yet 
* Westminster Confession, ch. 25, Sec, 2., 


— i 4 


| ' that the children of those who do not “ profess the - 


196 ' INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS. a * 


grace, and salvation, are not so inseparably annexed ; 


unto. it, as that no person can be regenerated or saved 
without. it, [since there may be some unknown extra 
ordinary possibility of salvation] or that all that are’ 


baptized are undoubtedly regenerated;”’ [since some of 


the infants thus“ sealed,” may turn out to be* of the 
“ noneelect.”| “The efficacy of baptism i i$ not tied to 
that moment of time wherein it is administered ; [all 
its sanctifying effects may not instantly be imparted} 
yet notwithstanding, by the right use of. this ordi- 
nance, the grace profiad 3 is not oly offered, but really 
exhibited, [conveyed] and conferned by the Holy Ghost, 
to such (whether of age or infants) as that grace be- 
longeth unto [if they be elect] according, to: the counsel: 


of God’s,own will; in his own appointed, timer)* 


The grace promised, is conferred pon’ the infant by 
the Holy Ghost, in its baptism! What is the grace 
promised ? 2 We have the answer in the Catechism. - It 


= 


is “ The engrafting into” Christ; “the remission of, sins. : 


» by his blood, and. -regeneration _by his Spirit ;” “ adop-. 
tion, and resurrection unto eternal lifes). ‘These con: 
stitute “ the grace promised,” and shige are all, accord- 
ing to Presbyterians, and their kindred sects, given. tos 
infants in their baptism % / , Such"infants, and only such, 
are im the church; and owt of the church, “ there is, 
no ordinary possibility of salvation.” Thus we have 
an exposition, of Calvinistic doctrines on the subject. 
They hold baptism to be the medium through which, 
to the infant who receives it, are conveyed “the merits 
of Christ’s death’;” the blessings of grace and, salva- 


ely as pe font oh. 28) Beets. 8 ei rt, eed 
at L rger Cat. » Quest. 165. , 


~ 


THE DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 197 


tion! Again-we have precisely the same old Popish 
teachings maintained by.all the other sects of Pedo- 
_baptists,, We have -also, a-like falsification. ss the true 
apse doctri ine of infant salvation. 
Those who study” the several Pedobaptist § Standards, 
and other authorities on this ‘Subject, must be. struck 
_ with the fact, that. they frequently speak of “ ‘the. ordi- 
nary way”? -of salvation, and of the “ordinary possibil« 
ity of salvation!” What do. they mean» by such lan- 
guage? Do they intend to teach their people that 
there may be some other way of salvation than ‘that 
which God has revealed in his word? Has not Jeho: 
vah himself told them that, apart ‘from Christ Jesus, 
thereis ‘none other name given under heaven “among 


te 


men, whereby we must be saved ?”* There is but one - 


way of salvation.. Infants are sayed in the same way 
that’all others of-the redeemed ‘are. saved, by the grace 
of God in Jesus Christ our Lord. |. 

Am’I told that the ‘statements™ ‘presented from the 
‘books may be*true as to them, but after all, do not.cor- 
‘reetly represent the actual faith of the several’ commu- 
_ nities. involved ?- Is it affirmed that they do not, espe- 

» elally among us, credit» this doctrine of, baptismal -effi- 
tacy, nor believe that baptism is neeessary to the 


salvation of infants? If not; they do not believe’ 


their books.!> Why, then, do they continue to print 
and” circulate. these : boelts, and. to declare. that. they 
do. believe theni, Beatie? ? If not, they do not 
believe their ‘teachers! Why do they still: hear,, and 
sustain, and obey then? Say you they do not be- 
lieve. their own ayowed baptismal sdetirine? a. wy. 
rit eee * Actsiv., 12, on a 
1a r e 


oa 


rack © 


198 INFANT ‘BaPtiby SUBVERTS 


then, do they still Giilies their children? Why are 
they 50 alarmed when their children are in danger of 
dying without baptism ?° Why are they so impatient, 
of any argument against infant’ baptism ? , Why this 
ceaSeless .effort to keep up infant baptism ?” Why all 
this, and much more, if they do not belieye that theit 
pinta has: some sort’of éonnection with, the’ salv ation 
‘of infants? Individuals among them are doubtless ex- 
ceptions, but ‘the masses still hold infant baptism as a 
condition of infant ’salvation, Their Standards. teach 


‘it; their fathers believed it; they themselves cherish the 


same faith, more or less explicitly. 
“We have now seen that the. whole Pedobaptist world 


make the ‘salvation of infants conditional, and consign, 


to destruction all thosé in see these conditions: are 
not fulfilled. - . ' 
One ‘of these conditions is, as we have. seen, ‘tat 


they be within “the pale of the church.” But where, 


in the word of God, can the authority be found to sus- 
tain this necessity for their church membership ? None 
whatever exists. “It is, besides, unreasonable in itself. 
The church was organized for special purposes, con- 
nected with the preservation of ‘the christian character, 


the conversion ) of sinners, and the extension of the gos: ; 


pel among, men. Only those, therefore, may enter it 
who are qualified to enjoy its blessings, and to perform 
the duties ‘involved. « “You might ds well tel] me that it 
is necessary or befteficial to mire infants to fight in-our 
armies, as that it is advantageous to baptize them into 

ur churches. Because the church sustains the char- 


actep indicated, it is. jnvariably required for admission 


that men give evidence of repentance for sin, faith i in 


« THE DOCTRINE OF INFANT sALvatiIon. 199 


Christ, and a voluntary and cheerful obedience .to all 
the demands. ofthe gospel. No other class of persons 
“can either receive .good, or do good, in the visible 
church. The membership of infants can therefore nei- 
ther benefit them, nor the church. And what’ advan- 
tage can they derive from the ordinances? They were 
instituted to designate believers, and to strengthen and 
confirm their faith. They never were enjoined upon 
infants. They are no more -obligatory upon them’ than 
are -repentance and faith. On such as possess ‘no 
ability, rests no: responsibility. God imposes no- duty 
upon, those to whom he has» given no capacity.to per- 
form it. The church was not designed for infants. It 
is no place for infants. Their,non- performance of ob- 
ligations resting oy upon adults, can never interpose a 
‘barrier in the way of their acceptance with God. The 
supposition that the church membership ‘of infants is a 

dition of their salvation, is unscriptural, unreasona- 
ble, absurd, and not to be credited. 

' Another, condition of the salvation of infants pro- 
claimed by all er, is, as we have seen, their 
baptism. 

This, I remark, jsfully as Rs AAW) unreasonable, 
and absurd, as. the other. What peculiar power Js 
there in baptist, ‘that with it they will be saved, and 
without it they will be lost? Is it thetmedium through 
which are conveyed to the child “the merits of the lifo 
and,death of Chris6?” ' ‘Is the cleansing efficacy of the 

“ Holy Spirit given in baptism ? Impossible ! These 
blessings. ares never in any case, so conveyed, either to 
an infant, or to a‘believer.. Grace and salvation are 


confined t6° and conferred by no ordinances whatever. 


at 


"te 200 INFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS | ® 


They. are always given to dying, infants, and to beliey- 
ing adults, by thé direct action a God-the Holy Ghost. 
The salvation of apianigs is in no way dependent on their 
baptism.. 

But further. The supposition that their salvation is 
dependent on any such conditions is an impeachment 
.of the righteous justice of God. -It is predicated on*the 
supposition that he holds the ‘dying child responsible 
for proceedings of which it, can have no knowledge, and 
over which it can exercise no possible control. Wheth- 
er it is baptized. or not, depends entirely upon its parents, 
friends, and ministers. Even if it were obligatory, it 
would .be their duty, not the chi id's. But it is the child. 
that is to be saved,.or lost. Shall the child be lost, 
because its parents were unfaithful or unbelieving, « or 
because the minister ‘did not, or could not do his duty ? 
The conelusion is nothing less than to charge God in 
the face of heaven, with cr uelty, and injustice. * 

And lastly, the opinion that infant salvation is based 
on any of the conditions prescribed, and advocated, by 
pedobaptists, is horrible, on another account. It sup. 
poses that only those who are baptized, and in the 
church, are saved! What becomes of all the unbap- 
tized who die in infancy ? They 6f course must be 
consigned to eternal death! How countless the moulti- 
tudes. of children who go into the eternal world un- 
baptized! This is true “of many, very many, in chris- 
tian lands ; and in Pagan, and-Mohammedan countries, 
it is true of all. If Pedobaptist doctrines on this sub- 
ject be true, untold millions of infants are damned ! 
They. could not be saved without < the merits of | 
Christ's life and death.” These are communicated ty 


” cH DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. aon 
them only through baptism. They never were bap-. 
tized. They are lost! , But their doctrines are not 
true. They are, in themselves and in their results, 
wholly baseless. . They are repugnant. to every benevo- 
lent feeling of the soul. Never did the human mind 
conceive of seritiments more absurd and revolting. 

Infant baptist, as these facts and considerations am- 
_ply evince, subverts, and falsifies the true scripture doe- 
trine of infant salvation, and thus proves. itself an ap- 
palling evil, by denying the teachings of the word of 
’ God on that subject, and* placing it upon fictitious 
grounds; by requiring that infants shall be in the 
church in order to be saved; by making baptism the 
means of removing original sin, and the medium of 
conveying to them “the merits of Christ’s life: and 
death ;” by proclaiming that the purification of the 

Holy Spirit is obtained for them only through this ordi- 
nance ; and by keeping out of sight the great truth that 
all infants are saved unconditionally, by the grace of 
-God in Jesus Christ. For all this evil inflicted upon 
the truth, and for the boundless distress and anguish 
created by the falsehood, Pedobaptists of all denomina- 
tions are responsible to God, and to men. Infant bap- 
tism -has produced it all. They—not the Baptists— 
are the men really, who “ hold the damnation of in- 
fants!” We would, if we could,” heal the festering 
-wound they have inflicted. We repudiate the doc- 
trine of infant baptism, and of infant damnation. We 
denounce all their accompaniments, and consequences. 
If*God is just and good, if reason deserves respect, if 
the gospe: is true, if the merits of Christ .are effica- 
cious, if the Holy Spirit is not bound by the control of 


hl. 202 . e . Re 


INFANT BAPTISM, ETC. uP 


men, and tied down to forms and ordinances, then all 
children dying in infancy, irrespective of any relation 
with the church, and without regard to baptism, or 
any other ordinance, are. saved with an everlasting sal- 
vation, by the grace of God in Jésus Christ our Lord, 
whose merits and righteousness, to fit’ them for the 
glorious change, are personally and ony apped 
by the Holy Ghost.. ,° 


es 


“CHAPTER X, 


INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT LEADS ITS 
ADVOCATES INTO REBELLION AGAINST THE AUTHOR- 
ITY OF CHRIST. 7 


Christ’s authority piechntats infant baptism contemns it, in regard to the 
persons to be baptized, the required profession of faith, and the io of 
baptism ; it prevents the obedience of believers, f 


. * 


~ Tux authority of Jesus Christ is‘everywhere absolute. 
In his church he is the sole lawgiver, and ruler. His 
known will is, in all cases, decisive of your duty. His 
right to govern is unquestionable. He is your Creator 
_—o infinitely wise, good, and merciful. You — 
are his people, ignorant, imperfect, and dependent. To 
enlighten and guide you he has given his most holy 
word, in which you ‘have instructions on all subjects, 
and to the utmost extent. This perfect revelation, you 
"are obliged to receive as it is, and be governed by it in 
your heart, and your life. To attempt evasion’ in any 
respect ; to practise as his what’ he has not commiand- 
ed; or to substitute in place of his institutions any. of 
your own; is to come directly mto collision, with his 
authority. Infant baptism offends in all these re- 
spects. It leads to the violation of divine command- 
ments regarding the persons to be baptized, the prelim- 
: inary profession of faith, the form of the ordinance, and 
the obligations to christian obedience. . 
1. Infant baptism leads its advocates into rebellion 


204 INFANT BAPTISM IN COLLISION 


against the authority of Christ i in regard to the, persons 
to be baptized. 

These are described definitely, 1 in the apostolic _ com- 
mission. When last the voice of-Messiah was heard 
upon earth, it was in the utterance of the command, 
Go, and make disciples, not among the Jews» only, but 
among. all nations. Teach them ihe gospel, and those: 
who believe it baptize im the name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. This duty, im- 
posed upon them is obligatory upon all their successors 
in the ministry “unto the end of the world.” But in- 
fant baptism has introduced a condition of things that 
renders rebellion inevitable. In pedobaptist countries, 
such as Italy and Spain, an instance of compliance with 
the command of Christ has not occurred in a thousand 
years. In those lands, or among pedobaptists any- 
where, who can “ make disciples, and baptize them 2” 
All the people have been baptized in their infty. 
There are, it is true, among them many unbelievers ; 
multitudes who are still “in “the gall of bitterness, ae 
in the bonds of iniquity ;” they steht to hear and -be- 
lieve the, gospel ; but they have all been baptized ! / 
They are all in the church! Shall we exhort them as 
Peter, in his day, did those of the same character, 
“ Repent, and be baptized, every one of you?” ‘This 
would be inappropriate. They have “cvery one” of 
them been baptized without repentance! Have any of 
them—a rare event—been instructed, and obtained 
faith? May we then say to them, as Philip did to an * 

interesting convert, “If thou. believest with all thy 
“heart Hi mayest be" baptized Bo. they have all 
been baptized without Faith! = any zealous preach- 


s #: 


+ 
© 


wine "THE AUTHORITY OF CARIST. 206 2 - 


_ or of ‘gitiibetoness should undertake to baptize one = 
* these baptized infidels, after his conversion, he would 
subject himself to the disgrace and the civil penalties 
of being ‘ui Anabaptist. The Saviour requires, that » 
men shall- first believe, and then be baptized. “But 
the order he éstablished is now reversed, The i impeni- 
tent and unbelieving, as well as the holy and faithful, ° 
all.have long ago bebe baptized. Thus infant baptism 
subverts the authority of Christ. Jt baptizes exclusively 
UNBELIEVERS, AND BELIEVERS NEVER! ~ In ‘proportion 
as it prevails the apostolic commission is coutemned 
_and violated. This remark may be illustrated by refer. 
ring to a fact in the. history of our fathers. In Eng- 
land, until after the restoration of the "Stuarts, there 
was not in-the established church, even a liturgy for 
the- baptism of adult persons. During the Common- 
wealth, the. citizens had enjoyed under Cromwell, a 
liberty of conscience before wholly unknown. With 
the Bible in their hanids, eréat numbers of the people 
became. Baptists. Their children were of course not. 
baptized. After the feturn of the monarchy, these 
were compelled to submit to the ordinance, and for this” 
purpose the liturgy was remodelled, and an. “ office” 
inserted, then for the first time, for adults. Dr. Wall 
narrates these events thus :—‘ It was by reason of this 
[the prevalence of the Baptist] opinion in those times, 
that the Convocation that set presently a after the resto- 
ration of Charles II., when they made a new book of 
Common Prayer, found it necessary to add to it «a 
office for the baptism of those who, having been born 
m those times, had hot t yet been baptized} whéreof there 
were many that were now grown too old to be baptized 
18 


5 


306 INFANT BAPTISM IN COLLISION 


{ 
as infants, and ought to make profession of their own 
faith. They gave in the preface to the said book an ” 
account of the occasion which made this necessary 
then, though not formerly, in these words, £ Together 
with an office for the baptism of such as are Of riper 
years.” Which, although not so necessary when the 
* former book. was Nagipiled yet by the growth of Ana- 
baptism, through the licentiousness [freedom of con- 
science} of nae times, is now become necessary.”* 
From the. period, therefore, that popery took. posses- 
sion of Britain in the seventh century, up to the reign 
of the second. Charles, no believers, unless in secret, 


_ were ever baptized in all that realm! Thus completely 


and effectually, as to the persons appointed to receive 
this ordinance, does. infant baptism -lead .to rebellion 
against the divine law, and subvert the authority, of. our 
Lord Jesus Christ | : 

2. Infant baptism offers an indignity to ine authority 
of Christ by dispensing with the appointed profession of 
faith as a condition of baptism. 
~ ‘The previous profession of faith in Christ i is Shade by 
‘the gospel itself, an indispensable condition of baptism. 
It can never be disregarded without a violation of the’ 
commandment’ of God. The apostles, and primitive 
christians, never departed from this principle j in a single 
instance. So plainly is this fact set forth in the sacred 

- word, and so’ firmly has it ever béen fixed inthe public 
mind, that, as we saw ina previous chapter, it has al- 
ways been demanded even of infants ! Papists, Lu- 
therans, Episcopalians, and, others, to this day, farcically 
pretend that little children do belieye; and, since they 


* Hist. Inf. Bap., volsii., pp. 821, 322. 
‘s , ap 


WITH THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST. 200 See 


eannot themselves make their own profession of faith, 
-sponsors are appointed to make it for'them! But who 
that thinks at all, does not know-that this is all a mis- 
erable fiction? Itis absurd. Itis ridiculous. Infants 
have no repentancé, no faith, no religion, They are 
baptized without any profession of their own whatever. 

. The law demands of all who’ are baptized a previous 
profession of faith. Infants make no such profession. 
Therefore. infant baptism is rebellion against the law, 
and an indignity to the authority of Jesus Christ. 

‘3. It also perpetuates the change of form, and thus 
wholly abolishes. baptism itself, 

As we have but «one Lord,” and “ one faith,” so 
we have but “one baptism.” There is no other. That 
“one baptism’ is the burial in water, and raising again, 
by a.true. minister of the gospel, of a believer-in our 
ord. Jesus Christ, upon a profession of his faith, in the 

me of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost. So ably*and conclusively, by. numerous wri- 
ters, is this proposition established, that I deem it un- 
necessary here to enter into the argument. This is the 
form of christian. baptism. It -is its mvariable form. 
' Baptism itself is but a form. The form is the thing. 
Take away the form, and ‘nothing is left. Destroy 
the form, and you destroy baptism. He who in bap- 
tism is not immersed, is really not baptized? The 
change of its form is the abrogation of baptism. But, 
except in the Greek church, infants are never im- 
mersed. They have water sprinkled, or poured upon 
them, . The form is changed. No one, I presume, 
imagines that this desecration would ever have become 
general, had it ie ee to accommodate infants. “ Men 


wa 208 INFANT BAPTISM DN COLLISION 


and women’? who read, and believe the scriptures, who 
are governed by: them, .and act for themselves, would 
neyer > think of submitting to any other than the scrip- 
ture form. But _to immerse’ infants would be, to say 
the least, very inconvenient, and not always perhaps 
‘entirely safe. Infant baptism has, therefore, perpetua- 
ted the change of form;, and thus wholly abrogated ; 
baptism itself. Infant baptism is thus also i in conflict 
with the authority of Jesus Christ. — gine 

4. Infant baptism prevents ‘the abalone to Christ of 
believers: 

He» commands all believers, as ‘odliota ‘a when 


they become believers; to. be baptized ; but many. who — 


have been sprinkled in infancy, refuse to obey him ; 
and. they refuse upon the. ground expressly: that they 
have been sprinkled i in thfaney: Now infant sprinkling. 
is certainly not baptism. And it prevents true baptieas : 
in a variety of ways. : 

Multitudes among sprinkled christians will not think, 
or converse on the subject. They are offended if it is 
even mentioned in their presence. A sermon they will 
not hear ; a book they will not touch, unless it is de- 
signed to confirm them in their errors. If any one ven: © 
ture to.present to them the tr uth, and adménish them 
to obedience, they will he at no pains to conceal their 
displeasure, and will probably hever forgive him! They 
live and die unbaptized. 

But there are many, very many who read the serip- 
tures for themselves, and who cease to entertain pedo- 
baptist sentiments. They would, if they might, most 
gladly be baptized. Will their own chosen and loved — 
pastors baptize them? Never! Often have they been 


Peet. gaara ae Sala ms 
WITH THE AUTHORITY OF CHRIST.* 209 


-besought to do so, but they will not, They are immo- 
vable.i What! refuse ‘to. administer the laws of Christ ? 
How dare they’ refuse 2° His. commands are» upon 
them. . “Teach,” ie the Redeemer; “and baptize 
those who®* believe.” But no; they have sprinkled. 
. them in- their jitianiey + ; therefore when- they believe 
they” will, not. “baptize them ! “Infant baptism thus 
turns the- professed ministers. of Christ into rebels 
against him, and bfings them, too, into collision” with 
his authority! ~ Son, “ws 
‘In our: country, however, there are large numbers 
who become enlightened, and: consequently unhappy on 
this ‘subject. They feél as if they must obey Christ, 
~ but how can*they? In Europe, such an act was,for 
—_—, a century, and 1 in most transatlantic countries is 
now, a serious Offehce against the laws .of the land. 
“Bot administrator and subject’ would this day, be per- 
died imprisoned, and, if they, could not escape, be 
ec et suffering possibly to an untimely grave. 
But in our own free land there are no such restraints. 
May not every one here do what he shall think to be 
his duty ? Yes, it is his unquestioned right. But after 
all, is the exercise of that right practicable ? Few who 
have no experience in the premises, or whose attention 
has not been especially called to the subject, can ima- 
gine how almost insurmountable. are the difficulties 
such an one finds in his way, He cannot be bap- 
tized, as we have seen, in his own church.» But he is 
at liberty to leave that, and join the Baptist church. 
Dare he venture such an act? Few, unless favored by 
peculiar circumstances, find themselves possessed of the 
requisite courage. He reject infant baptism! If he 
18* 


210 © INFANT BAPTISM EN COLLISION 
dare essay so: bold an act, he is taunted and ridiculed . 
as presuming, to’ be wiser than ‘the thousands of the 
great and the good who have gone, before him. Re- 
proached:! Tnsultedld Scoffed! He shrinks appalled. 
He dare reject infant baptism ! ! He is upbraided with 
a want of respect for his parents and ‘friends, who be- 
lieved in it, and who had him baptized in’ his infaney. 
Will he shame and scandalize,those who of all others 
aré dearest to his heart? He réject infant baptism’! 


‘In this act he will renounce his family, and relatives, : 


who will pursue him. ever after with ‘scorn and con- 
tempt, as unworthy and degraded. He leave his own 


‘church! He loves his church devotedly, and cannot 


abandon it. He.think of forsaking his own, and uniting 


with another church! If he dare he will be at once 


denounced as weak-minded; vacillating, and unstable. 
It will be rung in his‘ears that not much confidence is 
to’ be piscedt in the religion or intelligence of those 
“renegades,” who are going from one sade ch to anoth- 
er. He jom the Baptist church! For that church, 
above all others, he has been taught to cherish disre- 
spect! He believes its members to be mostly ignorant 
fanatics, with whom intercourse must always be pain- 
ful, All this, and only to be baptized! Had he not 
better give it up at once? . These are some of the bar- 
riers that infant baptism throws in the way of obe- 
dience. ‘They show that what our Lord Jesus Christ 
said on a memorable occasion, to the multitudes who 
surrounded him, is still true of all classes :—“ If any 
man come to me, and hate not [love less than me] his 
father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren* 
and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my 


— 
F WITH THE AvtHonrry Or cuRist. . 211 
+ disciple. And whosoever doth not pear his cross, and 
_. “come. ters me, canst be my disciple.”* I have 
known many, and. from’ my heart have pitied them, 
~ who» “lamented in’ secret the ‘obstacles in their way. 
~ They were always unhappy. . Their consciences’ were 
perpetually upbraiding them. But they remained in 
* disobedience ! © 
« There are persons, however, and I thank God that 
their numbers are rapidly multiplying, who rise supe- 
rior'to every restraint, and obey our Lord Jesus Christ 
at whatever hazard. They know, and dare do their 
duty... To them™nothing is so precious as a conscious- 
eness that*they please God. They are characterized by 
, strong and ‘independent minds, firmness of purpose, 
+ deep piety, and a readiness to sacrifice all for Christ. 
They count not their lives dear to themselves in com- 
parison with the approbation of their adorable Re- 
deemer. ‘These can, and do, burst the bonds of infant 
baptism. But’ the thousands remain through life. in 
slavery! They cannot move. 
, These are some of the forms in which infant bap- 
tism develops the evil inherent in its character; it 
‘leads directly to rebellion against the authority of 
Christ in regard to the persons to be baptized, receiv- 
ing those he has prohibited, and rejecting those he has 
," received ; it dispenses with the profession of faith as a 
condition of baptism, which he has in all cases impera- 
“tively demanded ; it kas perpetuated the change of 
form in baptism, a form divinely instituted and com- 
manded, and thus abolished baptism altogether ; and 
it prevents those who have been sprinkled in infancy 


* Luke xiv., 26, 27. 


1 


212 _ INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. 


from obeying Christ when they become believers. Itez 
is now seen to be most true, that infant baptism is an. 


evil because it brings its advocates into direct rebellion — 


against the authority of our seo Lord and Saxjour—- 
Jesus ee : x 


ie 


CHAPTER XI. 
INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE OF THE CONNEO- 
“TION IT ASSUMES WITH THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS 


TRAINING OF» CHILDREN. ; oh 


‘Importance of correct training for children; how infant baptism connects 
itself with it; the injuries thus inflicted. _ 


Tue correct orn and religious training of children, 
‘is immeasurably important. No subject is more wor- 
‘thy of our careful attention. We are all, and especially 
those of us to whose charge these little ones have been 
providentially committed, called upon to study it with 
prayerful assiduity. The great business of parental life is 
the proper training of the next generation. Material errors 
here, must always result more or less disastrously, while 
true principles, prosecuted with fidelity, invariably se- 
cure the richest blessings. This most interesting and 
_ _ responsible work, however, is not permitted to proceed 
unembarrassed. With it infant baptism boldly connects 
itself, and confidently claims to be necessary to its faith- 
‘fal and successful prosecution. This connection, and the 
evil it inflicts, it is my purpose in the Pieea chapter, 
briefly to consider. 
-» On the general subject of the moral and religious 
training of the young, Paul thus exhorts :—“ Ye. fa- 
thers, provoke not your children to wrath, but ‘bring 


- 


214° INFANT BAPTISM — 

them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.”* 
Regarding the benefits to be expected from compliance 
with this injunction the. wisest of men instructs us 
thus :—“ Train up a child in the way he should go, 
and when he is.old he will not depart from it.”+| In 
approval of the domestic fidelity of Abraham Jehovah 
said :—“I know him that he will command his chil- 
dren, and his household after him, and they shall keep. 
the way of the Lord.”{ All those upon whom our 
heavenly Father has devolved this great duty, are held 

accountable to him, and to society, for its true ‘and 

faithful performance. How strong, too, are the other 

motives which impel them ! Who can look upon the 
children around him, and especially upon his own off- 

spring, without feeling in his heart a firma purpose, for 

their sake, to discharge the obligation to the utmost 

extent ? These infant. minds are so many, blank sheets 

upon which you may write almost whatever you please. 

Ere, however, the work is commenced, let the startling 
fact be duly weighed that impressions, when once given, 

can never be entirely effaced. They are to a greater. 
or less extent mdelible.- If evil, or adverse to purity, 

and truth, an*injury, probably an irreparable injury, is 
done to the children themselves, to all the sgcial inter- 


ests with which they-may afterwards be connected, and .. - 


to whatever pertains to human happiness in this world, 
and in the world to come. : 
The principles to be instilled are all contained in the 
“sacred oracles.’ They ought to be preserved as far - 
as possible from all evil influences, to have constantly 
before them a pee and holy example, and eyery oppor- : 
* Bph. vi., 1-4. at Prov. xxii., 6. t Gen, xviii., 19. 


“ — 


gee AN INJURY TO CHILDREN. ‘Did 


tunity should be:improved to fix in their hearts the 
lessons of heavenly wisdom. The great object must 
_ ‘be—since piety.includes ‘morality, and fits them both 
for the-duties of, this life, and the glory of the life to 
. come—to lead them to Christ, and. to seek for ‘them 
: pure vital religion. " Untilsthis end is gained, very little 
comparatively, has been accomplished. The manner in 
which the proposed end is to be sought, is perspicuous- 
ly stated by God himself :—‘ These words which I 
command thee this day, shall be in thy heart; and. thou 
shalt teach them diligently unto thy children; and thou 
» «shalt talk of them.when thou sittest in thy house, and 
~ when thou walkest. by the way,’ and when thou liest 
down, and when thou risest up.”* 
~ On this general subject there is, as far as known to 
me, among christians of all classes, no difference in 
- sentiment. The moment, however, we descend to par- 
ticular's, we are the poles asunder. Baptists insist that 
the successful moral and religious training of children 
can only be fully attained ‘by adhering strictly to the 
teachings of divine inspiration. And since their bap- 
tism and reception into the church in infancy, are meas- 
ures not authorized in the gospel, nor consonant with 
reason, they must be productive not of good, but of 
evil. Pedobaptists,-on the contrary, earnestly insist 
_ that it 7s essentral to a happy result in the premises that 
all infants be baptized, received into the church, and be 
there brought up with the people of God. Here we 
-join’ issue, and’ shall proceed to examine the merits of 
the controversy.» I consider myself the more impera- 
tively: called upon to do this, because paeisige have 


‘ * tees Viey.6, "° J 


- 


216 * INFANT BAPTISM i 


heretofore thought it, scarcely worth’ their while on this 
topic, to defend their opinions, or «practice, with any 
special carefulness. We have been; and are, fiercély 
attacked, and violently denounced, in sermons, books, 
tracts, newspapers; everywhere, as wanting in affection- 
ate attentions-to our children, and paying little or no’ 
regard to their moral and’ religious training! This odi- 
ous charge is rung perpetually in the public ear, and it 
is thought to be sufficiently proved by the fact that we ~ 
refuse to baptize, and receive them into our churches. 
The clamor has been kept up from age to age, and 
with so much zeal and pertinacity, that out of our own ~ 
circles the calumny is almost universally believed ! 
Justice and truth demand: of usa temperate but firm 
defence. d ec: 
Baptists wanting in affectionate attentions to their - 
children! Pay very little regard to’ their moral and 
religious training! Let facts. ena Do the children. 
of Baptists in their general conduct, evince less moral 
propriety than others ? Are they, when of the same 
‘social grade, less polished 1 in their manners, less intelli- 
gent as men, or less patriotic ‘as citizens? Are a 
smaller number of them in proportion, found to be 
truly religious, and active, and useful as followers of 
Christ? Who dare affirm any of these things ? No 
man certainly, who has any respect for his own char- 
acter, or veracity. By reliable statistics, collected at 
different times, and in several cities of our Union, - it 
has repeatedly been’ proved, that. a much’ larger pro 
portion of the children of Baptists’ become religious 
than of the children of Pedobaptists. - During the early 
part of last. year, a report was’ made, after accurate ex- 


*, M * 


. AN INJURY TO CHILDREN. O17 


amination, by the Baltimore Sabbath-school Superin- 
tendents’ and Teachers’ Association, with the following 
results :—In the Protestant Episcopal,Church Sabbath- 
schools of that city, among all the pupils, about one in 
every forty-one had professed religion; in the Sabbath- 
schools of the Presbyterian church, Old School, about 
one in. ninety, and New School, about one in Sifty in 
‘those of the Lutheran churches one in fifteen ; in those 
of the Methodist Episcopal churches, one in twenty; in 
those of the Baptist churches, onp IN Five.* A sim- 


a BETS Union, June othe, ipet A correspondent writes as 
follows :— is 
‘CA few months ago you iblisliga the statistics of the Balti- 
more §. §. Superintendents’ and Teachers’ Association, to dis- 
prove the oft-repeated fallacy that Baptists are cruel to leave 
their children without ‘the seal of the covenant,’ and thus ex- 
posed more than those who have enjoyed that ‘privilege’ to live 
and die without Christ. We then showed that in the Sabbath- 
schools of this city, the proportion of converts was more than 
twice as large among the Baptists as in any other school, and 
more than ten times as great as in some of them. The report 
_ for the present year is still more conclusive, and I humbly trust 
it will tend to dissipate the fears and ‘silence the complaints of 
‘those who say our children are left ‘to the uncovenanted mer- 
cies of God.’ Would that all the children were taught as ours 
are, that they are ‘by nature children of wrath,’ needing the 
work of the Spirit and the application of the blood of Jesus to 
their hearts, before they are fit for a place in his holy church, 
Then we might see more than we do converted in their early 
days, and consecrating the bloom of their youth to God. To 
teach an unconverted person (man or child) that he is a member 
of ‘the church, and-embraced within the covenant, simply be- 
cause a rife a which he had nothing to do, was performed 
upon him, can have no other effect than to lull his conscience to 
sleep, and to make him comparatively contented with his favor- 
able position. God grant that the day may soon come when 
such dangerous and unscriptural ‘teaching shall cease, and when 
the church shall be as she is des¢éribed by, inspiration, “a cho- 
je) 


918 INFANT BAPTISM 


ilar investigation has been made in Cincinnati, ‘with like 
results.- In New York some years since, a scrutiny, was 
instittted in a large number of families -of all’the. pre- 
vailing denominations, and it was. found that very many 
more of the Baptist than of any. others, had «been 
brought savingly to Christ. Thesevare facts. What 
do they prove? Not that the baptized children 
around us have an advantage over-ours, but the-con- 
trary. Eyery theory must ars judged by its results, 
and both the reasons and the facts in this case, prove 
that of infant baptism is worse than wseless. The public 
smind is beginning to be enlightened on this subject, 
and will not. much. longer Pear with patience, the re- 
proaches, and defamations with which we are so un- 
singly pursued. 

What. moral and _ religious advantages are, in the 
training of children, claimed as arising from their bap- 
tism, and admission as members into the church ? 


sen 1 generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,’ ‘a peculiar 
people.’ . 
. “But to the Renn : — ’ 


= School. No. attending. Prof. of re’gn. Proportion. 
Protestant Episcopal...>..0.. 1161 28 lin 411, 
Presbyterian, Old School. .... 726 8 1 in 908/, 
Do. New School.... 300 66 s2o1ingd 
English Lutheran ...........+ 5538 ; 87 Lino 
Methodist Episcopal......... A556 2 220 1 in 203/; 
Bapiapem ans crass on tite 761 143 lin 5/3 


“Tt will be seen by this’ table that the Baptists have nearly 
‘three times as many professors of religion in their schools as any 
other denomination, and about seventeen times as many as are 
in the Old School Presbyteria church, one of the strongest-ad- 
vocates of infant baptism. These ar eloquent’ facts, and we 
trust that their Tanguager may not be forgotten.’ 2 


t2 


3 


AN INJURY TO CHILDREN. 219 


Are we told that when the children are baptized, 
sponsors, or parents, of both, come before the church, 
and there in the presence of God and men, enter into 
the most solemn vows that they will “bring them up_ 
in the knowledge and admonition of the Lord?” All 
this we know. And we know more than this. ‘ Spon- 
sors, it is plain, must be conscious when they assume 
these vows, that they cannot redeem them. It is noto- 
nious that not one in fifty ever even attempt: it. The 
whole paraphernalia of sponsorship is in fact, a mere 
matter of form and show, without authority, and with- 
out benefit. But what of the vows of parents? Are 
they not substantial, and valuable? Upon. them surely, 
every reliance may be placed.. And what do they vow? 
Why, that they really will do what God.Almighty has 
commanded them to do; in other words, that they will 
~ discharge an obligation which no vows of any kind can 

either absolve; or render more ‘binding! Who has’re- 
quired this at their hands? To me it is most evident 
that if without. these vows they will not obey the di- 
vine injunction, they will not obey it at all. If the au- 
thority of the Most High is not sufficient of itself, vows 
and pledges will add nothing to its force.. But even if 
the vows in question were effective and desirable, why~ 
-connect. them with baptism? For-this relation I can 
perceive no especial reason. No benefits, therefore, on 
this ground are, or can be, secured.to the children, * 
- These baptized children, however, are members, we 
are told, of the church. ‘hey have, in consequence, 
thrown around them a strong “moral influence, which 
without this relation, they could: not. enjoy. This is 
looked tgot as giving them superior advantages. But 


220 INFANT BAPTISM 
are they, after all, any more intimately associated with 
the people of God, or under the influence of the church, 
than they would have been had no such. proceedings 
ever have transpired? Certainly they are not. In 
either case they are under precisely the same control 
and direction. The children of Baptists are surrounded 
by‘all the moral influences and christian. associations, 
that are enjoyed by those of pedobaptists, and’ their 
salutary results are felt to fully as great an extent. 
We have therefore all the benefits which have been 
supposed to attach to infant papesene: without i incurring 
any of its evils. 

It is most evident that no good arises from the en- 
» gagements of sponsors, from the promises of parents, 
from associations with the» people of God, from the 
moral influence of*the church, from any circumstances 
or sources whatever, connected with their baptism, 
which they would not have enjoyed, and which our chil- 
dren do not enjoy without it. ~On the contrary, they 
incur the most serious and dangerous evil, in two re- 
spects : they are deceived on vital tenets relating tc 
salvation, and they are thereby placed in circumstan- 
ces extremely iene to the reception of oa 
truths, 
Infant baptism leads, in moral and religious: tainty, 
directly into deceptions regarding the way of salvation. 
“These baptized children will, as soon as they are 
capable of thought, mquire, if they care to think at 
all on the, subject, what relation this ordinance has 
given them to Christ and salvation. They can find in 
the Book of God no answer. ‘The Bible is silent. To 
what quarter, then,. must they look for information ? 


= 


AN INJURY TO CHILDREN. 221 


‘To their catechisms, of course. And what do! these” pial 
same catechisms teach them? If they. are Calvinists, Es 
they. teach them that they were born in the covenant 


of grace, and members of the church of Christ, and 
that in their baptism they had, sealed and made over to 
them, ‘all the benefits of the death of Christ!” If 
they are Methodists, their catechisms teach them that 


their baptism cleansed them from the defilements of . 


original sin, united them with the church, and enrolled 
them among the faithful people of God! If they are 


Episcopalians, (and so in substance of Catholics, Lu- 


therans, and others,) that by “their baptism they were’ 
made members of Christ, the heirs of Ged, and in- 
heritors of the kingdom of heaven.” «A great portion 
of their moral and religious training consists in teach- 


ing them these very catechisms, together with their 


creeds, confessions, and other standards. If they be- 
lieve them, they are unquestionably ‘deceived as to the 


great principles of true religion... They must conclude | 
that they are safe. What more is necessary? If now - 


_ they live moral and correct lives, they cannot fail. Of 
“heayen! And is this true? No. It is wholly false. 
Their minds are miserably perverted! They have mis- 
taken the very nature of vital christianity. If they 
would look into the Bible, they would find its teachings 
on this subject the opposite of those contained in their 
catechisms, And would they examine their own hearts 


and lives, they would find them, in the light of the holy. 


word, not. pure, not sanctified, but still depraved, sinful, 
criminal. Their moral and religious training, has be- 
trayed them! It may lead fa to ruin. : 
These deceptions aghponec upon the infant mind, are. 
19* 


* 


2% 


929, INFANT BAPTISM © 


_ fostered in riper years, and strengthened, and deepened, — 
‘and fixed, by the press, and the pulpit of all classes | 
a Baptized young people” are addressed by their ea 
tors, not as sinners, but as “children of the covenant.” 
They are “ peculiarly favored.” Dry. Miller, for exam- 
ple, observes :— ‘The only question’ they [baptized - 
young people] can ask themselves is not, Shall we enter 
the church, and be connected with Christ’s family ? 
But shall we continue in it, or act the part of ungrateful 
deserters ?” He maintains that :—* Such children are 
to be registered as members; as such they are to be 
specially taught ; their own relation to the church ten- 
derly peesse There are to be meetings exclusively for 
their parents, and for them as members with their pa- 
rents, and in those meetings ‘they are to ee their school- 
fellows admitted into full communion.” Thus» “ they - 
will be brought to recognize their own membership.’’* 
Alluding to these views of the’venerable Princeton pro- 
fessor, Dr. Campbell of England, in a recent work, — 
remarks : :—“ Under such a system it is hardly extrava- 
gant, with Richard Baxter, and Dr. Miller, to believe 
that in nineteen cases out of twenty, our children would 
grow up dutiful, sober, orderly, serious, and before they 
reached mature age, recognize their membership in a 
personal act, with sincerity and edification.”+ This is 
the moral and religious training prompted by infant bap- - 
tism, and taught in the books. Not the conversion of 
these edren® is sought, but ‘the unfolding of the 
elements of the holy ened with which they were born,” 
or which was imparted in baptism! Other sinners may 
require to be “born again,” but these have been “pu- 
* Stovel’s Hereditary Claims, p. 24. ¢ Jethro, p, 219. 


ae 


AN INJURY TO CHILDREN. _. 923 


“ rified by baptism.” It remains’ only that they “ recog- 
nize their members oii in thé church, and they are in 
“full communion.” They are not exhorted to “ per- 
sonal religion,” but warned against “personal apostasy,” 
“the part of ungrateful deserters!” It is a calamitous 
‘mistake to connect infant baptism with the moral and 
religious training of children. Its doctrines deceive 
millions. It creates false hopes. It leads them to con-- 
ceive themselves favorites of heaven, when in truth they 
are “in the gall of ges and in the bonds of in- 

Piquity.” 

The-children of Baptists are, Jed into no such decep- 
tions, but are carefully guarded against them. | No mists" 
are thrown around them which prevent them from un- 
derstanding the gospel of Christ. They are not obliged: 
to perform the Sais labor of ‘“ unlearning what they 
have learned amiss,” and then learning the truth, They 
set out in the right direction, and induseeloasly pursue 
it. They learn that all, whether baptized or unbap- 
tized, are by nature, depraved and. sinful, and that in 
order to be saved they must repent, and believe in our. 
Lord Jesus Christ ; that all true religion is personal ; 
that every man must account individually to God ; and 
that each must for himself think, decide, and obey our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Their minds are not preoccupied 
by error, but open to receive the truth without preju- 
dice, and to practise it without hindrance. These ad- 
vantages are priceless. They are of unspeakable mag- 
nitude and importance! Of them all, however, our 
brethren of the several denominations around us are 
unhappily deprived. The hearts of their children have 
been withdrawn from the truth, and “ turned unto fa- 


224 «INFANT BAPTISM, BIC. 


bles.” Infant baptism, therefore, unfits parents, and 
others, for the successful moral and religious training of 
children, and it disqualifies the children under their 
charge from embracing the truth, by previously imbu- 
ing their minds with error, and implanting prejudices 
against the simple. gospel of the Son of God. 
We have now-submitted for your consideration the 
importance of the moral and religious training’ of chil- 
dren as enjoined in the word of inspiration ; the obliga- 
tions it imposes upon parents, and others; and the claims. 
to fidelity preferred by the iriterests of society, and urged @ 
by the spiritual and eternal destiny of the children them- 
selves. We have seen that from their baptism, and church 
relationship, no good is secured of any kind, but on the 
contrary, that they are seriously and permanently injured. 
We have ascertained that the evil inflicted consists, in 
part at least, in the false impressions made upon their 
minds in regard to the teachings of the gospel, inregard - 
to their own character as sinners, in regard to the way of 
salvation, and in regard to the true nature‘of the religion 
of Christ. And we have also shown that parents thus 
place both themselves and their children in a position in 
which they lose all the advantages of being guided by 
‘the diyine word, of receiving originally just’ conceptions 
of themselves, and of preserving the mind free from pre 
judices of all kinds in relation to both truth and duty. 
Most fearful, therefore, and often we apprehend. fatal, 
is the evil of infant baptism, evinced in the connection 
which it arrogates with the moral and religious training 


of children. 


he tp  CEAPTER EI, 


INFANT BAPTISM JS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT 18 THE GRAND» . 


FOUNDATION UPON WHICH RESTS THE UNION OF CHURCH 


‘ go ND STATE, ¥ 
a4 ms 


») Testimony in proof; origin and nature of the union ; destructive of ‘tue 


+ 


‘ . - religion. : . 


Inrant baptism, ‘is inseparable from the union of 
church and state. They are essential to each other. 
This fact will, I presume, be admitted by all. In a late 
learned work, Dr. Williams, (of England,) remarks :— 
“Without it [infant baptism]. those prophecies can 
never be fulfilled that predict the conversion of nations 
to God. National conversions must be pedobaptistical 
conversions, because there must be children included in 
these nations: A national church must therefore be a 
pedobaptist church. Indeed, those who aim at.a na- 


tional church must have some principle upon which 


. the whol¢ of its inhabitants may be compressed within 


its pale. This infant baptism alone renders possible.”* 


*<Dr, Wall justly asserts that all national, churches 
have practised infant baptism. Nothing is plainer than, 


that whére national churches are maintained, infant 


baptism: must be pe because the nation is brought 


into the church in its infancy.”; In E 


% In Stov el’ s Chr’ b *Dise if ie 
+ liinton’s Uist. of Bapt., p. 368. 


ope, this is in’, 


i 


oo 


* 


INFANT BAPTISM. _ 


fact, one of the principal arguments dn ae of i iIn- 
fant baptism, that it is the grand foundation upon . 
which rests. the, union of church and state, and’ that 
without it such union cannot be maintained. The. fol- - 
lowing canon law of England is prompted by a. con- 
viction of the truth mow stated :—“ No minister shall 

_. refuse or delay to christen any child, that is brought 

~ to’him upon Sundays, or holy-days, to be christened ; v 
“(and if- he shall refuse to christen, he shall be sus- ~* 
pended by the Bishop of his diocese from his ministry, 
by the space: of three months.” ** All who belong to. 
the’ nation must belong to the church. To be in the 
church, all must be baptized. And to baptize all, 
they must receive the ordinance in their infancy. Were 
only those who repent, believe in Christ, and live holy 
lives, admitted into the church, then indeed would -it 
be: as Christ designed, pure, elevated, sanctified, but it 

_ never could be nesiopat and particularly would it very, . 
seldom contain the kings, and princes, and great men. 
of the earth. These can find their way into the church 
by no other medium than infant baptism. But, they. 
must be in the. church i in order to make it a, national 
church. Infant baptism is. essential to the union of. 

’ church and state. : 

Upon what arguments do the Ficodaa of a state . 
church rely to prove its lawfulness ? The very same _ 
by which they defend infant baptism. To this fact. I: 
briefly alluded’ i ina former chapter. Judaism in both- 
cases, furnishes the required testimony. The Jewish 
society before Christ, and the christian society after. 

* Christ, are one~and the same church under different 
* Ch. Can., 68. . . 


FOUNDATION OF ALL STATE RELIGIONS: 227 


‘ dispensations. The Jewish church was national.’ The 
christian church must also be national. Every Hebrew 
‘was born in the J ewish church, and to confirm. him in 
his rights and immunities,.he was circumcised. In like 
manner every christian, child is born in the chur ch, and 
-receives baptism. “If: infant baptism is legitimate, a 
national church, and priesthood, necessarily. follow.””* oie 
Infant baptism; therefore, as is maintained, both. by its 
friends, and its enemies, is the grand foundation upon 
., which rests the union of church and state. This fact 
having now been fully determined, we proceed to con- 
~~ sider the origin and nature of the unica in question. - 
Our Lord Jesus Christ foresaw that his holy religion 
would meet, in_all lands, the condemnation of men in 
power, and that in its progress it would agitate society 
to its very foundations, « He therefore said to his disci- 
ples :—“ Think not that I am come to send peace on 
the earth. I am not come to send peace, :but a sword. 
For I am come to set a man at variance against. his 
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the 
daughter-in-law against -her mother-in-law. And a 
man’s foes shall be they of his own household. a “ And 
ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.”{ 
Accordingly, the religion of Christ no sooner bégan to 
be preached than it had arrayed. against it all the prin- 
ces, priests; and officials of every government upon 
earth. Its advocates were pursued, hunted down, per- 
secuted, and destroyed everywhere. Resistance, how- 
ever, but added to its strength. God was in-his truth. 
His purposes no+earthly power can successfully frus- 
»trate. “The people heard, and believed: . Disciples mul- 
‘* Henry Denne. + Matt. x, 84-86. } Matt, xxiv., 9. 


a. 


i 2 
RE 


2256 INFANT: BAPTISM Qoc 8 hig 


tiplied. -Heathenism waned.* ‘True religion spread. ite. 


self into all the ramifications of society, | in. all places, 
and countries. At this moment ‘peculiar events were-: 


transpiring in the Roman empire. Lucinius and Con- 
stantine were in conflict for the imperial crown. -Poli- 


ticians are ever sagacious -to. perceive, and avail thant. 


selves, of any element in society, which may bear them 


on triumphantly to their desired end. Lacinius iden: Be 


tified himself swith the pagans, and rallied to. his sup- 


port’ all classés who composed. the opposition to the re- _ 


ligion of Christ. Constantine linked his fortunes with 


the christians. Battles were fought. Constantine was » 


victorious. He ascended the throne ‘of the ‘Cesars: 
Numerous reasons’ show that of doctrinal religion this 
emperor knew very little, and of. experimental religion 
nothing. © His connection with christianity originated ir 
a far-seeing policy, and afterwards, continued fr om sim- 
ilar considerations. - The result was the adoption of the 
christian religion, and its establishment in the place of 
paganism, which had gone down with Lucinius, as, the 
religion of the empire. ed 
“The model upon which the union of church and state 
now brought into being was framed, was strictly pagan. 
The union itself was “subsequently advocated by the. 
priests as scriptural, upon the ground that Judaism was 


a national religion, and established by law. .This con- 


sideration, however, did not at first, if it ever did after- 
wards, weigh in the mind of the emperor... He very 
well knew that in every nation, of whatever grade, be- 
fore that period, and it is still true. of them all, the 


prevailing superstitions were, and are, established by. 


law,.as the religion of the state. ‘ Despotic rulers,” 


* 


Ae ft 


‘ 


: * 


FOUNDATION OF ALL STATE RELIGIONS. 229 


says Noel, “have ever sought to. extort from their sub- 


‘jects all possible advantages | for themselves, and-to this 


end- to retain them in the most complete servitude. 
They have chiefly: depended on their armies. But the 


‘fears and the hopes of superstition, have been too ob- 


vious a support not to .be largely employed. Well- 


‘paid soldiers have been their first instruments of power, 
- Their second has been a well-paid priesthood. Priests 


have lent to despots i in aid of their selfish designs, the 
portents; and the predictions of superstition. Deeks 


‘have in return, invested the superstition with splendor, 


and punished non-conformity. with death.” « By the 
aid of the superstition the despot fortified his’ tyranny ; 
and by the aid. of the despotism the priest gave cur- 
rency to his falsehoods.” « “ Neither party was strong 
‘enough to rule alone. But when the priest preached 


‘for the despot, and the despot governed for the priest, 


both the more easily kept their feet upon the necks of 
the people, and made the universal degradation sub- 
‘servient to their greatness.”* This was “thie policy es- 
tablished in Egypt, and Babylon, and Persia, and Greece, 


‘and Rome, and all other countries. All this was well 


understood by Constantine. He therefore combined in 
himself, and in his successors, as had been the practice, 
the highest ecclesiastical with the highest. civil power. 
He governed not only the state, but “als the church. 
He’ regulated its discipline, assumed to decide’ all’ con- 
troversies, by judges of his own “appointment, and, 
excépt those called by himself, interdicted the -assem- 
bling. of any council whatever. Thus the whole form. 


- ‘and’ character given to his church” by Jesus Christ 


“* Union of Church and State, pp. 85,86. ~ 
20 


ay 
wh 


230 INFANT BAPTISM © 


were déstroyed and lost. It was erected into a great 
hierarchy. Messiah was dethroned. It was no longer 
the church of Christ. “Such was the union of the 
church with the state, when that alliance was first 
brought into being. it was fashioned upon the princi-- 
pes of paganism, and advocated upon those of Juda- 
ism. . And upon- this substantially, has been since mod- 
 elled the union of chur ch — state In every. other 
country ! < 
The results of ths union now demand our ‘calm at- 
tention. : RS 
Those which Slt tety arose were most disastrous. 
Wealth and honors poured into the church; and with 
them came impiety, spiritual ignorance, ceremonies and 
superstitions of all kinds. ‘Frequent pilgrimages, for 
example, were undertaken to Palestine, and to the 
tombs of the martyrs. Absurd doctrines and idle cere- 
monies daily multiplied: “Dust and earth, brought from- 
Judea, were sold and ‘bought at high prices, as the most 
powerful remedy against the violence of wicked spirits: 
The old heathen habiliments, and processions, were 
brought into christian worship. And the virtues which 
had formerly among pagans been ascribed to their 
temples, their lustrations, and the statues of their gods, : 
were by the baptized now attributed to their churches, 
their holy water, and the images of their saints.* -To 
this deplorable condition was the cause of Christ at 
once reduced by the calamitous union of the church 
with the state. . 
Another result was to give’ iugaied prevalence to in- 
fant baptism, as a practice required by this new relation,» 
~ * Noel; Union of Church and State, pp.'87-89, 


ie: 
FOUNDATION OF ALL STATE RELIGIONS. 231 


‘The introduction of infants, though in primitivetimes 
unknown. in the christian church, was not anew policy 
in bodies ecclesiastic. The children of the ancient pa- 
-» gans had been ever,-by appropriate forms, soon after 

their birth, solemnly presented to the gods. Infant 

dedication was therefore continued; and-its form of 
course was now baptism.~ .Policy demanded that chris- 
tianity should be as much as possible, and particularly 
in its ceremonials, conformed to paganism, in order that 
the masses might be the more readily transferred from 
one religion to the other. On this subject Mr. Hinton 
beats :— We find it indelibly 1 recorded, on the pages 

of history, that the practice of baptizing-infants did not 

» spread extensively till after christianity became the state 

_ religion of the Roman empire.”* : 

The last result I shall nrention is, that’any established 
religion ceases instantly to be the true religion. . 

. Christianity, as révealed by Messiah, necessarily i in- 
“aoteey individual inquiry, belief, and profession, “An 
established religion is exactly” the opposite, since it de- 
mands unexamining conformity. The gospel defers ev- 
ery” thing to the conscience :—“ Let every one be fully 
"persuaded i in. a own mind,” and “ whatsoever is not 
of faith is sin.” A state religion disregards the con- 
science altogéther:: The gospel eens men to reject 
every false religion. A state system compels men to 
~ embrace, zight or wrong, the religion of their country. 
‘The gospel invites men to form a voluntary society upon 

' conviction’ as men. An established, religion herds them 

- together: by law, as animals, within ther inclosure of a 

seis ritual, The gospel binds every man to search: 


+. ® Hist, of Bapts, p. 868" 


« 


id 


2 a 8 INFANT BAPTISM — 


gate it, in opposition to error, however venerable and 
popular. All this is by every state religion denounced 


and prohibited. The union of church and state is there- _ 


fore; in all_cases, inevitably, and necessarily, iniquitous 
in itself, and full of evil in all its bearings, andvrelations, 
social, political, and religious. It is unscriptural, it binds 
the consciences of men, it suppresses inquiry, it subjects 
the wise and good to be governed by the ignorant, and 
vicious, it is a horrible engine of persecution, it is an in- 
jury to the state as well as to the church, and impedes 
and prevents the -e ension of the gospel, and the con- 
yersion of .the . «Tam thoroughly convinced 
that this wnchristian connection between the church and 
the state [which has ever prevailed in Europe] has-done 


after truth, to receive it, to maintain it, and to: promul- ; 


more mischief to the gospel than all the ravingsof infi-_ 


delity since the crucifixion. It converts good christians 
into bad statesmen, and political knaves into pretended 
christians. It is at best, but_a foul and adulterous. con- 
nection, polluting the purity of heaven with the abomi- 
nations of earth, and hanging the tatters of a poligieal 
piety upon. the cross of an insulted Saviour.”* 


Such is the union of church “and state, in its: origin, 


character, and results, Ours is the first-christian country, 
and the only one, since-the reign of Constantine, in the 
government of which this\union has been repudiated 


and denounced as a monstr6us.evil. ‘In the sentiments, 


therefore, which Lhaye here expressed, I expect to have 


‘the concurrence of every true-hearted American chris- 
tian. But the union of church and state rests for its 
foundation upon infant: baptism, without which i it cannot . 


i * Dr, Philip. rod 7) AS 


’ 


FOUNDATION OF ALL STATE RELIGIONS. 233 


exist. Destroy infant baptism, and you destroy the 
sunion of church and state. That unhallowed ‘relation i is 
no longer possible. Is it consistent to repudiate and 
condemn the connection, and at the same time uphold 
the platform that supports and perpetuates it? Can 
you deprecate the result while you continue. to defend 
she cause? He who defends infant baptism defends Lies 
the union of church, and state. For the enormities of 
every state religion, Catholic and Protestant, infant bap- 
tism is, as we have fully shown, justly chargeable.. nia 
fore infant baptism is an enormous evil. 
20% 


CHAPTER, 5TH, 


. 


4 INFANT BAPTISM Is AN EVIL BECAUSE IT LEADS TO RE- 
> LIGIOUS PERSECUTIONS. 


Testimony from the nature of pedobaptism ; from its political associations ; 
from the sources upon which it relies for support; from facts. 


Tyrant baptism leads to religious persecutions. Of 
this fact I shall proceed at once to submit the ma 
testimony. a 

The first. argument to uidh; T eall your attention in 
proof of the proposition before us, is found in the nature’ 
of pedobaptisni itself. It brings into the church the 
whole population of the country where it prevails. AML 
are’ baptized, and admitted to membership. Every class 

~ and condition are necessatily included. Such a church 
must inevitably, and to a great extent, be ignorant of 
spiritual things, and essentially irreligious. The great 
mass, we al] Mow: of every Community, grow up with- 
out religion ; and” although, according to Pedobaptism,” 
in the church, and entitled to all its. paises are full 
of sensuality | and worldliness. The majority of mem- 
bers, therefore, especially i in countriés where infant bap- : 
tism is fully carried out, know nothing of the renewing 
grace of God, and are governed in thee feelings and: 
pursuits by. considerations entir ely of earth. It cannot 
be ‘expected, therefore, to feel much interest in’ holy 
things, or to exercise that love and forbearance towards . 


= 


INFANT BAPTISM, ETC. 235, 


others inculcated in the word of God; and especially if 
they appear to them to manifest disrespect or- stub- 
bornness. The persons who compose its several de-’ 
‘partments’ have their ambition to consult, their hatred 
to gratify, their superiors to please, and their schemes 
of personal aggrandizement to accomplish. © This:is the 


character and spirit with which infant baptism must in 


~ the nature of things imbue the church. Woe to him, 
therefore, who shall be found in the way of any of its” 
‘purposes or designs. He must, he will be crushed. 
Such a church infant baptism makes. It will inevita- 
bly be a persecuting church. This conclusion is con- 


firmed by the history of all ages. Previous to the . 


reign of Constantine, no such thing existed as the per- 
secution of christians by each ‘other. They were all 
’ full of affection, forbearance, and kindness. Whatever 
might be the errors of their brethren, the thought did. 
not occur to them that they might do more than ex- 
press their disapproval, and formally withdraw from 
them. Immediately after that period infant baptism 
. became general, and persecutions commenced. The 


scenes of cruelty.and blood which have’since been en- ° 


acted, fill all who contemplate them with the deepest 
horror! It is unquestionably true, therefore, that ‘in- 
fant baptism leads to religious. persecutions. 
“A second proof is found in the political connection 
which, when practicable, infant baptism always as- 
"gets We have just seen in the last chapter, that it 
is the orand foundation upon which rests the. union’ of ” 


church and state. . Without infant baptism,” no such - 


union is possible. And the fact is well known that 
every state church in all ages, and in all countries, has 


9 * 


Sih ee 
See 


ba 


236 _ INFANT BAPTISM 


been a persecuting church. This is* true even of hea- 
thenism, as well as of christianity. Nebuchadnezzar 


‘compelled his subjects, of whatever creed, upon. pain 


of death, to bow down to his golden idol. Darius 
thought it excellent policy to Satake a royal decree 
that no prayer ‘should be offered to any god but him- 
self for thirty day s. The Greek legislators forbade the 
exercise of any but the national religion. Draco _pun- 


~ ‘ished departures from the established faith with death. 


Plato thought that every such act shouid be denounced 
to the magistrate as a crime. Aristotle allowed but 
one national form of religion. . Socrates was sentenced 
to drink the hemlock, and died for the crime of heresy. 
Established religions im christendom haye been con- 
ducted on the same principles, and have been equally 
as exclusive, as intolerant, and as bloody as paganism. 
Heathens, in common with Jews, persecuted the follow- 
ers of Christ, as long as they had any ability. Infant 
baptism was introduced, the church was united with 
the state, and Christianity immediately began to walk 
in the footsteps of Heathenism and Judaism. From 
that to the present day, the history of every” state 
church, popish and protestant, has been the same. But 
no state church could ever have existed without infani 
baptism. Infant baptism, therefore, is Bare chargeable 


with all their persecutions. ~~ ° 
~ A third proof is derived from the source of the main _ 
argument upon | which infant baptism relies for support. 


‘The appeal of its friends is now, and has been for 
“many ages, to Judaism. In “Judaism they find their 
“s ‘Seripture testimony,” - for the union of church and 


state.” An Judaism also they obtain ample authority. 


* : eS 2 


* 


LEADS TO RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION 8. 237 


for call their persecutions. Judaism is now ~ orand. 
platform upon which all these pr inciples stand, There 
all of them are alike sustained. _ Tf infant baptism is 


right, a state religion is right, and persecution is right. 


Look into pedobaptist standards, popish and protestant, 
and you will find that they maintain their doctrines, 


and defend their proceedings, by appeals to: the laws — 


of the. Hebrews. Does any. man dare to. differ from 


the established religion? ach priest is another Samu- 


el, -and armed with the same powers, He. therefore 
hews the presumptuous Agags to pieces before the 
Lord. In the same. scriptures that. Support. their forms 
of ecclesiastical organizations, they find commands to 


punish those who depart from the doctrines, or violate - 


the precepts. of their religion. Can we be surprised, 
then, that such a church should. practise persecution ? 
It_would be. wonderful if it did not. 


In proof, that infant baptism leads to religious yen 


cutions, I, in the last place, appeal to facts. 

Popery before the Reformation, poured out upon oi 
Baptist Fathers all the fury of its malignant heart. 
Nor could, any thing better have been expected; since 
the oath taken by.her Bishops at their consecration, 
and similar ones aré made by every inferior priest, is as 
follows :—“TI will persecute and oppose all. heretics, 
and schismatics, to the utmost of my power.”* And 


most fully do they perform, their vows. I will,not,’ ’ 
however, here recount the horrid details of her cruel- : 
ties, practised’ in every disgusting and execrable form. 


They may be read: in the Histories of the Church. by 
Ivimy, Jones, Benedict, and othiers. From the: third to 


* Hereticos et schismaticos pro posse persequar et ieshughabo. 


vig 


$. s 
238 4 INFANT BAPTISM 


the fifteenth century they were hunted down. and.de- 
stroyed like wild. beasts. They “had ‘trials of - crue) 
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and 
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn 
asunder, were tempted; were slain with the sword. 
They wandered about in sheepskins, and goatskins, be- 
ing destitute, afflicted; tormented; (of whom the world 
was not worthy.) They wandered in deserts, nde in 
mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth.”’* 
This was the measure meted to ws by popery. And 
after the Reformation, did our Baptist Fathers. receive - 
kinder treatment from protestants ?_ No; in no respect 
whatever. They were still pursued with the same re- 
lentlessness. The papists dnd the protestants destroyed 
each other, in every possible manner. Never were ene- 
mies more bitter, or uncompromising. In but one thing 
upon earth was it possible for them to agree,.and that 
was in persecuting the Baptists. This-was carried so 
far that m several of their treaties, both in Germany. 
and Switzerland, as D’Aubigné confesses in his History 
of the Refor mation, a special © ar ticle was inserted bind- 
_ing both parties to. use every ‘possible effort to destroy 
all the Baptists. in Europe. . Let us briefly enter inte 
this history, and see, how far the protestants. fulfilled 
their part. of the obligation they assumed. . Thus we 
shall have laid open before us more fully the persecu- 
tions into which infant baptism hurries: its f iends. 
‘Luther, on his return from ‘Wittenberg; ” says D’Au- 
’ bigné, “ extinguished i in Germany: the fanaticism of the 
Anabaptists.”+ | How he did this is, for his.own fame, 
but - too” well rememberéd by every reader of history. 


* Heb. xi, 86-38. 5 _ + Hist. Ref., vol. iii., p. 805. 


- LEADS TO RELIGIOUS PERSECUTIONS. 239 


Nor were he, and his friends, content to destroy t them in 


ye their own. land. They followed them with cruel hatred 


even into other countries. For example, Dr. Cox says: 
—‘‘The princes of Germany, having discoyered* by 
means of aéercepted letters, a secret correspondence be- 
tween the German and English Anabaptists, wrote an. 
epistle to Henry VIIL., containing a statement of their 


pernicious doctrines, and warning him. of danger likely = 


to result from their fanatical. proceedings, unless pre- 
vented by a bold «and timely interference.”* This 
“epistle” of “the princes of Germany,” we are spe-" 
cially informed, was advised by Luther, and written by 
Melancthon. It was their work. How attentive Henry, 


~ and his successors, were to the advice it contained, the 


« 


prisons of the “ United Kingdom,” and especially the 


fires of Smithfield, bear ample testimony. 


- In Switzerland our brethren met the same fate as in 
other countries. ‘This fanaticism,” says the pedobap- 
tist chronicler of the Reformation, “ reappeared in Swit- 
zerland, where it threatened the edifice. which Zuingle, 
Haller, and Cicolampadius had erected on the word of 
God. ” -«Grebel [a Baptist minister] endeavored to gain 


*_over Zuingle.. It was in vain ee the latter had gone 


further than Luther... ‘ Let us,’ _ says Grebel, ‘form a 

community of true-believers, for it is to them alone that 

the promise belongs; and let us establish a church that 

shall be without sin.’ But Zuingle would neither hear 

Grebel himself, nor permit him to speak: to the people.” 

He then turned in another direction. Roubli, an aged 
minister of Basle, Brodtlein, minister of Zollikon, and 

Lewis Herzer, welcomed his advances. They resolved 

* Life of Melancthon, p- 218. : 


/ 
240 bs INFANT BAPTISM 
on forming an independent body in the centre of the 
general community, or church within the church. A 
new baptism* was to be their instrument, for’ gathering 
their congregations, which were to consist exclusively 
of © -true believers. “The baptism of infants,” said 
they, ‘(is a horrible abomination,f a flagrant impiety, 
invented by the evil spirit and by Pope Nicholas II. 
The Council of Zurich, in some alarm, directed that a 
public discussion should be held, and as the Anabap- 
tists still refused to relinquish their errors, some of them 
who were natives of Zurich were imprisoned, and oth- 
ers who were foreigners were banished. But persecu- 
tion only. inflamed their zeal.” ‘Fourteen men,’’ he 
remarks, ‘‘and seven women were arrested,‘ and 
imprisoned on an allowance of bread and water, in the 
heretic’s tower. After a fortnight’s confinement, they 
managed, by removing some planks in the floor, to 
effect. their escape annie the night.” “« They . were : 
joined by George Jacob Coira, surnamed Blourock, a 
man of distinguished powers, and many others. While 
Zuingle was attempting to stem the torrent of Anabap- 
tism at Zurich, it quickly-inundated St. Gall. Grebel 
arrived. there, and was received by the brethren with 
acclamations ; and on Palm Sunday he proceeded. to 
the banks of the Lithe, attended by a ‘great number of 
his. adherents, whom he) there. baptized.” “ Zuingle 
wrote a tract on baptism, which the Council of St. Gall 
ordered. to'be read in the churches.”. To this t] he only 
answer * of these Dapiisss was,.»‘* ‘Give us the word of 


* He means that nothing but the {immersion of believers upon. 
a profession of their faith was by then allowed to be baptism. 
+ Most true. , 


‘LEADS TO RELIGIOUS PERSECUTIONS. 241 


God, and not the words of Zuingle.” <«Do you keep 
- the doctrines of Zuingle; as for us, we will keep the 
sword of God.” The outed, overcome in argument, 
and.put to shame by the truth, now-resorted to other 
measures. They condemned Mentz to be drowned, and 
the sentence was immediately executed. Blourock was 
sscourged with rods, arid banished by these pious prot- 
estants. ~Soon afterwards, falling into the hands of the 
papists, he was burned at the stake. Multitudes of 
others also suffered in various: ways little less severely 
than did _Mentz and Blourock. But do Lutherans and 
Zainglians now justify such conduct ? 2? D’Aubigné, the 
writer I have recited, and who is of our. own day, 
apologizes for it thus :—‘Undoubtedly the spirit of re- 
béllion existed among thése Anabaptists ; undoubtedly 
the, ancient ecclesiastical law which condemned heretics 
to capital punishment was still in force, and the Refor- 
mation could not in the space of one or two years 
- reform every thing ; nor can we doubt that the catholic 
states would have accused their protestant neighbors of 
encouraging’ insubjection, if the latter had not resorted 
to severe measures against these enthusiasts.”* “ Re- 
bellion !’ What rebellion? The refusal to submit 
their consciences’ to the magistrate? Of this the 
Baptists were guilty. It was rebellion! Then there 
was an “old ecclesiastical law,” forsooth! But this 
was a popish law, and it condemned Zuingle as clearly 
as it did Mantz or Blourock. They were just now es- 
pecially desirous not to scandalize their catholic neigh-. 
bors! They must therefore imprison, banish, ‘drown, 
and burn these Baptists! And I regret to say that 


* D’Aubigné’s Hist. Refor., vol. iii., pp. 806-819. . 
7 21 


, i 

249 INFANT BAPTISM. 
_similar persecutions are thus carried on until the present 
hour. In which of the prisons on continental Europe, 
where Baptists are found, have not our ministers, and 
our people, within the last five years, been incarcera- 
ted? But tell me, what impulse moved,, and still 
moves them to all this? Was it not infant baptism ?- 
Their denial of infant baptism was expréssly assigned: 
as the main cause! Infant baptism undoubtedly, there- 
fore, leads to religious persecutions. _ It undoubtedly 
produced all these ae ee 

‘Let us turn for a moment to England. There, fom 
the day of the burning of Sawtre mee Brute,* almost to - 
‘our times, persecutions against Baptists, have raged 
with the utmost violence. Protestants in*our father- 
land, could bear almost any thing else with’more pa- 
tience than opposition to infant baptism. Our sympa- 
thies have been moved a thousand times in. our child- 
hood, and we have wept over Cranmer, Ridley, Rogers, 
and others, who fell martyrs under the hands of the 
papists. By pictures, easy lessons, and essays, in prim- 
ers and Sabbath-school books, in our infancy and by 
declamations in riper years, our sorrows have been — 
called forth for their sufferings. TI refer to this fact not 
to condemn it. These great men were cruelly buteh- 
ered. But I am obliged to say that our feelings have 
been abused in this matter. Where are our sympa- 
thies, and. our tears, for our own brethren whom these 
very men murdered in cold blood as really as David 
did Uriah? Ah, of this no’ primers, or other school- 
books, have told u _And yet these men had before 


dealt to many a Baptist, the cup that they were at last 


av 


: ** A, D, 1400. 


2 


' LEADS TO RELIGIOUS PERSECUTIONS. 243 


obliged: themselves to drink from the hands of the Ro- 


man Catholics. . Take, if you please, an example or two 
in illustration. Laws. were passed in England to search 
after Baptists, and> to: bring them ty punishment. - “The 


' bishops named in the commission” for the performance 


of this work, “were Cranmer, Ridley, Goodrich, Heath, 


‘Scorey, and Holbr rach,” who executed their bloody of- 


fige with ‘singular ferocity.* Joan of Kent, a distin- 
guished batly: and a Baptist, was among the first. ap- 


. prehended. She was unceremoniously condemned to 


be burned alive at the stake. The death-warrant was 
laid before the young King Edward. He refused to 


sign it. Cranmer was deputed to persuade him to do 


SO. How did the archbi shop discharge his office? He 
“argued,” says the annalist, “from the law of Moses, 


‘according to. which blasphemers were to be stoned.” 
He said “that there were*impieties against God which 


a prince; being his deputy, ought to punish just as the 
king’s deputies were obliged to punish offences against 
the king’s person.” ‘“Plied with such arguments,” 
Burnet says,+ “the young king was rather silenced 
than convinced.” “He set his hand to the warrant 
with tears in his eyes, telling Cranmer that if he did 
wrong, as it was done in submission to his authority, 
he [the archbishop] should answer for it to God.” 
And most sternly, and soon, did he answer. for it. 
Again: In whose mind is not the picture of John 
Rogers. at the stake, with his wife and children around 
Bless indelibly wos haa ha ? A disti uish a gentleman, 


Pa * $e8 this whole matter in Neal’s Hist. . Puritans, N. Y. ed, 
vol. ii., pp. 858-880. ‘i 
t Hist. Ref, vol. ii, p. 110. 


“244 / ENFANT BAPTISM L. > 


when the lady spoken of, who is called. by the-historian 
“an illustrious female,” was condemned, went to Rogers, 
and: besought: him to exert his influence to save her, or 
at least to procure her a Jess dreadful death. - Rogers 
manifested much indifference, ‘said “ she ought to be 
put to death,” and jestingly observed, “ Burning alive 
is not a cruel death, but. easy-enough !’’~ On, hearings 
these words, which expressed so little regard’ for the — 
poor woman’s sufferings, his friend replied: with great 
vehemence, at the same time striking . Rogers’ hand, 
which before he had held fast, <‘ Well, perhaps it may 
so happen that you yourselves will one day have your 
hands full of this mild burning,” And..so indeed, in 
the providence of God, it did happen. *, And-yet more. 
In a sermon before Edward VL., Bishop Latimer speaks 
of the fearless intrepidity with which went to the stake 
“the Anabaptists that weres[then] lately burned in di- 
yers towns in England.” These were the men, Cranmer, 
and Ridley, and Latimer, and Rogers, who burned Bap- 
tists by scores, and who were: afterwards themselves 
burned by the’ papists. . They were no better, and died 
no more wnjusily, or cruelly, than their Baptist victims. 
“What measure ye mete it shall be measured to you 
again.” Our sympathies should be.at least.as warm 
for our own brethren and sisters, as for the titled digni- 
taries by whom they were so cruelly destroyed. 

Of the horrible, details of persecutions practised in 
after years; in England, in which thousands fell who 
were among the best and holiest men the world ever 
saw, 1 will not speak. I add only, that their principal 
crime was the denial of infant baptism. ‘This was an 
offence. so enormous that they could not be forgiven. 


# x 


‘LEADS TO-RELIGIOUS PERSEOUTIONS. 945 je 


Tf iit were Sutetied to other criminals, Baptists 
were always excepted from their: ‘provisions. Whoever . 
élse escaped, they were strre'to suffer. “The [solemn 
league and. covenant] Confession. of “Faith” of “the 
Chureh of Scotland”—Presbyterian—contains the fol- 
lowing” passages, Which were subscribed, and’ sworn to 
by every minister who entered their pulpits:—« The 
defence of Christ’s church appertaineth to the christian 
magistrate, against all idolaters and*hereties, as papists, 
and Anabaptists, &c., to root out all doctrines of devils 
and men, &c.”* “The examples of scripture do plain- 
ly ‘declare that the abusers of the sacraments, and con- 
temners of the word, are worthy of death.”+ We “or- 
dain the spreaders, or makers of books, or libels, or 
letters” —“ repugnant to any of the articles of the true 
religion publicly preached, and by law established”— 
“to be punished. All magistrates, sheriffs, &c., are 
ordained to search Sor, apprehend, and punish, all con- 
- traveners.”{ We “give our public testimony against 
the dangerous tenets ‘Bf independency, and what is false- 
ly called liberty of conscience.”§ Such were our perse- 
cutions before the Réformation, and have been since 
that event among protestants in Germany, Switzerland, 
England, and Scotland. Nor were they confined to the 
other side of the Atlantic. They came with our an- 
“eestors. to America, and prevailed alike among the 
puritans of New England, and the cavaliers of Virginia. 
“Happily, our glorious Revolution put them down, and 
gave freedom of worship and of conscience to our be- 
“loved Jand. Need I here recite the Bae and describe 


ge Sec re z ; ‘ ; 4 Sect. 8. 
t Sect. 6, act 2, part. ~ § Sect. 17. 


21* 


246 INFANT ae 


the cruelties practised upon oe by the Episcopalians of 
_the South, and the Congregationalists of the North? 
= pi not, since they cannot» but be to all most: famil- — 

- Our fathers have been denounced by-every reli- 
ane faction, condenmed in all the Confessions of F aith, 
led ‘everywhere to prison and to death, and covered 
with opprobrium in all nations. Polticians as well as 
religionists have bélieved that in putthg them to death 
they did God service. 

Thus we have shown saeontohineah le that infont 
baptism leads to religious persecutions. It necessarily 
makes an ignorant and worldly church, which if it-has. 
the power will persecute ; it unites the church with the 
state, and every such church’has been and*is guilty of 
religious persecutions ; the source from which infant 
baptism mainly draws the arguments for its support 
leads the church to acts of persecution ; and history 
shows that all pedobaptist churches having the. power 
have engaged in persecution, and that their. perse- 
eutions have been always most violent and_bitter- 
against Baptists, principally because -we deny,’and re- 
fuse to practise, infant baptism. » The world has never 
been visited by a more dreadful evil than’ religious per- 
secutions. No man can read the details of their enor- ~ 
mities without shuddering. All feel the deepest dis- 
gust. I shall attempt here no ‘description of them.» 
But let it be remembered that -Perseciition is one of the 
results of infant baptism. ~ i ail 

The converse gt this proposition is alsoutrne’ Bap: 
tist principles are inimical to persecution. © They, in 

ure, repel it in allits hateful forms. « And 
when these principles shall | spread themselves oyer the 


ile ; 
LEADS TO <— PERSECUTIONS. 947 


earth—and. hex ever have advanced, and ever will ad- 
vance part passu with political freedom—religious per- 
-secution shall be known no more among men. ~ | 
» It is not a little remarkable that Histeaesy and oth 
ers, have.attributed the first true conceptions of religious 
diberty to Roger Williams, the Governor of Rhode Isl- 
“and. In this they all evince their total ignorance. of 
Baptist history. Of Williams Bancroft says :—“ He 
‘was-the first in modern christendom, to assert in its 
plenitude, the doctrine of» the liberty of conscience, the 
equality of opinions before the ‘law, and in its defence 
he was-the harbinger of Milton, and the precursor, and 
the superior of Jeremy Taylor.”* I honor Roger Wil- 
liams for his enlightened conceptions, and his bold action 
regarding religious liberty. But he was only the rep- 
resentative ath all the Baptists who had gone before 
him, many of whom had written’ as wisely, as learned- 
ly, and as conclusively as he. When, for example, 
Calvin had-succeeded in bringing Servetus to the stake— 
one-of the most horrid blasphemies alleged against whom, 
bythe way, was his dencal of infant baptism—a protest 
against the proceeding was published by a learned and 
‘pious Baptist minister, Mr. David Joris. “It is,” said 
* Joris, ‘‘an incredible blindness that the servants of 
‘Christ, who are sent’to give life to the dead through 
_ the knowledge of the truth, should condemn the erring : 
* to death, and through temporal death expose their souls 
to eternal ruin. The right to pass: such a sentence be- 
longs to Him alone who gave life, and suffered death , 
for-our redemption. Were. it lawful to put heretics to 
Booth, there would be a general sla aughter, since all re- 


“© History, &e., vol. i, p. 875. 


248 


ligious parties regard their opponents’ as guilty of here- 
sy.”* In Calvin and Joris, you see Presbyterian and 
Baptist principles. regarding .religious «liberty, in full 
contrast, long before the days ro Roger Williams: - 
Thomas. Helwys was another example equally as strik- 
ing as the Governor of Rhode Island. If the latter 
stated and defended in the new world, the doctrine ‘of 
“soul liberty,” with great skill and force im his writings, 
and honorably illustrated it in the planting of a civil 
state where consciences, however’ diverse or eccentric, 
were never oppressed, the former gave in his publica- 
tions, in the old world, full form and expression to the 
same sentiments, and maintained them with singular 
personal boldness, and magnanimity. Helwys was 
spurned from society, and driven into obscurity. Wil- 
liams was more fortunate. The small territory that he 
planted, scarcely noticeable upon the map of the great 
confederacy of states of which it. now forms a part, 
furnished the example of religious freedom which that: 
confederacy has copied, and which . across ‘this wide 
continent, the millions of our people now account 
“their highest honor.” This was, however, only the 
embodiment of the great Baptist principle which, from” 
the apostles’ times, our churches have all taintained, 
and defended. 

In a Baptist Gonfession of Faith pabiehedé in 1611, 
may be seen the following passage :—“ The Magistrate 
is not to meddle with religion, because Christ is the, 
King, and Lawgiver of the church.”+ Let also a: few 
sentences. from the distinguished cnptieeyer rs 


* Tenry’s Life tind Times of Calvin: Le ge 
+ Struggles and ‘Triumphs’ of Religious Freedom, oe 6, t 


~ ro: 
ay. . 
“LEADS TO sisaiony PERSECUTIONS. 249 


mentioned, be here pondered. “The power and au- 
thority of the king” — —he wrote in England—“ is earth- 
ly, and God hath commanded us to submit to all ordi- 
nances of man. Therefore I have faith to submit to 
what ordinances of man. soever the king commands, if 
it be not against the manifest word of »God. » Let him 
require what he will, I must»of conscience obey him 


“with my body, goods, and all that I have. But my 


soul, wherewith I am to worship God, that belongeth 
to another King, whose kingdom is not. of this world, 
whose people must come Sealing’, whose. weapons are 
not. carnal, but spiritual.” Again, says Helwys “I 
acknowledge unfeignedly, t that God hath given, to ma- 


gistrates a sword to.cut off wicked men, and to reward 


. 


the well-doers. But this ministry isa worldly minis- 
try; their sword is a worldly sword ;. their punishments 
ean extend no further than the outward man; they can 
but kill the body.” “ Their ministry is appointed only 
to punish the breach of outward ordinances, which is 
all that God hath given to mortal man to punish. The 
king may make laws for the safety and good of his. per- i. 
son, state, and subjects, against which whoever is dis- 
loyal, or disobedient, he may dispose of at pleasure. 

The Lord hath given him the sword of authority, fore- 
seeing in his eternal wisdom, that but for this his ordi- 
nance of. magistracy, there would be no living for men 
in- the world, and especially for the godly. | ‘Therefore 
the godly have particular cause to glorify God for this 
his blessed pamirpaney of magistracy, and to regard: it~ 


-with. all reverence.” | And again : ae ‘The Shrpach* of 


Christ’s laws of the whieh, ‘we all this while. speak, 
which i is the only thing T stand: upon,” ” how i is it to be» 


* 


a] od 


250 oNFANT, BAPTISM | 
ae wy 


‘ punished? °« Higtkingdess is spiritual; ‘his laws are 
spiritual ; the transgression is spiritual’; the punish- 
ment also is spiritual—everlasting death.” “ No car- 
nal or worldly weapon is given for the support of his 
kingdom.”’* “a 
These are Baptist sentiments, and they consequently 
have never, in any country, been engaged in the nefa- 
rious work of persecution, To this. fact it ‘has, how- 
ever, sometimes been objected, that’ their circumstances 
have always been such that they, never possessed the 
power to persecute,’ Have we not reason to be sur- 
prised at a statement like this? Had Roger Williams 


> 


and his associates, no such power? Could they not . 


have persecuted the puritans as safely, and as success- 
fully, as the puritans persecuted them? Is it respond- 
ed that they did not do so because they were just out 
of the fires of persecution themselves? But were not 
the puritans also just out*of the fires of persecution ? 
They persecuted the Baptists. - The Baptists never 
persecuted them, but received them into their territory, 
and though differing with them’ in opinion, gave them 


the same religious liberty which they themselves en- 


joyed. That the Baptist never can become a perse- 
euting church’ is guarantied by the very nature of its 
“organization: It is composed of none but those who 
give, satisfactory evidence of.a change of heart by ‘the 
Holy | Spirit, and voluntarily seek admission to its mem- 
bership. None others can be received. ‘A church 
_without a-Bishop” ‘to concéntrate its designs; stead- 
fastly adhering to the full independence of each partic- 
ular separate organization; offering to ambitious mén 


7 


“* Struggles and ai sta &e., pp. 11, 12." 
s 


* 


+ © = 
ea =i, allie : s 
LEADS TO RELIGIOUS PEESECUTIONS. O51 


¢ * 


“no distinctions, and. to its Membér 's, of whatever grade, 


no secular advantages ; ‘how can she ever engage in 


‘the business of. pancebulion® She persecute? Who 


would she persecute? Not” her own communicants, 
‘since to them she 1 is bound by the strongest ‘ties of af- 


féction, and can, besides; do nothing” Ririthowt their con- 


sent... Not those who are out of ihe church, since over 
them she has no control. Why-would’ she persecute ? 
To bring men into her communion? She would not 
have them, until convinced that they were truly con- 
verted, nor then, unless. it was their unbiased pleasure ~ 
to come, professing that they did so“from a desire to 
obey our Lord Jesus Christ. She can’ never be a per- 
secuting church. To. pane such she must cease to 
be Baptist. 5 lg 

These are, and ever have’ beg Bastist principles. 
They are the principles taught by Christ and.his apos- 
tles. - They demand the freedom of. the conscience. 
They have long been overborne, and trodden under foot; 
but they are not destined to die. » “«God-is in his-truth.” 
It must at length triumph. Our people are rapidly 
filling the world. ‘They carry with them the Bible. 
aaandy it for themselves. They form their own 
opinions. “ They submit their consciences to no man. 
They oppress the conscience of noman. - They act upon 
their convictions of duty. ‘This mental independence, 
commenced i in childhood,: soon becomes a habit, and is 
inevitably-extended into every department of life. The - 
character of the® people is thus elevated, their powers 
of thought invigorated, their conceptions s “purifieds: and 


they become truly formidable to tyranny in the state as 


well as inetheschurch. - By. such they must always ex- 
* 


. 


252 INFANT BAPTISM, zr. 5 

¥ - e 
pect to be denounced. ~ But they never can be enslaved. 
Their principles have ever rendered them obnoxious to 
despots, and in every absolute government they: have 
been put to death, asthe enemies of magistrates and 
rulers. Light is now, thank God, breaking i in upon the 
world.’ Truth, political and religious, Is gaining ground. 
The nations must ultimately sever the yoke of their op- 
pressors. And as national liberty extends itself, Baptist 
principles, and ae people, ‘will cover vie whole 


earth, . “ 
ae r - 
ow vies é “ 
bP sd af ’ - 
@ + 
: 
* 
- 
-. * 
e 
x wae 
’ 
* PEt 
” 2 e * 
* A 
~ 
* - 
‘ i. s 
: % ¢ 7% 
. b : 
é 
* 
My 
us 
= | ew 
ee 
’ 2  ® ty Tae 
» “7 ye 
- > ey 
. . * } 
% » t< . S 
hs, y) 
pre * ME PE a 
> \ pee : ~ 
eae af PY 
# “ 
‘ * * Tas a 
Sd . . oa -. 
> % 


sone CHAPTER XIV, | 
INFANT BAPTISM Is AN EVIL “BECAUSE IT Is CONTRARY 

TO THE PRINCIPLES OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS FREE- 
~ DOM, * 


S > 


Nature of freedom ; infant baptism destroys civil freedom; it destroys 
eieions freedom ; it enslaves the mind in all respects. 


_ Freepom is a state of exemption from illegal control, 
We enjoy civil freedom under a government in which 
our persons, our property, and all our rights, are se- 
cured, and protected, by just. and equitable laws, 
promptly administered, and duly obeyed. . Religious 
freedom is immunity from the dominion of men over 
our faith, He is free who worships and serves God 
without molestation, according -to his own convictions 
of duty. Freedom has no affinity with lawless license. 
It cannot, on the contrary, be possessed without sub- 
mission to the law.. Government is essential to the 
condition. of man, God has therefore instituted. gov- 
ernment, both civil and religious. Between these de- 
partments there i is no conflict, They neyer contravene 
each other. As citizens of a. common country, and 
moral and accountable beings, we are. subject to both 
divine and human laws. Ours are the blessings of 
both. In the-obedience rendered we are admonished’ 
by Messiah himself, to “give unto Czsar the: things 

22 


a ae : oie ; 4 
254 INFANT BAPTISM CONTRARY TO 


that are Ozesar’s, and unto God the oe that ane 

0d’s. = oie f 

Civil government is. te divine dy ioieserdionte “ “The 
powers that be, are ordained of God.” As members 
of the body politic, every man is obliged scrupulously 
to conform» to its légal: requirements, in all cases in 
which they do not come.into collision’ with his obliga- 
tions to.God. . His duty to the Most, High is more ex- 
alted and imperative than. any, other. ~ J aliovah has not 
deleg ated his authority to earthly rulérs of. any class, 
whether they be officers of state, or ministers of. reli 
gion. Tn faith and worship every man, as long as he 
infringes the rights of no other man, is accountable to 
God only. The disciples were forbidden to call any 
man on earth .master. Messith is himself sole. Lord.. 
Nor are they permitted illegally .to rule each other. 
Even the apostles of Christ disavowed any authority in 
this respect...“ Not, ” - said they: to their brethren, 
“that we have dominion over ‘your faith, but are help= 
ers of your joy ;’* and “ Who art thou that judgest 
another man’s servant ? To’ his-own master he stand- 
eth or falleth.”} Freedom, ‘political and religious, thus. 
defined and understood, is, as we now “sé; not only 
the just right of, every man, but, I will add, it is his 
inalienable right. He is not. permitted to resign it 
even if he were 50 disposed ; nor can he, by any power, 
be, , deprived of it without the grossest violefiees and 
wrong. ‘Religious freedom is inalienable,” says the 
distinguished and lamented Dr..Robert B. ‘Semple, “be- 
cause the opinions of men depending only on the evi-’ 
dence contemplated by their own minds, cannot follow 


* 2 Cor. i, 24. + Rom. xiv., 4; James iy., 12. 


% Com AND ik cl FREEDOM. 255 
the dictates of other men. It is inalienable,also, because 
what is here a right towards man, is a duty towards the. 
Creator. It is the- -duty of every man to render the 
Creator such homage, and ‘such only, as he believes to: 
be acceptable to him. This duty i is precedent: both in. 
order of time, and degree. of obligation, to the claims — 
of civil. society: Before any man can: be considered as 
a member of civil society, he must be considered as a 
subject. ofthe. Governor. ‘of the: universe. And if a 
member of civil society who enters intovany subordi- 
nate association, must’ always do .it with a reservation ‘ 
of ‘his duty to the general authority, much more must 
every man who becomes. a member of any particular 
civil society, do. it with a saving of his allegiance to 
the universal Sovereign: We maintain, therefore, that: 
in, matters’ of religion, no* man’s night is abridged by ; 
the institution of , civil Society. and that religion _is 
wholly exempt from its cognizance.’’* "These great 
facts and principles will be. readily conceded by all en- 
lightened American christians, of every denomination. 


_ The time is past when, in this country at least, they’ 


will -be ‘called in question. Yet with them all infant 
baptism, as I shall now demonstrate, is wholly incom- 
patible... vei 
Itis contrary to the principles of civil freed aa 
© Ibis the first step in a process which soon oalages 
the mind, and throughout after life, leads captive all its 
powers. The child, without its own knowledge or con- 
sent, has been subjected to the ordinance in which he. 
makes a profession of religion. “As soon as his reason 
begins to dawn, he is, in popisl countries and’ commu- 
* Semple’s Hist. of Virginia Baptists, p, 436, 


r 


256 INFANT BAPTISM CONTRARY TO’ _ 


nities, obliged at regular intervals, to confess. to ‘his 
priest, all the actions of his life, and* thoughts of his 
heart. He dare not entertain any opinion, which his 
confessor condemns, © To him he ‘must submit in- all 
things. . Thus a feeling of” dependence’ and” subjection 
is created in his eatliest years, whichis fostered, in all 
subsequent life. He mtst receive. upon authority, as 
true, propositions which to his own judg ment and rea- 
son, if he may venture to éxercise them, are absurd ; 
and’ he must hold as false those which appear to him ° 
incontestably true. He. must adopt no sentiment. but 
by permission of his spiritual, guide. - Habits, of self- 
distrust, and submission to superiors, thus formed, are 
soon indelibly fixed ‘in the soul They can never be 
eradicated. In Catholic’ countries, and communities, 
children.are thus reared.- As a natural consequence, 
they are. mentally, through life, inevitably, and irrecov- 
erably slaves. His habits are characteristic of the man, 
and are, as a matter of” course, -carried into all the ‘rela= 
tions. of life, civil as well as religious. Every citizen 
is sedulously trained to refuse the formation of any judg- 
ment of his own, or if he chance to do so, to distrust, 
‘and ‘renounce it, thé moment it is contradicted by those 
to whom he is. accustomed to defer... Can such a man 
be free? He is necessarily, politically, a slave. His 
soul is bound in such fetters that he can no more recov 
er from them than he can change. his nature. Infant 
baptism places men in this Souilichias Therefore infant 
baptism is contrary to the principles of civil freedom. 
Occasionally, I grant, as.an exception to a general rule, 
a man may be found who is capable of breaking these 
chains, and rising above the-evils of his condition. But 


_- CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM. 987 


he is almost alone. The great mass are content to re- 
main in their bondage. Vo popish nation, therefore, 
ever has been, or ever can be, free, The people are so 
trained that they must have masters. They demand to 
be ruled. How dare they form an independent opinion 
upon politics, or any other subject? They never did 
such a thing. The act is above their reach. They 
shrink from it with alarm. If, as lately in France, they 
arise, and achieve their liberty, it is done in tumult, and 
they remain in tumult, until, as that nation did. once 
before, and so will again, we fear,* they sink back into 
despotism. The states of South America are called 
republics, but they are not free. ‘They never can be, 
under existing circumstances, because all these destruc- 
tive influences are embodied in their organic laws. In- 
fant baptism is at the foundation of the slavery of the 
nations. 

Infant baptism is contrary to the principles of religious 
freedom. 

The deteriorating causes just noticed are also influen- 
tial here. A people incapable of civil, must also be in- 
capable of religious liberty. But there are here addi- 
tional reasons. The very first act in religion is a gross 
violation of the great principle of freedom. No choice 
is left to the child. He is baptized, and placed in the 
church, as soon as he is born. His faith, his religion, 
his relation to God, is not a subject upon which he is 
ever to exercise his own powers of reason or judgment. 
His church is selected’ for him, and he is committed to 
the principles, of that church, no matter what paar sed 


“* This. ‘prediction, hazarded in the first edition, recent events 


have given us no ground to retract. * 3 ¥ 
22% 


958 INFANT BAPTISM CONTRARY TO - 


be, in its polity, in its doctrines, or in its forms. To 
question the truth of any thing he is taught, is presump- 
tuous and criminal. Heé-is not to doubt whether his 
church may in some things be wrong. He may prove 
her right if he can, but not wrong. In most countries 
it is at the risk of his See his fortune, and his 
life, that he adopts. any opinions, or practices, not sanc- 
tioned by authority. Talk to such a man about study 
ing the scriptures to learn the true faith, and to gain 
correct knowledge of his duty! His faith and duty are 
prescribed. He dare not dissent. Why should he study 
the scriptures ? He is prohibited from giving them any 
other than the authorized interpretation. He is obliged 
to believe what the church believes, and to do what he 
is commanded by her priests. Religious liberty is to 
him, utterly impossible. He is bound hand and foot, in 
hopeless slavery. And what is true of one man is true 
of a whole community, or of an entire nation, since it 
is composed of men all of whom are of the same char- 
acter. Such a nation never can possess, they never can 
even understand religious freedom. Into this condition 
of things they are thrown by infant baptism. Therefore 

infant baptism is contrary to religious no less than to 
political freedom. 

.Am I told that the evil we are now considering might. 
exist without infant baptism? If it might, then infant 
__ baptism cannot be justly regarded as its legitimate cause. 
But no, it could not exist, and would not, without. it. 
To this cause it is truly and necessarily traceable. With- 
out infaut baptism there could have been no overshad- 
owing and oppressive hier archies ; without it there could 
have been no Begenenite nominal obuistandig ; without 


? 


gd CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM. 259 


it there could have beck no union of church and state ; 
“there could have been no lor ding it over the consciences 
of the people of God by men in power ; there could 
have been no destruction of religious freedom. Let in- 
fant baptism - be at once-blotted out, and all of: every 
successive generation of children taught the true princi- 
ples ‘of religion as. set forth in the word of God ; put 
the Bible into their hands, and teach them that in their ~ 
faith and practice they must exercise their own judg- 
ment; that they cannot be members of the church unless 
they have repentance of sin, and a living faith i in the. 
Redeemer ; and that no obedience can be acceptable to 
God which is not rendered from love to our Lord Jesus 
Christ, voluntarily, and intelligently ; let all this be ‘in- 
stilled into their minds, and_ religious freedom will in- 
stantly spring up, and spread itself over the face of the 
earth. Infant baptism is the true origin of the evil, and 
it must be banished from the world before the nations 
can be emancipated. 

But these facts and arguments, I am reminded, are 
predicated of infant baptism as it exists in connection 
with popery, and that it does not necessarily follow that 
they are true of it when practised in connection with 
protestantism. Infant baptism, I answer, made popery, 
and it will carry protestantism back to the same’ point. 
Out of Great Britain, what is protestantism at’ this hour 
in Europe? So far as religious freedom is concerned, it 
differs almost nothing from popery. Our facts and ar- 
guments are therefore true and applicable also to prot- 
estantism. 

In England, however, and in our own country, do not 
men think and act freely 1 in religion? Flow, then, can 


© * 


260 — INFANT BAPTISM CONTRARY TO ~~ 


it be said infant baptism fetters their freedom either in 
polities or religion ? ? In England, I answer, infant bap- , 
tism is very extensively renounced? and a corresponding 
liberty prevails. But does England enjoy full religious 
freedom? ‘That she does no one will fora moment pre- 
tend. Public sentiment is brought to-bear on the sub- 
ject by means of the bedjichment, and the influence of 
fashion, wealth, and’ aristocr acy. An enslaving power 
is thus exerted which few have the moral courage to 
encounter, and which all must confess 1 is contrary to the 
principles of religious fr eedom. 

In America, the very atmosphere we breathe is essen-: 
tially anti-pedobaptistic. Here infant baptism is com- 
paratively a dwarfish and inefficient thing. A distin- 
guished minister of that class—Rev. Dr. Bacon of New 
Haven—in a recent official paper, thus speaks of the 
decay of the practice : :—“A wide neglect of infant bap- 
tism prevails” in the Congregational and Presbyterian 
churches. ‘How does this happen? We commend. 
the i inquiry to the earnest attention of all whom it con- 
cerns, and especially ot pastors, and the teachers in the 
theological seminaries.” ‘Is it true that the views on 
the subject which have been gaining authority in our 
churches for more than a century, are essentially anti- 
pedobaptistic 1 in their tendency, and that this tendency 
is revealing itself in a growing disuse of infant baptism? 
The question of the fact, and the question how to explain 
the fact, ought to be fairly and frankly considered. Our 
Baptist brethien on the one hand, and the believerse in 
baptismal regeneration on the other, are constantly tell- 
ing us that the’ baptism-of an unconscious infant is in-, 
congruous with our theory of religion.” This witness . 


= a > aa OER, 


CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS ‘PeEEDOM 261 
is true. There is anjone all classes in our country Pa a 
wide neglect of infant baptism!’ It can never flourish 
here. It is out of its element, and does not produce its 
mature fruits. It is in the old world that its results are 
felt in all their power. But is it not in the nature of 
the same cause to produce the same effects? These 
effects may be so modified by other influences, as to. be 
less painfully felt, but as far as they go they are pre- 
cisely the same. It is in the nature of infant baptism 
here as. elsewhere, to destroy civil and religious free~ 
dom, and that it has not its full effect among us is at- 
tributable mainly, if not wholly, to the Baptist element 
which everywhere so strongly pervades the public mind, 
and even enters the Pedobaptist churches themselves.. 
Thus have we seen the nature of freedom, political 
and religious; that it is the inalienable right of all men; — 
and how it is destroyed by infant baptism in the state, 
arid in the church. It is true, therefore, beyond ques- 
tion, that infant baptism is contrary to the principles of 
civil and religious freedom. It follows that by how 
much civil and religious freedom is an unspeakable 
blessing, by so much is infant baptism, which destroys 
it, an evil, and a curse. 


+ 


Nee 


CHAPTER &Y¥ 


INFANT BAPTISM IS AN .EVIL BECAUSE” IT ENFERBLES 
THE POWER OF THE CHURCH TO COMBAT ERROR. 


Design of the church ; to accomplish it, it. must be pure; weakening effect 
of infant baptism ; iiaee sted by its influence on the Reformation; by 
daily occurrences. Ke 


_ Jesus Curisr designs to destroy sin among men. His 


arin’ is mainly, the | instrumentality by which this great 


work is to be achieved. - By the gospel, she is to en 
lighten the world, to instruct the nations, to subdue the 
hearts of all men to the truth, and to bring them under 


_ the glorious dominion of Messiah. This is a funda- 


mental feature in the faith of all christians. Its ¢ cor- 
rectness no one doubts. 

Contemplate the extent, and,the nature of the oP 
proposed. ‘To accomplish it, must not the church her- 
self be clothed with all her strength? Her power is 


ain her conformity in all-things, to the laws of Christ. 


He has therefore sanctified his church, “ that he might 
present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, 
or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be 
holy, and without blemish.”* Is it possible for a 


 Pedobaptist. chutch to maintain this character?. We 


haye already amply seén that it is wholly impracticable, 
since infant baptism necessarily robs it of its purity, 
s Eph. Vey 200" 


id 


- 


and spirituality, and consequently of its ability to fulfil 
the purposes of its organization. as corrupt church 
may become great, and ahah and powerful. It may 
rule over the world. The papacy has done all this. 
But to rule the nations is one thing, and to convert the 
nations to Christ is another thing. This last she can- 
not'do, because she is not herself converted. To ac- 
complish the. work assigned her, is to her impossible. 
Infant baptism, whenever operating without restraint, 
inevitably corrupts the communities that practise it. 
‘It fills the church with the worldly and unregenerate, 
and thus gives her either a dead and soulless faith, as 
in Spain, or a living and active infidelity, as in Ger- 
many. It is foanifest that such a church has no longer 
any power successfully to combat error in herself, in 
her sister denominations, or in the world around ‘her. © 
_ Of this important truth we have no more striking 
‘exemplification, than that which is presented in the his- 
tory, and_ results, of the Lutheran reformation, This 
great moral revolution was characterized by many de- 
fects. Painfully was it mingled with the passions,-and 
prejudices, and fanaticism of men. It fell far short of 
restoring religion to its original Bible standard. Yet.it 
was productive, during a long period, of many great 
and most happy consequences. “Indulgences,” as they 
‘are familiarly. called, first attracted the attention of the 


INFANT BAPTISM, ETC. 


reformers. By indulgences is meant to be described a 


“peculiar appendage to the popish “sacrament of pen- 
ance.” They had regard to the pardon of the sins of 
the baptized. The baptized were conscious that they 
‘committed daily sins, from the guilt of which it was 
necessary they should be absolved. In this way only ~ 


+ 


oe INFANT BAPTISM DESTROYS 


frivolous, the gay, and the criminal, were disposed. to 
pay liberally.- But they would pay much more ‘iber- 


ally, when their pardon included, as it frequently did, 


permission for subsequent crimes which they desired, 
and intended to perpetrate. Priests only could ad- 


minister sacraments ; consequently. are only, could 


grant indulgences. Lucrative indeed, did they find the 


monopoly. These indulgences, with some others of the 


outworks of popery, were vigorously attacked. Not 
long, however, did the conflict rage before nearly every. 
department was involved. The citadel itself of popery— 
the power of sacraments to convey the grace of God, 
and their ‘consequent necessity to the salvation of all, 


whether adults, or infants—they soon gallantly assailed. 
With the Bible in their hands, which they pr ofessed. to 


regard as the standard of truth, and duty, Luther and 
his coadjutors exploded, and overwhelmed with oblo- 
quy, the whole fabric of superstitions which had been 
imposed upon the world as the religion of Christ. 
Terrible. indeed, for a season, was the battle. Upon 
which standard victory would ultimately perch seemed 
doubtful. . It was soon perceived that the conquest 
could not be gained unless the word of Ged, in their 


‘vernacular, was put into the hands of the’ people, and 


could that favor be dispensed,-and. for such pardon the. 


~ 


disseminated throughout the whole land. This was” 


done. The spell by which men had been. bound, was 
broken. The papacy writhed like an*expiring monster, 
Its power was overcome. The great doctrines of sal- 


vation by grace, not through ordinances, but through. 


faith, were again mhogainied to the world. 
This was the first’ period of the Reformation, During 


THE POWER OF THE CHURCH. 
; & 


th. was the sole 


its continuance the simple force ‘of t 
- reliance of its friends. No exterior aid was invoked. 
The gospel, unencumbered ‘by any of the traditions, or 
commandments of men, was everywhere in the as- 
cendant.. No power could resist its progress. Reli- 
gion was no longer a dead’ formality for the ‘maasses, 
but a spiritual energy pertaining to each individual 
personally. It concerned his own heart, and life. Thus 
the hopes of men were removed from the old popish 
theory of grace eapected through sacraments, to the 
gospel scheme of grace received through faith in our 
Lord Jesus Christ. This was then the character of 
protestantism. It was the character of the religion of 
the apostles. Errors. of all kinds, fled before it. It 
rapidly spread into all the nations of Europe. Eng- 
land, and France, and even Spain, as well ‘as the Ger- 
man nations, felt its power. They were all agitated 
~ as by. the throes of an earthquake. - Never was there 
a moyement so popular. Not the people alone, but. 
the princes also embraced the gospel. 0, if the gospel 
had continued to guide them, what might not have 
been the result! But here a second era in “ne Reforma- 
tion commences. A national establishment of religion 
was unhappily, considered by them all, as a matter of 
course. Popery was abolished. Protestantism must 
be adopted, and furnished with the sceptre of worldly’ 
dominion, which had just been snatched from Popery’s 
bloody hand. It was done. ~Here was the first false 
step. “A vital question,” says Stoyel, “at once arose 
to bé considered. It was how the uninformed and un- 
converted masses of the people, might he most peace- _ 
fully transferred from a papal to a protestant govern- ey 
23 


oy. 4 
266 INFANT BAPTISM DESTROYS: 


ment, and | . united under its rule. In 
detérmining this question, to every worldly politician: it 
would appear, ‘that the less change they introduced in 
the external ceremonies, and pipaliy rites of religion, 
the more their difficulties would diminish, sinte the 
change would thus become less obvious to the people.” 
They supposed themselves, therefore, obliged “to retain 
infant baptism, always pleasing to the masses, and as 
“much of the other papal ceremonies, and sacramental 
doctrines, as they. could possibly tolerate.”* Here was 
the next false step. How lamentably had they now, 
already receded from their original ground! To ren- 
der their religion national, they had given up the es- 
sentials of its purity, and to fix it in the affections of 
the people, they had embodied in it the elements of its ” 
destruction. Thus they placed themselves voluntarily, 
in a position in which it was impossible long to retain 
their character, as the representatives’ of Christ upon 
earth! How could the reformers consent to such dese- 
erations ? How could Luther, and Melancthon, and 
Zuingle, and their associates, fail to see that the union 
of church and state,and infant baptism, a necessary 
concomitant of that union, must, sooner or later, be 
ruinous to all true religion? Did they not anticipate 
that these influences, if permitted to operate, would 
ultimately’ destroy all the advantages to gain which 
they had labored and suffered so nobly 2 2 ENG They 
all concurred with the princes. Protestantism was ¢ es- 
tablished by law. Infant baptism was fixed upon the. 
church! The power of the church vanished. It had 
» BO more ability successfully to combat.error, 


* Christian Disciple, pp.17-20, 


THE POWER OF THE CHURCH. _ “961 
a were 
Anther fact. here claims our its The Bap- 
tists saw the approach of the Reformation with unmin- 
gled joy. During its first period they warmly sympa- 
thized with the movement, and heartily co- operated 
with its friends. They were found in every place, gal- 
lantly battling in the cause. When, however, to setéle 
protestantism as the religion of the state, infant bap- 
tism was confirmed and established, they stood ap- 
‘palled. They.paused. They protested’ They said 
to their brethren, “ Christianity i is not a mere expan- 
sion of Judaism. Its great end is not again to envelop 
man, as the papacy seeks to do, in the swaddling- 
bands of outward ordinances, and man’s teaching. 
Christianity is a new creation. “It takes possession of 
the inward man, and transforms him-in the innermost — 
principles of his nature, so that he needeth not human 
teaching, but by God’s help he is able of himself, and 
-by himself, to discern that which is true, and to do that 
which is right.” Balthazar Hubmeyer, for example— 
- one of the noble army, whose souls ascended to heaven 
from amidst the martyr-fires of Vienna—was a pious, 
learned, and eloquent Baptist. Before the dawn of the 
Reformation he had sought to revive the spirit. of reli- 
gion in the Catholic church, of which he was then a 
priest, and multitudes had flocked to his preaching, 
and had been moved by his appeals. When Luther 
nd Zuingle lifted their voice for reform, an animated 
echo was instantly heard: from Hubmeyer. He had al- 
ready translated portions of _the scriptures into the 
‘language of the -people, and was by the side of the 
foremost in the battle. When the leaders halted, con- _ 
’ sidered, hesitated, and, acquiesced in, infant” bapltea 


268 _ INFANT BAPTISM DESTROYS 


and the union of church and state, he dissented, and 
planted himself upon the eternal principles of the word 
of God. He knew that nothing was gained until the 
church was restored to its primitive form, as set forth 
in the gospel: “Write to me again,” said he to Zuin-— 
gle, his early friend, but afterwards his bitter foe, 
«Write to me again, for God’s sake, on baptism.” ““I 
believe and know, that christendom shall not receive 
its rising aright, unless baptism, and the Lord’s supper, 
are brought to their original purity.” Zuingle had 
once Teubted himself, as had Melancthon, oid Carl- 
stadt, and most of the others, about infant baptism ; 
but they were now committed. The fatal step was 
taken. But he could not pause, until he saw the 


church composed, as Jesus Christ commanded, of be-- 


lievers only, and a pure, and spiritual body. Blourock, 
and Grebel, and Mantz, and Hubmeyer, and the others, 
reminded the reformers of their own previous doctrines. 
What response did they receive? Zuingle pettishly 
answered :—“ It is impossible to make a heaven upon 
earth. - Christ has taught us to let the tares grow 
among the wheat !’’* Suc brethren, determined that 
no effort should be wanting on their part, still pressed 
the subject. ‘They were answered only by imprison- 
ments, persecutions, and the stake! For the great. 
Swiss leader, however, D’ Aubigné ventures this apelo- 
gy :—* He designed a Ces religious reformation, 
but. he was resolved not to allow the least invasion of 


“public order ‘or political institutions. This was the 


limit at which he discovered written. by the hand of 
io that word from heaven, ‘ Thus far shalt thou go, 


wae ni ie Hist. Ref., vol. ily P 806. 


THE POWER OF THE CHURCH. 269 


aad no further.’ Somewhere it was | necessary to make 
a stand, and it was at this point, Zuingle, « and the re- 
formers, took their stand, in spite of the efforts made 
by rash and impetuous men [the .Baptists} to: hurry 
them beyond. it.”* in other words, infant baptism, 
was necessary toa state religion, and as such had en- 
teréd into the “public order, and political institu- 
tions.” It was the law of the land, Our brethren, 
therefore, who refused to conform to it, were denounced 
as rebels ; they were covered with reproach as violators of 
the law ; they were, by princes and magistrates, impris- 
oned, scourged, banished, put to death ! And for their 
persecution’ christian men still rise up as apologists ! 

The progress of the Reformation ceased. es was 
stationary for a season. The current then turned back, 
and flowed towards the corruptions from which it 
set out. In France, England, and other countries, it 
followed in the same direction, and reached the same 
results. Infant baptism has now had time to work its 
legitimate effects, and they have been full of calamity, 
It is actually announced from some quarters, and by 
Protestants themselves, that “'The Reformation has 
proved itself a failure.” And so believing, what meas- 
_ ures are being adopted by these same Protestants ? 
Do they compare the principles of the Reformation 
with the Bible, ascertain in what they are deficient, 
correct their errors, and thus go forward into the light 
of truth? Far from it. They give up even what had been 
gained, and take up their march back again into popery! 
How large a. portion of the Hpiscopal church, espe-— 
cially in England, has already returned to the embraces 

'* D’Anbigné’s Hist. Ref., vol. iii., p. 811. 
a3" 


* 


= 


270 INFANT BAPTISM DESTROYS 


of “the Man of Sin!” Infant baptism made popery 
what it is, and infant baptism will carry protestantism 
again into popery. 

‘What power has popery, what power has protestant- 
.ism now, either permanently to reform itself, to extir- 
pate error from other christian communities, or to con- 
vert the nations to Christ? They cannot make others 
purer than themselves. Were all men of their princi- 
ples, they would not therefore be the humble, convert- 
ed followers of Christ. They would not be christians 
in the true gospel sense. What can the English church 
do at present, in the combat with error? . She is en- 

- feebled to a hopeless degree. What can Lutheranism 
do, in any of the numerous governments where it pre-_ 
vails? She is powerless. And Calvinism? Ah, what 
is to be hoped from the Arianism of Geneva, or the 
Unitarianism, and Universalism of New England? Scat- 
tered among all these classes are to be found many indi- 
viduals who really love our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
serve him with a sincere heart. Their piety I respect 
and honor. I speak here not of these few, but of the 
great mass of the popish, and the protestant world. 
In them all infant baptism has evinced the essential evil 
of its character, by either wholly destroying their abil- 
ity, or greatly enfeebling their power to combat error. 
“ Will it be said that, in the present depraved state-of 
humanity, communities might easily be pervaded by 
an irreligious and infidel spirit, even if infant baptism 
had never existed? We grant it. But then the de- 
structive element would have been out of the church. 
Now it is within the church. However high the tide 

of ungodliness may rise, all is safe while the church 


= 


— =4 > 


"THE POWER OF THE CHURCH. on 


preserves the model ordained by its divine founder. 
‘Planted on the rock against which 1 the gates of hell 
shall not prevail, it presents an embankment to the 
swelling waves, which breaks their force, and. turns 
them harmless back. Ina pure church there dwells 
a recuperative power that can renovate the most de- 
generate lands. Living and spiritual; in the world, 
yet distinct from the world ; such a church acts as a 
correcting and restoring agent, reproving iniquity, con- 
founding unbelief, and holding forth the word of life 
toa reckless and profligate generation. But if its own 
light becomes darkness, how great is that darkness ! 
When the church itself engenders the disease ; when 
its own bosom is the fountain that sends out the con- 
tagion; then the last hope disappears. It must be 
taken down, and give place to one built on a scriptural 
foundation. Otherwise the land which its presence 
blights, must sink beyond recovery, into the gulf of 
corruption.”* It can never reform itself ; it can never 
reform others; it will retard and obstruct the conver- 
sion of men. 
It may be objected, however, that these facts and 
_ considerations are too sweeping, and are not applicable. 
‘to the evangelical pedobaptist denominations among us. 
Let us, then, descend to more of particularity, and 
trace in the minutice of society, and among the best 
classes, the influence of infant baptism in destroying 
the power of the church successfully to combat error. 
“Indulgences, auricular confessions, priestly celibacy, 
purgatory, and similar doctrines and practices of the pa- 
pacy, are revolting abuses. They are theological monstros- 
; _ * Tde, in Gill’s Part anid Pillar, &e., pp. 79, 80. 


oy ‘ " ad 
Ci e s 


if 


272 INFANT BAPTISM DESTROYS 


ities which ought to be banished from the world. But 


what protestant pedobaptist has power to reach them ? 


He may show them to be destitute of any countenance 
from the word of God. His arguments may be logi- 
cal, and conclusive. But what has he siccomplighed:? 
His popish brother effectually puts down all his essays 
by a single question :—Where do you get your infant 


‘baptism? He tells him in the face of the sun, and he 


tells him truly, that the Bible gives just as much sup- 
port to the papal ritestwhich he condemns, as it does 
to the protestant rite which he approves and practises. 
They all rest upon the same ground, and must stand 
or fall together. No man can consistently receive one, 
and reject the others. They must, for the same rea- 
sons, be all received, or all rejected. This appeal to 
his own principles comes with resistless power. He is 
silenced, and silenced forever. Infant baptism has wholly 
incapacitated him successfully to combat the errors of 
popery. 

Among Episcopalians, confirmation, and orders, are 
among the most striking abuses. Our Presbyterian 


‘and Methodist brethren declaim against them eloquent- 
ly. They pronounce them unauthorized in the Bible, 
and injurious to religion: Their verdict is true. But 


while they learnedly discuss, and clearly prove these 
propositions, their Episcopal brother hears’ them un- 
perturbed. He knows that he is armed with a weapon 
they cannot resist ; it is the argumentum ad hominem. 
Our authority, he calmly responds, for confirmation and 


orders, i J8 the same with yours for infant baptism! Are 


these corruptions, and i injurious to religion, because they 
have no direct scripture warrant ? Phen’ ‘so is infant 


= 


= etre ee ae % hs - i 
a mis PowER OF THESCHUREH: : “oe 


Gta ehention ahd co for the 
Same reason» With what consistency van, you practise 
appa, condemn the ethers.* 2 » They-dare* not contra- 
t-him, ‘They are “necessarily silent. “*+%> 
“Among “Methodists, a very "painful corruption is the 
__ baptism of «6 “seekers, and their egeption t to their com- 
“union: © And ies are’ these seekens ! Ze They are 
persons’ who desive..to. be: sived, and. pianifest feeling 
“on, the subject - of religions but who rofessedly, have 
_ “not a, living faith in: Christ, nor.any well-grounded hope 
of “eteinal.. lifes“ Against. this practice, Presbyter ‘ans of 
. all, classes ~prc rotest, . They-proncypve ‘ibva: Bross error, 
alpably unseriptural, and not ta be col tenanced | 
‘Their Methodist brother is not at allf disconeerted. He 
tells them: plainly, and tells. them truly. that, The bap- 
tism. of. seekers is, to say: the -least, “as lawful. _as the 
baptism of mfants.* Itis, in ‘truth, attended with pros- _ 
pects. even more encouraging since these seekers may 
soon be. ‘Tejoicing . in hope, but “of. infants “no such ez- 
pectation is reasonable. The -seriptures fi ivor one as 
much 4 as they do, the: other... His assailants | cannot 
answer him: “‘Theyare silent. ae is thenceforth un- 
interrupted, nl ae 
* “The doctrine of. hefeditaty ae, to the covenant 
x2 _ of grace,” 2 isan: appalling abuse: among Presbyterians, 
_and,, Calvinists, generally. | _ Other pedobaiptists pro- 
* no nee it. anvabsurdity, and, wholly incredible. Dare 
they openly: assail it? -If they do, they are quietly re- 
minded that their theory of “infant. baptism is as:scrip- 
_tural.as any other. Thus they “are all put to flight 
each by the other. Every denomination is so enfeebled 
that it cannot combat error in'any other. The inva- — 


ie 


; aon 


S d saa a 


O74 INFANT BAPTISM DESTROYS — ; 


4 


viable and effectual - answer. to. every: argument, is, 
“ Physician, heal thyself.” 

Let no one consider these, views: of the “subject a as. 
of small importance. The method. of: argument, here 
sketched has ever been, and is now, a favorite ‘resort of 
both papists and protestants, It was employed. by 
Cardinal Du Perron~in his reply to the first King - 
James; by John Ainsworth. against. Henry Ainsworth; 
by Fisher the Jesuit against Teton Laud ;.and by 
-Bossuet, Bisliop -of Megux, against De, La Roque of . 
Rouen. Bessuet’s. object was to defend the withhold. 
ing of the cup from ‘the laity-in the Lord’s supper, upon 
the authority of the chutch, and~he urged that infant 
baptism, both as to subjects and mode, was maintained 
not by scripture; but by. church authority only, with 
which, nevertheless, the reformed complied. Why, 
then, he asked, should they refuse compliance in the 
other case ?’”** .De-Lia*Roque was dumb. © Dr. Whitby 
employs this argument ‘with special force against the : 
English pedobaptist, dissenters. When, after: pleading 
for. some “condescensions in their. behalf, he says :— 
“And -on'the other hand, if, notwithstanding: the evi- 
dences produced. that baptism, by immersion is suitable 
to the institution both of our. Lord’ and of his apostles, 
and was by them ordained to represent our burial with - 
Christ, and-so-our dying unto sin, and our conformity 
to his. resurrection by newness of life, as thé “apostle 3 
clearly maintains isthe mearing of that rite if if, I say, 
notwithstanding this, -all our dissenters do agree. to 
sprinkle the baptized infant ; why: may they. not submit 

+ 


* Stennet’s Answer to Russen, p- 178,: “et sequitar, e & 
~ 4 Rom. vie, 846, wm a 


* 


ae oa, a ae C 


. 


" bi * + = * . 3 ; . » 7 ; 
‘THE POWER OF THE’CHURCH. QT 5 


el to the significant -ceremonies imposed. by our vehurch’® 2 


For since it is'as. lawful to’add_to Christ’s institutions a 
significant, ceremony which he ot his apostles instituted, 
‘as to use another in its stead which they never did in- 
stitute, what reason can they have to do the latter, and 
refuse. submission to the former? And why should not 
the’ peace, and union of the church, be as prevailing 
with them to perform the one, as is their mercy to the © 
‘infant’ s body to neglect the other?’* Thus infant 
baptism 4 is used as the grand plea for compliance with 
the ceremonies both of the church of Rome, and.of 
‘the church of England. It i8 their chief prop to sup- 
port these hierarchies, the appeal to which they resort 
for countenance. And, so. triumphant is this appeal, 
that no pedobaptist ever has been able to stand before 
it.t.. They must all either submét, be silent, or renounce 
infant baptism. While they retain this unauthorized 
rite, they have no 5 aah to resist error on the pox of 
others. ; 

Nor are they untrammelled even’ in their efforts: to 
bring the unconverted to Christ. Infant baptism tends 
to close the hearts of sinners, and does close the hearts 
of thousands, against those great doctrines of the gos- 
‘pel, the reception and belief of which, are esagntial to 
their salvation. , 

Is it asked—How does infant. baptism prevent men 
from ‘embracing the fundamental doctrines of the gos- 
“pel 2 2° Preach as they are revealed in the word.of God, 
the doctrines of universal and total depravity, the work 
of the Holy: Spirit i in regeneration, justification by faith, 


_ » * Protestant Reconciler, p»289. 
+ Gill’s Part and Pillar, &e., ch. % 


¢ 


ay ees eon 


“ 


ore 8 INFANT BAPTISM PrsTROTS 


* 
am other. dectices, of this. clase, and press. Pare 
those who have ‘been taught to. believe the baptismal 


- doctrines:, of the Standards. ..They, will,gaze in. your 


. 


face with a look ‘of ‘sélf-confident incredulity. If they 
answer youvat all, it will ‘be in language like ‘this :—_ 
“ We believe that children are born in the chureh,. and 
covenant of grace, or that their original sin was” washed 
away in baptism. In either case, they. are consequently 
holy. . We are all, therefore, originally pure. <No one: 
ean be-holy and depraved. at the same time: ‘Those, 
at, least, “who are .baptized :in childhood are not de- 
praved. . We were baptized in childhood.. Your doc. 
trine of depravity we do not believe 1” But, the work. 
of the Holy Spirit in regeneration, they surely will not * 
deny ! ! You see before you a company of men: “with- 
out God, and without. hope in the world.” You affec- 
tionately warn'them that, if they would be saved,.t they 
“must be born again” —“ born of -the Holy Ghost. 4 
Do they believe. your message ? They have studied 
their catechisms too well. We, they | answer, were bap- 
tized in our infancy, and in. that ordinance we were 
then,’ and there, “ born. again of . water, and. of the Holy _ 
Ghost.” “Why do you tell ws, who have’been long ago 
* born again of the Holy Ghost,” that. we.must yet be. 
born again of the Holy Ghost? . Are people dwwice 
born again? - They pronounce your teaching nonsense !* 
They profess ; that they believe in’ the regenerating ef-. 
ficacy of the Holy Spirit, but they confihe.it to the - 


medium: of baptism | ‘They adhere tu the catechisms: 


In. the form ‘in which the: doctrine is revealed in, the — 
Bible, they do not believe it.. And regarding justi afi- 
cation by faith, what ‘are their impressions ? apey are 


a 


a alles a 


THE POWER OF THE CHURCH. 27% 


. Sitkaeat that in their baptisns; in, infancy, they. “ were 
. cleansed from the defilements of original sin,” and-had 


conferred upon them all the *Beiteats of the death of 
Christ.” They must then, have been’ accepted of God, 
and of course, justified / Men are justified but, once. 
“They have no idea that they are again to be justified. 
Infant baptism has encased them all in a covering. of 
steel. You cannot’ approach them, They are impe - 


vious - to. truth! Why, | pay pee to’ their pedobaptist. 


teachers, what do you. mean? .-We were brought up in 
the church. We have never forfeited: our birthright. 
“We are not ‘sinners of the gentiles.” ““ We’ are 
‘Abraham’s seed,” “the children .of the covenant.” 
They are confirmed’ in sin and deception! © Infant. bap- 
-tism has been their. ruin. These, alas ! are no faney 


“pictures. They are realities which are daily occurring 
- all around us. These deceived men boldly tell you that 


if you taught them the fruth concerning baptism, you 
“now teach them falsely; and if you now teach them 
‘the truth, you then taught them falsely / What can 
you -answer them ?. Théir declaration is true. * You 
have betrayed. them! . You cannot, justify yourself, 
Infant baptism has closed their hearts agai me 
-gospél. Ms ea 2 

~ Thus does. infant’ baptism deatioy the power of the 
‘@ligeeli to combat error, and prove itself a most: la- 
mentable evil. By adopting it she takes away * “her » 
own. purity, and placesherself in. a position in which 
she ean do nothing” effectually, either to reform herself, 
or to remove thie’ errors of her sister churches... ° This 
_ isshown: conclusively, by the history and results of the 


Reformation ; ee the: acer attitude “of Lutheranism, 


24 


. 


ef ‘ .s * - . < , 
278 ; INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. — 


~ 


Episcopacy, and Calvinism; by the inoptisistencies of éven 


evangelical Episcopalians, Methodists, and Presbyteri- 


ans; and by the influence of the rite upon the minds 
of unrenewed men.- Such a church ceases necessatily,. 
to be an effective instr umentality for the destruction of 
sin among men. She cannot teach the nations the” 
gospel. She cannot enlighten the world. «She cannot, 
subdue the hearts of men to the reign ‘of ‘truth, “She 
‘ean never bring. a rebellious - universe under the domin- © 
ion of Messiah. She has lost- forever, ne locks of her 


s 


strength. > ea Rae) a. 
e 7 se 
© 
> 7 
“~ 
r 
. 
t 
as 
i >. 5 CS ae ad 
=> / 
— 7 * - 
Pal 
: + 
ee Se Seal 
« - * ~ . *” 
ee ~ > 
4 
~ 4 J i» 
" rf 
- eh of set 
2 ¥ ° i tas 
- bs a 
Fash ‘ 
. R : % 
‘ > a 
Cie. ° ° A eg 
as : s.) 
s » 


CHAPTER XVI 


INFANT BAPTISM IS. AN. EVIL BECAUSE IT INJURES THE 
(CPEDIT OF RELIGION, Will REFLECTING MEN OF THE 
WORLD. ‘ 


‘It is irrational; itis without authority; it throws suspicion upon all reli- 
gion; its purposes are sectarian. 

~ Taz honor of religions dear to every true christian. 
To cherish and to love it, is*both his duty, and his in- 
terest. He can never see it tarnished, but with deep 
pain, The gospel is consistent both with itself, and 
with réason. It is to be proposed to men of the world. 
Their salvation depends upon their believing, embra- 
cing, and obeying it. They are not always ignorant of 
-its truths. The utmost’ care should be éxercised that 
they be not repelled: from its teachings. They are ca- 
pable of reasoning on religious siibiects: What you 
attempt to teach thetn must corr espond with the divine 
word. Otherwise christianity will, in their minds, be 
discreditéd, arid your approaches will be resisted. To 
-honor the cause of Christ, therefore, and to gain men 
‘to truth and salvation, ‘such must be your faith and 
“your practice, that norie may be able to point to them, 

- and say, this is irrational; this is without authority ; 
-* this is: suspicious in its character; this is a: sectarian 
© device. You must be above reproach, * Let your 
Paghts 20 shine before ay that they may see your good 


» £ 


a oe AA ey x 


280 INFANT BAPTISM DISHONORS, RELIGION > 


works, and alviify your Father phish is. in heaven.” 
But infant baptism) does not: honor, it- inevitably sii, 
the credit of religion,, with be es iy ae men of 


the world. a Siu eee w YR gage 
Tt does so, in the first place; because it is’ poh in it- 
self irrational: © + vis 


You bring saad a‘ child to fe sprinkled. An in-. 
telligent. man will naturally inquire «your. reasons. He. 
seks for the rationale of the, practice. Do you ‘tell him = 
that thereby it is “cleansed ‘from. ofiginal sin; or that it’ 
receives all the benefits,of. ‘the, death ‘of Christ; or ‘that 
it is regenerated, and itted for heaven ?, He: solicits” 
your proofs.. You can give hith none that deserve the 
name. With his Bible in his hand, and his “eyes open’ 
to behold the objects around him, does hes believe your 
teaching? Its impossible, He doesnot. He cannot, 
He may not answer you.» He may believe you honest, 
and sincere: But he does not‘assent. °The baptism: of 
a little infant! What sense or reason is ‘there in it 
He-perceives none. ‘There is none... It. commemorates ;* 
nothing. _ It signifies ‘nothing., What good does ‘it ac- 
complish? None for the child; none for the parents; 
none for the ‘church; none” for religion ;-none for the 

world ; none in-any respect. whatever What- ‘reason: — 
able man_can believe that the child, or any ‘other hu- 
man being, is the better for it, either-in this life, or in, 
the next? It, in reality confers-no privileges, or advan- 
tages, temporal, or ‘spiritual.- “Tri is, in truth, utterly it ir 
rational, and in the estimation of intelligent, think! a 
unprejudiced worldly men, must detract. parese 


the credit of religion, ab ie ee ee 
Infant, baptism, in the. second place injures’ th 
- eet ie # vs 


» 


” 


re 


4 


* & 


INFANT BAPTISM DISHONORS RELIGION. 281 


_ of religion, ‘because 2 1s practised without any authority 
: whatever. ‘ ie 
“The Bible contains aot one _passage in its stupor 
This fact has been before sufficiently demonstrated. No 
man,. however — he ‘studies the sacred record, © 
can find one there. ‘And do- you place at the very 
‘threshold of religion an irrational institution, unauthor- : 
ized. by God, and hurtful -to men? And do you" de- 
‘mand compliance with it as an essential. part. of the di- 
vine serviée? “What must be the impression thus made _ 
upon. intelligent: men of the world? * The credit of relix 
gion, inevitably suffers, 2 ee 
- Infant baptism, inthe third place, i injures thes credit. 
: of religion, by casting suspicion upon the whole subject. 
‘Religion must be set forth and practised in a’ plain, 
candid, open, ingenuous, honest. manner. If I find a 
man equivocating, and double dealing with me on one 
subject, Isuspect he may ‘on another’: and if I detect 
him. so acting in several instance’, | withdraw. my confi- 
dence from him entirely. So it is in religion, Men 
* “must, not ‘be trifled with, nor deceived by its professors, 
and. teachers. But infant baptism is- inconsistent both 
with; scripture and reason. . Yet, in this country, its ad- 
vocates vehemently maintdin’ that religion: in - all its’ 
parts; is reasonable, and that they are governed. in their 
whole faith,’and- obedience, exclusively by the word of 
* God : / What must-be the effect upon the. mind of a 
discriminating hearer 2. Will ‘he conclude ‘that these 
" pedobaptists are. sincere; but’ ignorant? This may be 
true of manyy but cannot bertrue: of “all. He will cer- 
7 ainly reason in his” own heart thus = This, Tknow, is. 
“wrationaly ‘and ‘unauthorized.  ¥- know ‘not ‘how many 
24% + ee | 


" @ 


. 


ae : 
282 INFANT BAPTISM DISHONORS RELIGION. 


other like: things christians may teach and practise. If - 
one irrational and unauthorized principle be advocated, 
why not another? “And if two, why not twenty ? 
Suspicion is awakened, and men ‘of the world are re- 
pelled by it from religion! Thus infant baptism casts 
suspicion upon the whole of the religion of Christ. « 
Finally, infant baptism, as pbiotized among uis, is a 
well-arranged sectarian device. * - 
It ippals not to the judgment, but to the feelings ; 
not to reason, but to prejudice in favor of an old’ and 
‘venerable custom. It wears very muéh the appearance 
of an-essay to take undue’ advantage of all.the parties 
concerned. You receive the pies into the church! 
You then have certa.nly such avhold upon -the parénts 
as commits them to that particular denomination’ of 
which their cherished loved-ones are thus made mem- 
bers. If the children go, the parents will follow them. 
Thus both are secured. But how?” Not by reason: 


_ not by the force of religion; but by a mere sectarian 


fiction! The whole proceeding seems tO argue a con- 
sciousness-that religion will not bear the test of “exam- 


“ination! - Other vfice why do they impose what implies 


a profession of it, upon-these children, before they are 
capable of exercising their 1eason?° Why not allow all 
parties an opportunity to study the Bible before their 
dogmas are forced upon their acceptance ? iby Why hurry 
parents and children into the church in'violent haste, as ~ 
if they could ‘not: otherwise be saved? Can men. of 
the world, can any class of men; believe that an intelli- 


- gent, a holy, a. reasonable religion, a religion that "ad- 


“dresses the judgment and the. heart, can be propagated, a 
and honored, by means like these? ‘They cannot. Ine 


ta 
INFANT BAPTISM DISHONORS RELIGION. 283 


fant baptism among us is a sectarian device, and as such 
unworthy of the. reieion of Christ. 

From all these faateand considerations it is* most: evi- 
dent that infant baptism injures the credit* of religion 
with reflecting and unprejudiced men of the world, and 
is therefore a great. evil. They must see that it is irra- 
tional in itself, that it is wholly without authority-from — 
the word of God; théy must be led: by it to suspect, 
in all its other departments, the integrity of religion ; 
and they will thus be tempted to regard. as Lonipatibite 
with its morals, and honor, any sectarian trap, or'man- 
agement which may swell the numbers of an ecclesiasti- _ 
cal party. Need we besurprised, therefore, that among 
persons of this class, so strong a tendency to skepticism 
‘should: prevail; that they should feel ‘inclined to repel 
the gospel of ‘Christ ; ; and that they should so often want 
confidence in the ministers of religion? Infant. baptism. 
is inimical to the honor-and ee ‘of the gospel of 
Christ. With regard’to it, therefore, we may with em- - 
phasis repeat the divine admonition :—“ Cast ye up, cast 
ye.up, prepare ye the way, take up the Btutiles 
me of the ey of my ere ; 


ro 


¥ e * 
Ont 
ee : - E 5 
» na 

Mex ON ene “ oe K n ¥ 

2 * i 
= » - > % 
at. * < ¥ * BI yt ane 

a 


? 


CHARTER XVII. 
INFANT, BAPTISM Is~ AN EVIL BECAUSE If IS. THE Ghkat ‘ 
BARRIDR TO CHRISTIAN UNION. 


Nature of christian union; its importance ; “the principles upon which it is 
wn “incompatibie’ with infant baptism. ‘3 


. 


CuristrAn union, and infant baptism, never can exist . 
Spgetlier. Between the millions. of Baptists. and pedo-_ 
baptists- this rite interposes ay barrier which is, and must 
forever remain impassable. But christian union is im- 
perative upon us-all,, Whatever-prevents it is an evil. 
- Infant baptism prevents, it. ‘Therefore infant baptism is 
an evil. 62 gs" bo ae iee 
It is in the very oishine of true religion to prodkuple 
and perpetuate christian union... God is one ; his” reli- : 
gion is one; and his people are one... All: who love 
Christ.are guided by the same gospel ; are partakers of 
the same Spirit; have in view the same great ends ;” 
and are heirs of the same immortal inheritance. How 
can they be otherwise than united? In asserting these 
scriptural propositions, Iam not unmindful: of the fact 
that. diversities of. sentiment 6n nearly every subject, 
will exist. «They, arise inevitably, from the-differences 
in natural capacity, in. acquired: knowledge, and the 
modes of thought, of different minds. These, however, ; 
will abngye ee to. minor considerations, and therefore 
‘a: 47.8 


~ ‘ge 


‘a 


fe © i: 
_ + 


FANT BAPTISM PREVENTS CHRISTIAN UNION. 285 
e 
be, unimportant in their nature, extent, and influence. 
They will be such as intelligent and holy men may in- 
dulge: without offence, without alienation of affection, 
and “without detriment. to the most perfect christian 
union. Nor is the requisition met when all who, com- 
pose one particular church, or denomination, are in har- 
mony: Christian union émbraces:all christians through- 
out the whole-universe, ~All who are. one with Christ, 

_ and governed by his word, are inevitably one with each 
other.. The law of gravitationin the natural world, does 
not more ‘certainly attract to its centre the objects with- 
~ in its range, than does the réligion of Christ bring into 

* unity all — who are within the circle of its influence. 
It knows no names, or ssc mt Tti is omnis It 

As universal. 1s as 
Christian union, I have said, is imperative uponus all, . 
Our Saviour ‘himself commands it; as an object to be- 
sought, with-unremitted earnestness. He deemed it also. - 
of such importance as. to-receive a place i in that memo- 
rable last prayer offered by him in behalf of ‘his ‘minis- 
ters and people. “I pray,’’ said he, ‘that they all may 
be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee,’ that 
they also may be one in us; that the world may believe. 
that thou has sent me. “And, the glory which thou 
gavest me, [ have given them, that they may be one; -I 
in them, and thou in me, that. they maybe made per-- 
fect, in one; and that the world may know that thou 
hast pent me.”* Christian union among all the people 
of God is therefore essential to the glory of: the Re- 
deemer, to the honor of his truth, to the spread of the’ 
ne among the nations, and to elicit and confirm the - 


* John, ch, Xvi. 


oe , ye <- 
re es es | ” Few 7 * 


286 INFANT BAPTIEM 


faith of believers... Well then did an apostle thus ad- 
monish us :—“ Now I beseech you, brethren, “by. the 
‘name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that :ye all speale the 
same thing, and that there be no divisions among “you, 
_ but. that ye be perfectly joined together'in the same 
mind, -and in the same judgment.”* . How gh i 
Dare any of us disregard this injunction ? — 

But christian union is not to be governed by feeling 
merely, however ardent’ that feeling may be. | Like 
every other duty, it must*be guided by fixed principles. 
And what are these principles? - It may be sufficient to 
say, without descending to particulars; that they are all 
plainly and fully laid.down in the gospel. “ The word 
of. God, the whole word of God, and nothing but the 
word of God,” is the grand “ platform.” . There is no 
other. This must be. embraced, believed, loved, prac- 
tised, and all christians will as naturally flow together as - 
the waters of the whole -earth will find their -way into 
the ocean. A union upon any other principles would 
not be christian union, but a conspiracy against tru? reli- 
gion, offensive to God and i injurious to ee peopie.. 

Such is christian union, in its nature, its obligations, 
and its principles. It is s implanted i in the renewed heart. 
by the Holy Spirit; it is demanded by the gospel. for 
the honor of truth, and for the extension of the kingdom 
‘of Christ among men; and:governed exclusively by his 
holy word, itis rpractioables natural, and easy. But in- 
fant. baptism interposes and destroys it wholly, indeed, 
‘renders it impossible. It destroys’ christian union by 
changing the laws of membership i in his church, a 
ed by Christ; by receiving into that. sacred ie uns 


* 1 Cor. i i., 10. 
ae 


i 


a, ane 


PREVENTS CHRISTIAN UNION. - 287 


i 


holy ‘and profane ; by admitting men without the ordi- 
nance ordained And" enjoined as the initiatory rite ; and 
by the corruptions which invariably attend, the practice — 
‘of infant baptism. Thus the lovers of Christ-are thrown 
hopelessly asunder. While the barrier remains, the sep-_ 
. arationemust continue: « ers 
. Infant baptism’ is therefore an offence against Christ; . 
an offence against the peace andsharmony of his peo- 
ple ; an SGence against the souls of men, And who is 
responsible for titis monstrous evil ? Those, of course, 
who introduced it, and who still adhere to its practice. 
For all its calamities they must account to God, and to 
men. We solemnly declare ourselves innocent of its 
enormities.. We never can. approve it. We never can 
believe. in the “principles upon which it is maintained. 
Were we, therefore, to unite for the sake of union; or’ 
from any other motive,*with pedobaptists, it would not 
be christian union.. It would be a sin-against God. » It 
would be a combination against the truth and purity of 
religion. While infant baptism continues, ehristian union 
is mee srprebialiole: % 


ee a . 

4S ¥ ae! 
ae ° 
‘ ie 


oe 


Ae CHAPTER XV eee 


INFANT BAPTISM Is AN. EVIL BECAUSE “IT ‘PREVENTS ‘THE 
* saLoraRy’ IMPRESSION wHICH BAPTISM WAS DESIGNED 
Y TO MAKE UPON THE MINDS BOTH’ OF THOSE WHO RE* 

- ORIVE I? AND. THOSE, WHO WITNESS’ ITS ADMINISTRA 


ae 
TION. ey ee ‘ * 


ae ve fe b - 


sa 
¢ 


Ab AS “e * * 
~Tmppessions made by baptism ; lessons it teaches ; contrast 5° infit pep 
A «= fism carne hem: all aside.. 


Barris, like all the’ other bitiiances of religion, was 
‘designed to make a deep and salutary 1 impression upon 
the heart, both of those who receive.it, and those who 
witness its administration. ‘It teaches important lessons, 
and holds up perpetually before the mind the most glo- 
fious truths of the gospel. But the sprinkling» of a 
babe turns them all aside, and destroys wey salutary 
result, 


- 


Baptism i is an ordinance of: Sinoiedeg dignity, and i 
pressiveness; especial, rhen: considered: in its ae ae 
‘bearings, and relations. Give i ty if you please, a., m0- 
ment’s thought... An intelligent 1d humble believer 
stands before: you. He has been in structed in. the ‘gos 
‘pel; be has embraced ‘its: truths ; “and deeply penitent — 
under a sense Of his guilt and condemnation, he has 
given himself to, Christ, on whom by divine grace he 
has been enabled: to.rest his hopes, and confidence. He 


cherishes a holy assurance of pardon and acceptance. 
+ 


> 


pa 


€ INFANT BAPTISM, ETC. 289 


“Justified by. faith, he BG “peace with God through our 
Lord J jesus Christ.” His soul cl ts with gratitude and 
joy. Hei ‘is “anew Creature.” His will, be -affections, 
his inclinations, his desires, his purposes, are all changed. 
He 1 now preseiits himself, as is his privilege, and: his 
duty, and In accordance with all his desires, that he may 
confess Christ before_men, andbe united with his peo- 
ple. With indeseribablé emotion he approaches the or- 
dinance in-which- this ‘confession -is divinely appointed 
to'be made. He is to be baptized but once in his life. 
He desires, therefore, to cherish in that hour especially, 
the | spirit of ardent devotion, and full consecration, 
which so important : asérvice demands. Christ died for - 
his sins, was buried, and rose again for his justification, 
He ‘is now dead to sin, and pocording to his command-, 
ment; is about to be buried with Christ*by baptism into 
death; and like as Christ was raised up from the dead 
by the glory of the Father, even’ so. he also, is to arise 
to walk in newness of life. How unspeakably solemn 
is that moment! With what-fervor he ‘renounces the 
world, the flesh, and the devil! How earnestly he seru-. 
tinizes his own heart, and reviews the reasons of the 
: ae by which he is‘animated! How thrilling his vows 
be the. Lord’s; to devote himself to the gtory of him 

is who hath called him out ae into his marvel- 
lous light !” "How fervent his prayers for the, divine 
grace and blessing! ‘The act is performet. He retires. 
The scenes of that hour are indelibly engraven upon his 
soul. _ ‘They can never be er ased. The salutary ed 
cal TeGuits are as lasting as his ear thly existence. 

With this scene compare that of the sprinkling of a 
child. The little innocent, unconscious of all that is 


me 25 
= 


ae = wg 

290 INFANT BAPTISM = ae 

passing, is brought forward, bedizened, postibly 3 with 
ribbons and lace. Some forms aré recited. estions 

and answers are read from books, The wet finger a 

@ minister is laid upon the forehead of the “child. 
Startled by the nervous shock, it perhaps : shrieks’ con- 
vulsively, and is hurried away from the’ altar!” The 
spectacle is over. What have you looked upon? A 
lamentable desecration of an ordinance of Jesus Christ ! 
Whois benefited?. Whois impresset 2 ie Whoi is ee 
And this is called baptism ! ; 

The baptism instituted by Jesus Christ. teaches: us, I 
have said, important lessons. It holds up to our view 
incessantly, Jesus as our only Saviour ; coh te instructs us 
that he gave his life for our life, and that the great acts 
by which we are redeemed, were his death, burial, cand 
resurrection.» This redemption is made ours personally, 
by the work ‘of the Holy Spirit in regeneration. Wie * 
are one with Christ by faith. For this reason in Christ’ ’s 
death for sin, we died ; in his burial, we were buried ; 
in his resurrection, we were raised up; and in his vie- - 
tory we are glorious conquerors. * All this we are re-. 

garded by the Father as having done,-not i in ourselves, 
but in Christ, since what he as our representative ¢ did, 1 for 


us, is justly regarded as having been done by us. For 


Christ’s sake, therefore, he pardons, sanctifies, dopts, 
and crowns us with eternal salvation. ot ay ( 
curred’ the acts of our redemption; this is the form of 
our spiritual change, a death to sin, a burial to the wor 1a. 
and a resurrection to a’new life; and this, as the apostles 
repeatedly declare, is therefore the form of our baptism. 
“Buried with him in baptism, wherein also we are risen 
with him through the faith of the Cpernon of God who 


{ 


an 


« 


4" 


e 


—_ =. 
h, +t he = bn ~ 
aM ix i 
"  PREVENTS THE BENEFITS OF BAPTISM. 291 


hath raised him from the dead.” In baptism, therefore, 
those great truths are ever before the mind that consti- 
tute the sum of the gospel. How, then; can a Baptist 
ever become a Unitarian, a Universalist, a legalist, or a 
cold formalist? As a Baptist he never can, Our very 
baptism teaches us salvation by grace, through faith in 
our Lord Jesus Christ. But what does infant baptism 
teach? Nothing, that is salutary. Absolutely nothing. 
A believer makes in his baptism a solemn profession 
_ of his faith. He has-avowed his belief in the doctrine 
of the Trinity, in whose name that ordinance was admin- 
istered ; in “ the freeness of the Father’s love, the all- 
sufficient atonement of the Son, and the regenerating 
and sanctifying influences: of the Holy Spirit ;” and he 
has recognized his obligations, in all things:according to 
: the divine word, to walk with the people of God, in 
- newness-of life. Nor can hé ever renounce these. tenets 
“without at the same time, renouncing his baptism. His 
baptism also implants all the strongest motives to holy 
living, since it was his own wblantan act, in which he 
declared himself dead to sin, buried to the world, and 
alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord. Such a separa- 
tion was then pledged between him and. sinful things, 


~ as is found between the dead Land the living. Even the 


common desire to maintain consistency of character, bears 
in favor of the christian life, since he has been publicly 
and aed baptized. Such are his professions, and 
declarations, and their practical influence, the benefit of 
all which, in infant baptism is totally lost. The child 
professes nothing, promises nothing, feels nothing. 
Such is baptism as to the impression it was designed 
to make upon those who receive it, in the case of a be- 


292 “INFANT BAPTISM, ETO. © . 


lever contrasted with that of an infant. When yeu 
witness the baptism of a believer, i in’the form instituted . 

7 Jesus Christ, your heart is moved.» There is an im- 
aac solemnity i in the whole: scene. You cannot re- 
strain your tears. Many a sinrier. has*by this means been 
convicted of sin, and afterwards given himself to Christ. 
But who ever was convicted of sin, or led to Christ, by 
witnessing the sprinkling of an infant ? 2 ‘Who ever, uns 
der such circumstances, felt the solemn grandeur of re- 
ligion 2 ? Infant baptism prevents the salutary impression 

upon the minds of those who witness the ordinance, which 
was designed to be made by baptism. 

But infant sprinkling seeks to supplant the baptism 
of believers altogether, and does so, as far as it- prevails. 
Should it universally prevail, it would thus banish from 
the world some of the best influences connected with 
the religion of Christ.. “he salutary practical “i impres- 


sion made by baptism upon the minds, of both those” 


who receive the ordinance, and those who witness its 
administration, 1s of the utmost importance. Infant bap: 
tism prevents this impression. Therefore infant baptism 
is 2 veat evil. , Yo Kee 


: 


5 


eee ey CHRPPER- Lik, 
INFANT BAPTISM Is AN “EVIL BECAUSE IT RETARDS THE 
“DESIGNS OF .CHRIST IN. THE CONVERSION OF (HE 
.. WORD. - . : ’ 


Christ designs to conyert the world; it is to be done by the gospel; the work 
~ hindered by the conflicts of christians ; consequences; conclusion. — 
° ? eee i. ~ & 


\ Pais whole world is to be conyefted to God. -As 
yet most of the nations are in darkness, and the shadow 
of death. But they shall all ultimately be delivered 
from their thraldom.- Joy,:and peacey and salvation, 
‘shall at length, reign universally. God himself has 
taught us this ‘glorious truth. Hear the language of 
his inspired. prophets. “.Adl “kings shall fall down 
_ before him. All nations shall serve him.”* . And it 
shall come to pass. in the last days, that the mountain 
‘of the Lord’s house shall be established in the top of 
, the mountains, and shall «be exalted above the hills, 
and all nations shall low unto tt. sc “For the earth 
© shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the 
waters cover the sea. fd af Pid the kingdom, 2 and do- 
re ‘minion ,-and the ‘greatness of the kingdom under the 
whole heaven, shall be given tothe people « of the saints 
of. the "Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting 
Kingdom, and all | dominions shall serve and obey him.”§ 


a 
.™ 


Se Pel Ixxii,, 11-- ments 2 + Isa. ii, 2. 
t Isa. xi, 9. > ey § Dan, vii, 9. 


ge 


a 


994 INFANT BAPTISM’ RETARDS le a 
™* 


These declarations cannot ‘be seadily mistaken. #1 all 
kings, and nations, shall acknowledge and worship the 
true God, and flow as a stream unto his house ; if the 
earth shall be full of the knowledge of him, and if. all 
dominions shall serve “and obey him: ‘and than this, ‘no 
less is here assumed ; the an.” surely the entire universe 
will have. ‘been converted, and brought fully” under 
thé reign of our. adorable Redeemer. These are the 
reasons of our ‘confidence in this result. ° The Lord 
Most High has Hléclared that it shall be 80). and his j In- 
finite wisdom, and power, are pledged for its accom - 
plishment. Heayen’and earth shall pass | away,” but. his 
word shall not pass away unfulfilled. “They were 
&, voices in heaven” which were heard by an. apostle, 
‘saying, “The kingdoms of this world have_ become 
_ the kingdoms" of our Lord, and # his Christ, and he 
shall reign forever. and’ ever,’ The. round earth, 


« igiea of being a _ theatre ‘on which “immortal be: 


ings ‘are ‘preparing. by crime, for eternal condemna- 
tion, shall become a universal temple in- which the 
‘children of men. are learning” the anthems ‘of the blessed 
above.” 6 ‘ ae Sheek 


hearts ‘of all ca 50. 
corrupt, ‘so obdurate, so fixed in sin, to be cha r ed 
and broughteto love and worship. the Saviour? Th 
is but'one power capable “of producing*this result. I 
is the simple unadulter ated gospel of Christ, .Reason 

Tim > 
‘cannot do: it. Philosophy cannot do it. ae Civilization 
cannot do’it. “The forms and ceremonies - of relig ion, . “: 


apart frozs its uitelity, cannot do'it. ' sonia © ait 


* Rey. xi, mee 


= 


e. PR = il 
Re ere ul af WS es) 36 ae 
| ‘THE CONVERSION OF THE WORLD. 995 


at the eros. of Chaist. “This alone has power. to 
nd the stubborn | will to ‘obedience, and melt the 
. a heart, toRlave. ” The lost children of men | are 
“to be taught that, “« God so loved the world that he 
gave his” only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 

‘rt him should not. “perish, ‘but have everlasting life.” 
They ‘will receive ‘the message.” They will believe it. 
‘They | will embrace the’ Redeerher and live. Nor will 
they. “ henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him ° 
who died for-them, and rose again.”. The remedy pro- 
vided i in the gospel is * effecial. “Tt has been tried 
aa by ‘the experienée _ of eighteen’ hundred years, and -has 
never’ failed ina ‘single instance. « Its efficacy has been 
proved by human Bete of all ages,” from the youthful 
sPengtent “to the sinner a hundred years old. All cli- 
mates have witnessed its power. From the ice-bound 
cliffs: of Greenland” to the banks of the voluptuous 
Ganges, | the* simple. stor y of Christ. crucified has 
turned, men, from. darkness to light, and from, the 
_ power of Satan unto God. Tts aect has been the 

same with men: of - the most dissimilar conditions.” 
has alike elevated sand. purified the degraded and 
doned, mi and’ the “dwellers in the palaces. of 
sovereign amidst the 
forest, and the crowded: 
ie the stato . Everywhere, and» at 
has-been, and still is, and, ever must be, 
prac desgnite. salyation to every | one that 


. 


| _ Such : are the Ha ioaet our Lord: vd) esus*Christ in the 
el, and. such i is ‘the POR eR es retagh they a are 9. be 
he 


296 INFANT BAPTISM 3 RETARDS 


executed. The ‘chanshe we pepe before seen, -is.the 
appointed instrumentality by, which, these - purposes ¢ 
grace are to be accomplished. Is she ready for her “ 
exalted mission? The nations are-in-her presence. ~ 
They are covered with misery and death. » In her 
hands is the power by which they are.to be delivered ° 
and saved. The command from heaven i is sounding | in 

her ears, “Preach. _the “gospel to ‘every creature,” 
Each day. that obedience is, delayed, hurries thousands 
down to irrecoverable destruction! What is she ‘doing? 
Springing forward«to the duty ? Grappling with the 
powers of darkness? Hurling back. the hosts of i in- 
iquity? Proclaiming Jesus Christ the deliverer? Alas, 
no! She has: ingloriously turned - away from her mis- 
sion! She has indeed, herself ‘become worldly, and. 
corrupt. - She is engaged almost solely, in theological 
conflicts with her fellows -disciples ‘She is quarreling 
about fictions! She has abandoned: -the nations to’ per 

ish in their sins! Infant baptism, like’ the: touch of 3 a 
torpedo, has benumbed all. lier powers. “What to her® 
are the designs of Christ in the conversion of the world 2 
She is, for the pr esent at least, ncaa of their ore 
cution ! a *. ‘ee 
. Infant baptism retards.the desea -of Chaise in.t 
conversion of the world, bj 
baptists in conflict. wit A other. Endless. a 
versiés occupy the time, and. powers, of thes very men 
who are under infinite obligations to be 1 art, 
and harmoniously to co-operate. in™ this 
loye. Nor is the» battle which has ‘bee 
during so many centuries, relaxing in an de, yree.” 
is becoming edeh. day; more, and nd 


s+ ‘ oe 
* : < 


+ . = 


ad s ll 4 . ~ >» 


THE CONVERSION OF THE WORLD. 297. 


vi orous. “In what, i is it possible for the co ending 
art les t to harmonize 2 ? Alas! they cannot = even 
upon suchi.d version. of the ‘Bible into the langua, ages 
Fa 

f the people, . as both _ Parties are, willing. = oes 
7 their hands !* Not only is the living Greadue™ 
detained © from the nations, but the written word, is 
withheld, and confesSedly “on ‘account - of “this. very 
; ae of baptism! * The heathen’ must not, there- 

evén have the Bible! Say you. that the designs 

> Ch hrist in the conversion of; the youl, are not ie : 
‘retarded ? sates f 

» Tnfant. baptist refards the designs of Christ i in she 
‘conversion of the world, by diverting.from the work the 
ti time, the talents, the learning, «and the money ae ' 
chureh. These, are, to a painful extent, occupied no 

ia efdeavoring to ‘destroy sin ; not, in enlightening the 
sic by sending them shee written and preach 
word ; not in labors to save thé souls of men; i both n 
’ counteracting, ‘and* preventing the success of eac - oth-. 
er! How much larger the number of -meeting-houses 
which must be. built, and of pastors, and oth inis- 
“ters, who'must be supported, than would otherwise be 
nece ssary ! All these powers,” and. labors, and. vast 
, might, ‘but for’ this e nega ae 
ci of the kingdom ist. Bint te 


DOL 


sion Of. the. world, , by Rani toe ‘mim- 
inisters from the foreign her WS Bap, : 


* 998 - INFANT BAPTISM RETARDS 


smaller number would be: sufficient for christendor 
and the remainder might “oo far hence to ahaa 
tiles.” What an’ immense army of heralds of: the: 
re cross, in Such a case, might» at. once depart ! : “And 
“the wilderness,.and the solitary place, would. be glad 
ba aay and the desert ant eaves and blossom as 
the rose.” x s 
‘Infant hapten retards the designs of Chaist in’ Hie 
_ conversion’ of the world, by giving the name of chris- 
tians to the abandoned ‘and profligate merchants, and 
sailors, and soldiers, and others, in for eign lands.. _ These 
men, -wicked as they are, covered with every. crime; 
claim to be christians! Heathens, and mohammedans, 
recognize them as christians, and as true representatives 
of the religion of Christ! They really are, for the most 
- part, members of pedobaptist churches, into which they 
were received in infancy. In these», distant and. dark 
lands, a man seldom dwells who is really born again, 
and even when he does, the natives naturally confound 
him with the mass of foreigners. Forming their * con- 
Ce] tions of christianity by the’ moral character of the 
‘men -before them, nearly all: of whom are swearers. 
drunkards, adulterers, “gamblers, and abominably de. a 


Bie 


bier all but pettabie as thus oeaiadl 1 > Way 
_ sof any successful effort abroad. A missionar; 4 ds his 
way among the. people, but what can he do? He + 
preaches to them “« off ‘righteotsness, temperance, ai and. 
a judgment to come.» They point. him, to his. cour P 
“trymen, and ask, Bee they not tha bapt et ae 


o-. : & , vy 
eae ae 


THE CONVERSION OF THE ‘WORLD. - . 999 


ie they christians ? ? The man ae Gon tells them of a 
Saviour who died for them, and of the Holy- Spirit, by 
whom men are purified. They answer him by asking, 
Have not your christian countrymen, who cheat, de- : 
fraud, and. abuse us, been’ redeemed’ by Christ, and 
puritied by the Holy Ghost? They have been bap- 
tized! They are christians. Does he attempt to ex- 
plam the difference between nominal .and real chris- 
‘tians ? They do not understand it. Their answer is, 
You are aj] alike. We see the practical influence of © 
your religion. We donot want such a religion ! “They 
wiJl hear no more. » Their hearts are oe against. the 
truth. 

Infant baptism retards the designs of Christ in the 
ter. of the- world, by. creating everywhere, 
strifes, and sectarian prejudices. cece effectually do - 
these embarrass and. obscure, the conceptions of men 

* of all classes! How can those who are’ under their 
influence, evet see the truth? They give con- 
stantly_ recurring occasions for reproach and aliena- 
tion. They turn away the hearts of. multitudes: from 
Christ; from his réligion; and from his people. In 
this way the moral force of all parties is greatly 
weakened, and the ‘progress | of the, gospel proportion: 

ally : retarded. * 

Thus it is seen how infant baptism retards the de- 

- ‘signs of Christ in. the conversion.of the world, by en- 

Pi. feebling, through her own errors and worldliness, the 

church herself ; by placing Baptists and Pedobaptists 

Faget perpetual conflict with each, other ;* by diverting from 

ne work the time, the talents, the léarning, and | the 
fae “ad of the ehureh ; by detaining large numbers of 


gem m3 e 


300 "INFANT BAPTISM RETARDS * 


ministers from the foreign field ; by giving the riame 
of christians to the abandoned and profligate in heath 
lands ; and by creating among then everywhere, _ 7 
» petual strifes, and the ‘bitterest sectarian prejndie S. 
~ How. larnentable~ the evil in “this respect which infa nt 
baptism inflicts upon our world! « What multitudes . 
has it left uninstructed, to perish forever! With such 
an incubus hanging.upon. the church, diverting her.en- < 
‘ergies, corrupting > iter principles, and destroying - her 
‘life, how can‘ the world ever be converted to God” 
w ** this impediment will be. taken away, imige baleful 
influe. which has poisoned christianity, will, be re- 
moyed, and “ the kingdoms ‘of this world. become “the 
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.” - 
‘It must now, 1 think, be evident that infant baptism 
18 ‘the e most pernicious heresy that has ever found its way 
into the church. of Christ. Are there still those who 
think ‘it a small ‘matter ?. Say. you that it cannot be so 
very ‘iniquitous ? You are perhaps willing to. admit’: 
that, “Tt does no good.” Do you yet claim that. it 
“ does.no harm ? he: Fou are, L trust, undeceived. You 
“now. see that. it, 1S really ‘the. source from which - have 
sprung most of ‘the corruptions ‘that afflict the cause 
of Chiist. °“ And it is the. the — 
_ slow, and insidious mani sr in which “if necoutlie ue 
its results. It acts, I: confess, silently. Tt oe 


pes its ends, Its steps | are ‘so cronies ol ad 


« 


GHAPEMR KX ys ae 


RECAPITULATION, WITH CONCLUDING y. ADOREPEES, 


Reeapitulation ; “addresses to Poipantest to Baptists.” tH Peaobaptis 


e.? churches 5, to Baptists. 


ear ys 


“Tae. evils of infant: baptism have now, In most of 
their forms, passed successively in review. ‘They have 


been considered calmly, dispassionately, but faithfully, 


and as demanded by the’ truth of our Lord Jesus Christ. 


If I have “nothing extenuatéd,” neither have I>“ set. 


down aught in malice.” Let bs. be: here’ brielly re- 
capitulated. 

Infant baptism is an evil, because its practice is. un- 
supported by the word of God ; because its defence 
leads to most. injurious perversions of scripture ; be- 
cause it engrafts Judaism upon the gospel of Christ ; 


because it falsifies the doctrine of universal depravity ; g 
because it contradicts the great fundamental principle | 


of justification by faith » because it is in direct conflict 


with the doctrine of the work of the Holy Spirit | in 
regeneration ; because it despoils the, church of those 
peculiar qualities which are essential to the church of 
Christ ; because its practice perpetuates the supersti- 
tions that originally produced. it ; because it subvert: 
the, scripture doctrine of infant salvation ;- because 
leade te advocates into rebellion against the authorit 


ee? 
x? 


“ tu RECAP TEL ADON: HIG... 308 


“of Christ ; because of the connection 1t. assumes with 
the moral and ‘religious training of children ; because 
it is the’ grand | foundation upon which rests the union 
of church and state ; because it leads’ to religious per- 
secutions ; because it is ‘contrary. to. the principles of 
civil and religious freedom ; because it. enfeebles the 
power of ay church to combat error ;. because it in- 
ures the credit of religion with reflecting men .of the 
world; because» it, is the great barrier to christian 
union’; because it prevents the salutary impression 
which baptism was.designed to make upon the minds 
both of those who receive it, and of those who witness 
its administration ; and because it retards the designs 
‘of Christ.in the conversion of the world. These, main- 
ly, : are the charges I prefer against infant baptism, and 
I believe that I have proved each one of them conelu- 
sively. If ‘so, it is a great. and unmitigated evil. It 
not only does no good, but it does evil, Immense evil, 
»  and-only evil. Se 
In closing this. discussion, may I not, in the ‘first 
; place, | address a ey words to my pedobaptist ae 
. ren? ; 
Will you not t hake pause, and with the Bible in’ your 
band, prayerfully re-examine this whole subject? You 
have ‘probably never, at any time, given it a. careful in- 
vestigation. You found it in your church, and feeling, | 
very naturally, a prejudice in favor of whatever she 
approves, and observes, you received and adopted it. 
You have since practised the rite under 4 sort of in- 
inite impression that, although you do not yourself 
mprehend with any clearness how, yet it is defensible 
; the word of God. This, I know, 1 is the posiliging 00- 
—e ae 
ae By i. 


: Ea i , * ? ¥ at 


ee 
aes 
y 


% 


304 * RECAPITULATION, Es 


cupied by thousands. You do not sddsiont to. “depart 
from the gospel. « Least of all do you imagine that i in 
this matter you are committing an injury in any’ way. 
The enormous _evil it brings. upon. you, upon your 
children, “upon “theathurch, and upon the world, is a 
great fact to which your attention has not hitherto 
been called. You have regarded it with favor because 
it is ‘observéd by your. MEG because great men 
practise, a and defend it; -because if is” a time+ honored 
institution which has come down to you ‘through a pe- 
riod of fifteen centuries; and because you have ‘thought 
that, Tf at does no good, it will dono harm!” But 
great men, and good’ men, as great, and as good, as 
any that have defended, and practised infant. baptism, 
have also defended, -and practised, all the corruptions 
of -popery. ‘Tf-on this account you receive infant bap- 
tism, ; you are obliged, for the same reasons, to receive 
all the corruptions of popery. That, ‘too, is a time- 
honored ‘institution, clothed with the sanction of more 
than twelve centuries. High position ; great learning 
venerableness ; never can give authority to Sip ieeiy 
which i is in itself false, and injurious. _ Ours is neither 
the age, | nor the country, nor. is religion the theme, in. 
which such arguments can be respected. Because our 
fathers were governed. by kings, and emperors, who, as 
they were taught by great, and good, men, “ruled 
by divine right,” shall we be monarchists? We choose 
in politics, to exercise our own judgment, and we reject 
as baseless, all these antiquated pretensions, Shall we | 
be less wise in religion? Here, too, we will look not es 
men, but to God ; not. to antiquity, but’to divine reve- 
lation, Our appeal is, “to the lag, and to the testi- 
fies, 


ony ‘ e 


WITH CONCLUDING ADDRESSES. 805 


mony. If we speak not according to these, it is be- 
cause there i is no light i invas.” 7. | 
Does infant baptism do no harm ? 2 I persuade my- 
self that no one who reads these pages, will ever again 
urge that fallacious plea. ° Every departure from truth 
must be an evil, and this is one. of the most melan- 
choly of them all. Will you not, my brother, ascer- 
tain for yourself, its character, and renouncing it, _re- 
turn cheerfully to the word of God? It is “a per- 
fect, rule of faith and practice.” If you, and all others, 
do so, no more will be heard of ‘this injurious and dep- 
recated custom. Even now, in our country at least, it 
18. losing its hold. Among: all evangelical christians it 
is rapidly waning. Multitudes of the best members 
in pedobaptist churches ofall sects, utterly refuse to 
_ have their children baptized. Will not you also aban- 
don it? In maintaining this, or any other error, you 
cannot possibly have any interest. Review prayerful- 
ly, ¢ and in the light of the divine word,.your opinions, 
and practice in the premises. I am sure you must de- 
es: sire to know. the truth, and to obey the truth. It may 
ost you some labor, and may perchance, demand sae- 
rifices. at your hands. But will you shrink from it on 
- these accounts? Lét the ‘a love of Christ constrain 
you” in this work. And may God enlighten, and guide 
you into the knowledge of his will, and into an hum- 
ble, holy, and ready « obedience i in all things. 
“May I, in the second place, appeal to persons who, 
- Sibough Baptists in principle, are yet members of 
Pedobaptist churches ? gts a 
This class of persons is much more numerous than has 
generally been a Many of them are not them- 
26* 


* ; Be. sh ® 


306 RECAPIIULATION, € 


selves fully aware that they approximate our principles. 
They have derived all their knowledge o' them through 
Pedobaptist’ channels, and such have. been the repre- 
sentations that they suppose us to be almost any thing. 
else than what we really are. ~ It has ever been our lot 
to be traduced, and exhibited in false lights. Ever 
their ministers—this is the most, charitable construc: : 
tion—are ‘strangely ignorant of us. Not a few, how. . 
ever, know that they really do hold our’ Opinions. By: all. 
those who occupy the contradictory position now indi- . 
cated, I would gladly be heard. What. apology do 
you offer for practising in your religion, one set of prin- 
ciples while you really believe another.? Do you téll 
me that it is more convenient for. you.to be a member 
ofa Pedobaptist church; or that your family are mem- 
bers of such a church, and it-is not desirable that you * 


_ should separate from them ; or that there is no Baptist 


church near your recidence:: or that there are some 
things among Baptists that you do not like ; or that 
its éocial relations are not congenial ; or that’ you are 
not sectarian in your feelings, and. wish to evince your 
liberality 2 One or another of these, or some like rea- 
son for the abandonment of ‘your-faith, is, alas, but too 
often heard ! Are. any such sufficient to reconcile you 
to a relation which must result in serious’ injury, since 
it violates your own principles, and aids in the perpetu- 
ation of the most disastrous of evils? Can you con- 
tinue to believe one thing, and to profess, and practise 
another and opposite thing? Such inconsistency speaks 
little for your éhristiemeonscieifousnéés.- You proba-: 
bly require baptism for yourself. You think every oth- 


er belieyér, as a believer, be baptized. But 


( e. ~ 
r og + 


El 


es 


is 


— 
wine, CONCLUDING ADDRESSES. 307 


you at the same time, refuse.your countenance to tho e 
whose ° — and.practice agree with your, own ; 

and + eee those who maintain the contrar y! By 
your presence, your ‘influence, and your money, you 
support» what you do not ‘believe, and are ‘convinced 
Christ does not. authorize ; and by withdrawing them 
‘all, you oppose what you do believe, and are assured 
your Saviour has enjoined! “You renounce infant bap- 
tism, and" you at’ the same time yigorously uphold it! 
You believe it is wrong, and an ‘abuse ; and-you mean- 
time do all in your power to fasten the evil upon the 
church, and the world! When remonstrance is offered 


* on the subject, you reply that it is not convenient for - 


you to do otherwise; that you cannot separate from. 
your family and friends; that you do not like the Bap- 
tists ; that you are no sectarian ;- or that’ you protessed 


‘religion among Pedobaptists, and. catinot leave the: 


Can you suppose yourself thus justified - in eae 
from what you believe the law*of Christ? +, . 
I appeal to your judgment and your heart. at ask 


“you epectiondiely, but candidly, whether you can “ree 


oncile it with your sense.of duty, and consistency, longer 
to continue in »your present contradictory, position ? 
a8 can you be happy, or useful, »as a christian, thus 


daily sacrificing: truth, and conscience, to mere worldly 


considerations ? 2. Do you ask what you must do ? I 


- answer,-be true’ “to Jesus Christ. Be honest with -your- 


self, and with others: “Will this require that. you change 
your church | relations? An dw. at, then? You may 
feel that it. will be a painful sacrifice. “It probably 


“‘may be painful. It may be most-difficult. Pride will 


gba = Hapella bye the odium it will 


pose it... You will 
“hag 


* 


__ the ragin 
i her. God has been our refuge, , and strength, a very ° 


iM oll 
sf 


&! : ‘ \ 
508 “Al * hoa BrryiarioN, * 


it bring upon you. “The love =~? ) _ a: 
whom you are now associated, and who will frown ‘upon 
you, will pléad against it. ~ How ‘can you “surmount 
such barriers ? Nothing but the firmest purpose, sus-’ 
tained by “the grace of God, can carry you forward. 
On the other hand, however, you have the most ani; 
mating encour pees Sepak eho died to save es 
obedience. “The seer: and ei taitDMenst of religion, - 
éall upon you'to act, and to act prom’ tly, vigorously, 
and effectually. ‘he cause of. Christ protests against 
your present course, and claims your -protection. These. 


- are sufficient. They will bear you ‘on triumphantly. i 


Do not, [ entreat you, refuse to. consider this subject. 
Dare to be consistent. Dare to honor, and to aa” ag 


’ well: ‘as to love our Lord Jesus Christ. 


a 
And now, my beloved. Baptist: brethren, what, “ad 


ae 
; conclusion, shall I say to you? “Duti ing many a” weary 
century. has our venérated. church struggled onward, 


against, every opposition, “She has “been denounced 
and proscribed by every” despotism, » national and ec=" 
elesiastical, popish and protestant. ‘All the powers of 
earth | have. been perpetually combined, and have ex- 
erted ‘their ‘utmost energ gies, for fifteen hundred -years, 
to destroy | her. She has lived on, “like a spark amid . 
ing Hilo of the ocean. God has supported 


present help in trouble. » <« From the time of the first 
departure from apostol ic purity, even down through all 
the darkest eras of th “Subsequent apostasy, there has» 


always been a succession of f men who, abj bjuring all com- 


munion with ao” have under dierent nam, and . 


4 
7 


2 a 


| € in a me a's et 
4 wie concuupmre ADDRESSES. — 309 


different t oun kept the sitll , and the testimony of 
erly that little band has become a great 

h Poe -€ The days of our mourning are 
ended. e The ‘time of | triumph has come. Your ad- 


yale 2 vanced position, your disciplined array, your growing 


; power and resources, furnish significant indications that 
God is about.to ix troduce, through your instrumentali- | 
ty, that general return. to primitive order; which i is to 
herald the final conversion of all-nations. This work > 
ig to be done, and it must be, for the most part, done: 
by you, since i it never can be: ‘accomplished by 1 those 
who adhere éo infant baptism. “How ean they hope: to x 
demolish . popery, while they strive to perpetuate in their | 
own organizations the very key-stone of its strength ? ee 
Infant baptisni was» the ichief instrument which 


‘ act ‘brought it. into being, ‘ and if. continued, will inévita- 


‘bly build it up again, ‘the same in substance, if not in ; 
name. “Who can reasonably look for ultimate triumph 
in a conflict with inpidelity, byt those who cherish among er 
themselves, a’ ‘traitor that, as’ fast, as*they can. drive 
one army from the field, will bring a fresh one into it? t? 
' This-is but ‘the labor of Sisyphus. repeated, ee He stone, 
of victory; rolled almost to the mountain- -top,_ will ‘ye. 
bound, and fall back into the abyss a Such ae y 


<< 


7 


é 


be successful, must pen at the foundation. a he axe 
must. be laid at the roo _ Infant. baptism- that old _ . 
Upas- -tree, which, wit s death-distilling _ brane. 268, be 


ungodly» church- Prd en state. religions, Pe 
prelacy, and skepticism, has, for fourteer centy 
shaded . and blasted’ the. world— nust come. dow! 

fore the gue of heaven, atid the sweet breath of * 


oa ’s Part and Pillar, p. 108, | a, A 


31€. - ROA PITULA TION. aro ™ 


life. an arsulate treely, diver the exper ow zaruened, 
and tseased humanity.” You, must not ‘onty enlight- 
en wad guide the heathen and mohammedan Dations to 
Christ, but you must also purify ehristendom, papai and 
protestant, nor will you find the latter achievement less 
difficult than the former. How exalted is the mission - 
assigned you from on high!» How gloriously it is to 
affect the destinies of the world! Yours, is a. loftier 
aim than mere ‘patriotism, and philanthropy. You seek 
the temporal good of nations, and of the whole race, 
But you stop not here.. You labor for the eternal sal 
vation of men. It is yours to convey the news of ever. 
lasting life to all the perishing ; to-furnish every family . 
upon the face of the earth with the word of God.in 
its own language; to send to, every neighborhood a 
preacher of the cross, and.to erect there, a temple m 
which the children of men shall learn the anthems of ~ 
the blessed above, and become meet to join the General © 
Assembly and Church of the First’ Born, whose names 
are written invheaven.. Do you properly appreciate 
your obligations ?. Up, then, and to your high and 
holy calling. God himself is with you. He will be 
“your strength. He will honor your “ works of. faith, 
" and. Jabérs of love,” with triumphant success, 


* Dr. Ide. 


THE END. 


na 7 


